urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.head#VOLUME I—FANTINE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.preface.head#PREFACE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.preface.1#So long as there shall exist, by virtue of law and custom, decrees of amnation pronounced by society, artificially creating hells amid the ivilization of earth, and adding the element of human fate to divine destiny; o long as the three great problems of the century—the degradation of man hrough pauperism, the corruption of woman through hunger, the crippling of hildren through lack of light—are unsolved; so long as social asphyxia is ossible in any part of the world;—in other words, and with a still wider ignificance, so long as ignorance and poverty exist on earth, books of the ature of Les Misérables cannot fail to be of use.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.preface.2#HAUTEVILLE HOUSE, 1862.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.title#FANTINE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.head#BOOK FIRST—A JUST MAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.head#CHAPTER I—M. MYRIEL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.1#In 1815, M. Charles-François-Bienvenu Myriel was Bishop of D—— He was an old man of about seventy-five years of age; he had occupied the see of D—— since 806.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.2#Although this detail has no connection whatever with the real substance of hat we are about to relate, it will not be superfluous, if merely for the sake f exactness in all points, to mention here the various rumors and remarks which ad been in circulation about him from the very moment when he arrived in the iocese. True or false, that which is said of men often occupies as important a lace in their lives, and above all in their destinies, as that which they do. . Myriel was the son of a councillor of the Parliament of Aix; hence he elonged to the nobility of the bar. It was said that his father, destining him o be the heir of his own post, had married him at a very early age, eighteen or wenty, in accordance with a custom which is rather widely prevalent in arliamentary families. In spite of this marriage, however, it was said that harles Myriel created a great deal of talk. He was well formed, though rather hort in stature, elegant, graceful, intelligent; the whole of the first portion f his life had been devoted to the world and to gallantry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.3#The Revolution came; events succeeded each other with precipitation; the arliamentary families, decimated, pursued, hunted down, were dispersed. M. harles Myriel emigrated to Italy at the very beginning of the Revolution. There is wife died of a malady of the chest, from which she had long suffered. He had o children. What took place next in the fate of M. Myriel? The ruin of the rench society of the olden days, the fall of his own family, the tragic pectacles of ’93, which were, perhaps, even more alarming to the emigrants who iewed them from a distance, with the magnifying powers of terror,—did these ause the ideas of renunciation and solitude to germinate in him? Was he, in the idst of these distractions, these affections which absorbed his life, suddenly mitten with one of those mysterious and terrible blows which sometimes verwhelm, by striking to his heart, a man whom public catastrophes would not hake, by striking at his existence and his fortune? No one could have told: all hat was known was, that when he returned from Italy he was a priest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.4#In 1804, M. Myriel was the Curé of B—— [Brignolles]. He was already dvanced in years, and lived in a very retired manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.5#About the epoch of the coronation, some petty affair connected with his uracy—just what, is not precisely known—took him to Paris. Among other powerful ersons to whom he went to solicit aid for his parishioners was M. le Cardinal esch. One day, when the Emperor had come to visit his uncle, the worthy Curé, ho was waiting in the anteroom, found himself present when His Majesty passed. apoleon, on finding himself observed with a certain curiosity by this old man, urned round and said abruptly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.6#“Who is this good man who is staring at me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.7#“Sire,” said M. Myriel, “you are looking at a good man, and I at a great an. Each of us can profit by it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.8#That very evening, the Emperor asked the Cardinal the name of the Curé, and ome time afterwards M. Myriel was utterly astonished to learn that he had been ppointed Bishop of D——
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.9#What truth was there, after all, in the stories which were invented as to he early portion of M. Myriel’s life? No one knew. Very few families had been cquainted with the Myriel family before the Revolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.10#M. Myriel had to undergo the fate of every newcomer in a little town, here there are many mouths which talk, and very few heads which think. He was bliged to undergo it although he was a bishop, and because he was a bishop. But fter all, the rumors with which his name was connected were rumors only,—noise, ayings, words; less than words—_palabres_, as the energetic language of the outh expresses it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.11#However that may be, after nine years of episcopal power and of residence n D——, all the stories and subjects of conversation which engross petty towns nd petty people at the outset had fallen into profound oblivion. No one would ave dared to mention them; no one would have dared to recall them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.12#M. Myriel had arrived at D—— accompanied by an elderly spinster, ademoiselle Baptistine, who was his sister, and ten years his junior.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.13#Their only domestic was a female servant of the same age as Mademoiselle aptistine, and named Madame Magloire, who, after having been _the servant of M. e Curé_, now assumed the double title of maid to Mademoiselle and housekeeper o Monseigneur.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.14#Mademoiselle Baptistine was a long, pale, thin, gentle creature; she ealized the ideal expressed by the word “respectable”; for it seems that a oman must needs be a mother in order to be venerable. She had never been retty; her whole life, which had been nothing but a succession of holy deeds, ad finally conferred upon her a sort of pallor and transparency; and as she dvanced in years she had acquired what may be called the beauty of goodness. hat had been leanness in her youth had become transparency in her maturity; and his diaphaneity allowed the angel to be seen. She was a soul rather than a irgin. Her person seemed made of a shadow; there was hardly sufficient body to rovide for sex; a little matter enclosing a light; large eyes forever rooping;—a mere pretext for a soul’s remaining on the earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.15#Madame Magloire was a little, fat, white old woman, corpulent and ustling; always out of breath,—in the first place, because of her activity, and n the next, because of her asthma.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.16#On his arrival, M. Myriel was installed in the episcopal palace with the onors required by the Imperial decrees, which class a bishop immediately after major-general. The mayor and the president paid the first call on him, and he, n turn, paid the first call on the general and the prefect.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.1.17#The installation over, the town waited to see its bishop at work.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.head#CHAPTER II—M. MYRIEL BECOMES M. WELCOME
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.1#The episcopal palace of D—— adjoins the hospital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.2#The episcopal palace was a huge and beautiful house, built of stone at the eginning of the last century by M. Henri Puget, Doctor of Theology of the aculty of Paris, Abbé of Simore, who had been Bishop of D—— in 1712. This alace was a genuine seignorial residence. Everything about it had a grand ir,—the apartments of the Bishop, the drawing-rooms, the chambers, the rincipal courtyard, which was very large, with walks encircling it under rcades in the old Florentine fashion, and gardens planted with magnificent rees. In the dining-room, a long and superb gallery which was situated on the round floor and opened on the gardens, M. Henri Puget had entertained in state, n July 29, 1714, My Lords Charles Brûlart de Genlis, archbishop; Prince ’Embrun; Antoine de Mesgrigny, the capuchin, Bishop of Grasse; Philippe de endôme, Grand Prior of France, Abbé of Saint Honoré de Lérins; François de erton de Crillon, bishop, Baron de Vence; César de Sabran de Forcalquier, ishop, Seignor of Glandève; and Jean Soanen, Priest of the Oratory, preacher in rdinary to the king, bishop, Seignor of Senez. The portraits of these seven everend personages decorated this apartment; and this memorable date, the 29th f July, 1714, was there engraved in letters of gold on a table of white arble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.3#The hospital was a low and narrow building of a single story, with a small arden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.4#Three days after his arrival, the Bishop visited the hospital. The visit nded, he had the director requested to be so good as to come to his house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.5#“Monsieur the director of the hospital,” said he to him, “how many sick eople have you at the present moment?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.6#“Twenty-six, Monseigneur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.7#“That was the number which I counted,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.8#“The beds,” pursued the director, “are very much crowded against each ther.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.9#“That is what I observed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.10#“The halls are nothing but rooms, and it is with difficulty that the air an be changed in them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.11#“So it seems to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.12#“And then, when there is a ray of sun, the garden is very small for the onvalescents.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.13#“That was what I said to myself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.14#“In case of epidemics,—we have had the typhus fever this year; we had the weating sickness two years ago, and a hundred patients at times,—we know not hat to do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.15#“That is the thought which occurred to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.16#“What would you have, Monseigneur?” said the director. “One must resign ne’s self.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.17#This conversation took place in the gallery dining-room on the ground loor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.18#The Bishop remained silent for a moment; then he turned abruptly to the irector of the hospital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.19#“Monsieur,” said he, “how many beds do you think this hall alone would old?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.20#“Monseigneur’s dining-room?” exclaimed the stupefied director.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.21#The Bishop cast a glance round the apartment, and seemed to be taking easures and calculations with his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.22#“It would hold full twenty beds,” said he, as though speaking to himself. hen, raising his voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.23#“Hold, Monsieur the director of the hospital, I will tell you something. here is evidently a mistake here. There are thirty-six of you, in five or six mall rooms. There are three of us here, and we have room for sixty. There is ome mistake, I tell you; you have my house, and I have yours. Give me back my ouse; you are at home here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.24#On the following day the thirty-six patients were installed in the ishop’s palace, and the Bishop was settled in the hospital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.25#M. Myriel had no property, his family having been ruined by the evolution. His sister was in receipt of a yearly income of five hundred francs, hich sufficed for her personal wants at the vicarage. M. Myriel received from he State, in his quality of bishop, a salary of fifteen thousand francs. On the ery day when he took up his abode in the hospital, M. Myriel settled on the isposition of this sum once for all, in the following manner. We transcribe ere a note made by his own hand:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.26#NOTE ON THE REGULATION OF MY HOUSEHOLD EXPENSES.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.27#For the little seminary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,500 livres Society f the mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100 ” For the Lazarists of Montdidier . . . . . . . . . 100 ” Seminary for foreign missions in Paris . . . . . . 200 Congregation of the Holy Spirit . . . . . . . . . . 150 ” Religious stablishments of the Holy Land . . . . . 100 ” Charitable maternity societies . . . . . . . . . 300 ” Extra, for that of Arles . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 ” ork for the amelioration of prisons . . . . . . . 400 ” Work for the relief and elivery of prisoners . . . 500 ” To liberate fathers of families incarcerated or debt 1,000 ” Addition to the salary of the poor teachers of the diocese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,000 ” Public granary of the Hautes-Alpes . . . . . . . 100 ” Congregation of the ladies of D——, of Manosque, and of isteron, for the gratuitous instruction of poor girls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,500 ” For the poor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6,000 ” y personal expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,000 ” ——— Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15,000 ”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.28#M. Myriel made no change in this arrangement during the entire period that e occupied the see of D—— As has been seen, he called it _regulating his ousehold expenses_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.29#This arrangement was accepted with absolute submission by Mademoiselle aptistine. This holy woman regarded Monseigneur of D—— as at one and the same ime her brother and her bishop, her friend according to the flesh and her uperior according to the Church. She simply loved and venerated him. When he poke, she bowed; when he acted, she yielded her adherence. Their only servant, adame Magloire, grumbled a little. It will be observed that Monsieur the Bishop ad reserved for himself only one thousand livres, which, added to the pension f Mademoiselle Baptistine, made fifteen hundred francs a year. On these fifteen undred francs these two old women and the old man subsisted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.30#And when a village curate came to D——, the Bishop still found means to ntertain him, thanks to the severe economy of Madame Magloire, and to the ntelligent administration of Mademoiselle Baptistine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.31#One day, after he had been in D—— about three months, the Bishop aid:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.32#“And still I am quite cramped with it all!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.33#“I should think so!” exclaimed Madame Magloire. “Monseigneur has not even laimed the allowance which the department owes him for the expense of his arriage in town, and for his journeys about the diocese. It was customary for ishops in former days.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.34#“Hold!” cried the Bishop, “you are quite right, Madame Magloire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.35#And he made his demand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.36#Some time afterwards the General Council took this demand under onsideration, and voted him an annual sum of three thousand francs, under this eading: _Allowance to M. the Bishop for expenses of carriage, expenses of osting, and expenses of pastoral visits._
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.37#This provoked a great outcry among the local burgesses; and a senator of he Empire, a former member of the Council of the Five Hundred which favored the 8 Brumaire, and who was provided with a magnificent senatorial office in the icinity of the town of D——, wrote to M. Bigot de Préameneu, the minister of ublic worship, a very angry and confidential note on the subject, from which we xtract these authentic lines:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.38#“Expenses of carriage? What can be done with it in a town of less than our thousand inhabitants? Expenses of journeys? What is the use of these trips, n the first place? Next, how can the posting be accomplished in these ountainous parts? There are no roads. No one travels otherwise than on orseback. Even the bridge between Durance and Château-Arnoux can barely support x-teams. These priests are all thus, greedy and avaricious. This man played the ood priest when he first came. Now he does like the rest; he must have a arriage and a posting-chaise, he must have luxuries, like the bishops of the lden days. Oh, all this priesthood! Things will not go well, M. le Comte, until he Emperor has freed us from these black-capped rascals. Down with the Pope! Matters were getting embroiled with Rome.] For my part, I am for Cæsar alone.” tc., etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.39#On the other hand, this affair afforded great delight to Madame Magloire. Good,” said she to Mademoiselle Baptistine; “Monseigneur began with other eople, but he has had to wind up with himself, after all. He has regulated all is charities. Now here are three thousand francs for us! At last!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.40#That same evening the Bishop wrote out and handed to his sister a emorandum conceived in the following terms:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.41#EXPENSES OF CARRIAGE AND CIRCUIT.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.42#For furnishing meat soup to the patients in the hospital. 1,500 livres For he maternity charitable society of Aix . . . . . . . 250 ” For the maternity haritable society of Draguignan . . . 250 ” For foundlings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500 ” For orphans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500 ” ——- Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,000 ”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.43#Such was M. Myriel’s budget.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.44#As for the chance episcopal perquisites, the fees for marriage bans, ispensations, private baptisms, sermons, benedictions, of churches or chapels, arriages, etc., the Bishop levied them on the wealthy with all the more sperity, since he bestowed them on the needy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.45#After a time, offerings of money flowed in. Those who had and those who acked knocked at M. Myriel’s door,—the latter in search of the alms which the ormer came to deposit. In less than a year the Bishop had become the treasurer f all benevolence and the cashier of all those in distress. Considerable sums f money passed through his hands, but nothing could induce him to make any hange whatever in his mode of life, or add anything superfluous to his bare ecessities.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.46#Far from it. As there is always more wretchedness below than there is rotherhood above, all was given away, so to speak, before it was received. It as like water on dry soil; no matter how much money he received, he never had ny. Then he stripped himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.47#The usage being that bishops shall announce their baptismal names at the ead of their charges and their pastoral letters, the poor people of the ountry-side had selected, with a sort of affectionate instinct, among the names nd prenomens of their bishop, that which had a meaning for them; and they never alled him anything except Monseigneur Bienvenu [Welcome]. We will follow their xample, and will also call him thus when we have occasion to name him. oreover, this appellation pleased him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.48#“I like that name,” said he. “Bienvenu makes up for the Monseigneur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.2.49#We do not claim that the portrait herewith presented is probable; we onfine ourselves to stating that it resembles the original.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.3.head#CHAPTER III—A HARD BISHOPRIC FOR A GOOD BISHOP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.3.1#The Bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had converted his arriage into alms. The diocese of D—— is a fatiguing one. There are very few lains and a great many mountains; hardly any roads, as we have just seen; hirty-two curacies, forty-one vicarships, and two hundred and eighty-five uxiliary chapels. To visit all these is quite a task.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.3.2#The Bishop managed to do it. He went on foot when it was in the eighborhood, in a tilted spring-cart when it was on the plain, and on a donkey n the mountains. The two old women accompanied him. When the trip was too hard or them, he went alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.3.3#One day he arrived at Senez, which is an ancient episcopal city. He was ounted on an ass. His purse, which was very dry at that moment, did not permit im any other equipage. The mayor of the town came to receive him at the gate of he town, and watched him dismount from his ass, with scandalized eyes. Some of he citizens were laughing around him. “Monsieur the Mayor,” said the Bishop, and Messieurs Citizens, I perceive that I shock you. You think it very arrogant n a poor priest to ride an animal which was used by Jesus Christ. I have done o from necessity, I assure you, and not from vanity.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.3.4#In the course of these trips he was kind and indulgent, and talked rather han preached. He never went far in search of his arguments and his examples. He uoted to the inhabitants of one district the example of a neighboring district. n the cantons where they were harsh to the poor, he said: “Look at the people f Briançon! They have conferred on the poor, on widows and orphans, the right o have their meadows mown three days in advance of every one else. They rebuild heir houses for them gratuitously when they are ruined. Therefore it is a ountry which is blessed by God. For a whole century, there has not been a ingle murderer among them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.3.5#In villages which were greedy for profit and harvest, he said: “Look at the eople of Embrun! If, at the harvest season, the father of a family has his son way on service in the army, and his daughters at service in the town, and if he s ill and incapacitated, the curé recommends him to the prayers of the ongregation; and on Sunday, after the mass, all the inhabitants of the illage—men, women, and children—go to the poor man’s field and do his arvesting for him, and carry his straw and his grain to his granary.” To amilies divided by questions of money and inheritance he said: “Look at the ountaineers of Devolny, a country so wild that the nightingale is not heard here once in fifty years. Well, when the father of a family dies, the boys go ff to seek their fortunes, leaving the property to the girls, so that they may ind husbands.” To the cantons which had a taste for lawsuits, and where the armers ruined themselves in stamped paper, he said: “Look at those good easants in the valley of Queyras! There are three thousand souls of them. Mon ieu! it is like a little republic. Neither judge nor bailiff is known there. he mayor does everything. He allots the imposts, taxes each person onscientiously, judges quarrels for nothing, divides inheritances without harge, pronounces sentences gratuitously; and he is obeyed, because he is a ust man among simple men.” To villages where he found no schoolmaster, he uoted once more the people of Queyras: “Do you know how they manage?” he said. Since a little country of a dozen or fifteen hearths cannot always support a eacher, they have schoolmasters who are paid by the whole valley, who make the ound of the villages, spending a week in this one, ten days in that, and nstruct them. These teachers go to the fairs. I have seen them there. They are o be recognized by the quill pens which they wear in the cord of their hat. hose who teach reading only have one pen; those who teach reading and reckoning ave two pens; those who teach reading, reckoning, and Latin have three pens. ut what a disgrace to be ignorant! Do like the people of Queyras!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.3.6#Thus he discoursed gravely and paternally; in default of examples, he nvented parables, going directly to the point, with few phrases and many mages, which characteristic formed the real eloquence of Jesus Christ. And eing convinced himself, he was persuasive.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.head#CHAPTER IV—WORKS CORRESPONDING TO WORDS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.1#His conversation was gay and affable. He put himself on a level with the wo old women who had passed their lives beside him. When he laughed, it was the augh of a schoolboy. Madame Magloire liked to call him Your Grace [_Votre randeur_]. One day he rose from his armchair, and went to his library in search f a book. This book was on one of the upper shelves. As the bishop was rather hort of stature, he could not reach it. “Madame Magloire,” said he, “fetch me a hair. My greatness [_grandeur_] does not reach as far as that shelf.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.2#One of his distant relatives, Madame la Comtesse de Lô, rarely allowed an pportunity to escape of enumerating, in his presence, what she designated as the expectations” of her three sons. She had numerous relatives, who were very ld and near to death, and of whom her sons were the natural heirs. The youngest f the three was to receive from a grandaunt a good hundred thousand livres of ncome; the second was the heir by entail to the title of the Duke, his uncle; he eldest was to succeed to the peerage of his grandfather. The Bishop was ccustomed to listen in silence to these innocent and pardonable maternal oasts. On one occasion, however, he appeared to be more thoughtful than usual, hile Madame de Lô was relating once again the details of all these inheritances nd all these “expectations.” She interrupted herself impatiently: “Mon Dieu, ousin! What are you thinking about?” “I am thinking,” replied the Bishop, “of a ingular remark, which is to be found, I believe, in St. Augustine,—‘Place your opes in the man from whom you do not inherit.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.3#At another time, on receiving a notification of the decease of a gentleman f the country-side, wherein not only the dignities of the dead man, but also he feudal and noble qualifications of all his relatives, spread over an entire age: “What a stout back Death has!” he exclaimed. “What a strange burden of itles is cheerfully imposed on him, and how much wit must men have, in order hus to press the tomb into the service of vanity!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.4#He was gifted, on occasion, with a gentle raillery, which almost always oncealed a serious meaning. In the course of one Lent, a youthful vicar came to ——, and preached in the cathedral. He was tolerably eloquent. The subject of is sermon was charity. He urged the rich to give to the poor, in order to avoid ell, which he depicted in the most frightful manner of which he was capable, nd to win paradise, which he represented as charming and desirable. Among the udience there was a wealthy retired merchant, who was somewhat of a usurer, amed M. Géborand, who had amassed two millions in the manufacture of coarse loth, serges, and woollen galloons. Never in his whole life had M. Géborand estowed alms on any poor wretch. After the delivery of that sermon, it was bserved that he gave a sou every Sunday to the poor old beggar-women at the oor of the cathedral. There were six of them to share it. One day the Bishop aught sight of him in the act of bestowing this charity, and said to his ister, with a smile, “There is M. Géborand purchasing paradise for a sou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.5#When it was a question of charity, he was not to be rebuffed even by a efusal, and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks which induced eflection. Once he was begging for the poor in a drawing-room of the town; here was present the Marquis de Champtercier, a wealthy and avaricious old man, ho contrived to be, at one and the same time, an ultra-royalist and an ltra-Voltairian. This variety of man has actually existed. When the Bishop came o him, he touched his arm, _“You must give me something, M. le Marquis.”_ The arquis turned round and answered dryly, _“I have poor people of my own, onseigneur.” “Give them to me,”_ replied the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.6#One day he preached the following sermon in the cathedral:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.7#“My very dear brethren, my good friends, there are thirteen hundred and wenty thousand peasants’ dwellings in France which have but three openings; ighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels which have but two openings, the oor and one window; and three hundred and forty-six thousand cabins besides hich have but one opening, the door. And this arises from a thing which is alled the tax on doors and windows. Just put poor families, old women and ittle children, in those buildings, and behold the fevers and maladies which esult! Alas! God gives air to men; the law sells it to them. I do not blame the aw, but I bless God. In the department of the Isère, in the Var, in the two epartments of the Alpes, the Hautes, and the Basses, the peasants have not even heelbarrows; they transport their manure on the backs of men; they have no andles, and they burn resinous sticks, and bits of rope dipped in pitch. That s the state of affairs throughout the whole of the hilly country of Dauphiné. hey make bread for six months at one time; they bake it with dried cow-dung. In he winter they break this bread up with an axe, and they soak it for wenty-four hours, in order to render it eatable. My brethren, have pity! behold he suffering on all sides of you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.8#Born a Provençal, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of the outh. He said, _“En bé! moussu, sés sagé?”_ as in lower Languedoc; _“Onté naras passa?”_ as in the Basses-Alpes; _“Puerte un bouen moutu embe un bouen romage grase,”_ as in upper Dauphiné. This pleased the people extremely, and ontributed not a little to win him access to all spirits. He was perfectly at ome in the thatched cottage and in the mountains. He understood how to say the randest things in the most vulgar of idioms. As he spoke all tongues, he ntered into all hearts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.9#Moreover, he was the same towards people of the world and towards the lower lasses. He condemned nothing in haste and without taking circumstances into ccount. He said, “Examine the road over which the fault has passed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.10#Being, as he described himself with a smile, an _ex-sinner_, he had none f the asperities of austerity, and he professed, with a good deal of istinctness, and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous, a doctrine hich may be summed up as follows:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.11#“Man has upon him his flesh, which is at once his burden and his emptation. He drags it with him and yields to it. He must watch it, check it, epress it, and obey it only at the last extremity. There may be some fault even n this obedience; but the fault thus committed is venial; it is a fall, but a all on the knees which may terminate in prayer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.12#“To be a saint is the exception; to be an upright man is the rule. Err, all, sin if you will, but be upright.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.13#“The least possible sin is the law of man. No sin at all is the dream of he angel. All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. Sin is a ravitation.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.14#When he saw everyone exclaiming very loudly, and growing angry very uickly, “Oh! oh!” he said, with a smile; “to all appearance, this is a great rime which all the world commits. These are hypocrisies which have taken right, and are in haste to make protest and to put themselves under helter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.15#He was indulgent towards women and poor people, on whom the burden of uman society rest. He said, “The faults of women, of children, of the feeble, he indigent, and the ignorant, are the fault of the husbands, the fathers, the asters, the strong, the rich, and the wise.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.16#He said, moreover, “Teach those who are ignorant as many things as ossible; society is culpable, in that it does not afford instruction gratis; it s responsible for the night which it produces. This soul is full of shadow; sin s therein committed. The guilty one is not the person who has committed the in, but the person who has created the shadow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.17#It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own of judging hings: I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.18#One day he heard a criminal case, which was in preparation and on the oint of trial, discussed in a drawing-room. A wretched man, being at the end of is resources, had coined counterfeit money, out of love for a woman, and for he child which he had had by her. Counterfeiting was still punishable with eath at that epoch. The woman had been arrested in the act of passing the first alse piece made by the man. She was held, but there were no proofs except gainst her. She alone could accuse her lover, and destroy him by her onfession. She denied; they insisted. She persisted in her denial. Thereupon an dea occurred to the attorney for the crown. He invented an infidelity on the art of the lover, and succeeded, by means of fragments of letters cunningly resented, in persuading the unfortunate woman that she had a rival, and that he man was deceiving her. Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy, she denounced her over, confessed all, proved all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.19#The man was ruined. He was shortly to be tried at Aix with his accomplice. hey were relating the matter, and each one was expressing enthusiasm over the leverness of the magistrate. By bringing jealousy into play, he had caused the ruth to burst forth in wrath, he had educed the justice of revenge. The Bishop istened to all this in silence. When they had finished, he inquired,—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.20#“Where are this man and woman to be tried?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.21#“At the Court of Assizes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.22#He went on, “And where will the advocate of the crown be tried?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.23#A tragic event occurred at D—— A man was condemned to death for murder. He as a wretched fellow, not exactly educated, not exactly ignorant, who had been mountebank at fairs, and a writer for the public. The town took a great nterest in the trial. On the eve of the day fixed for the execution of the ondemned man, the chaplain of the prison fell ill. A priest was needed to ttend the criminal in his last moments. They sent for the curé. It seems that e refused to come, saying, “That is no affair of mine. I have nothing to do ith that unpleasant task, and with that mountebank: I, too, am ill; and esides, it is not my place.” This reply was reported to the Bishop, who said, “Monsieur le Curé is right: it is not his place; it is mine.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.24#He went instantly to the prison, descended to the cell of the mountebank,” called him by name, took him by the hand, and spoke to him. He assed the entire day with him, forgetful of food and sleep, praying to God for he soul of the condemned man, and praying the condemned man for his own. He old him the best truths, which are also the most simple. He was father, rother, friend; he was bishop only to bless. He taught him everything, ncouraged and consoled him. The man was on the point of dying in despair. Death as an abyss to him. As he stood trembling on its mournful brink, he recoiled ith horror. He was not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent. His ondemnation, which had been a profound shock, had, in a manner, broken through, ere and there, that wall which separates us from the mystery of things, and hich we call life. He gazed incessantly beyond this world through these fatal reaches, and beheld only darkness. The Bishop made him see light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.25#On the following day, when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch, the ishop was still there. He followed him, and exhibited himself to the eyes of he crowd in his purple camail and with his episcopal cross upon his neck, side y side with the criminal bound with cords.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.26#He mounted the tumbril with him, he mounted the scaffold with him. The ufferer, who had been so gloomy and cast down on the preceding day, was adiant. He felt that his soul was reconciled, and he hoped in God. The Bishop mbraced him, and at the moment when the knife was about to fall, he said to im: “God raises from the dead him whom man slays; he whom his brothers have ejected finds his Father once more. Pray, believe, enter into life: the Father s there.” When he descended from the scaffold, there was something in his look hich made the people draw aside to let him pass. They did not know which was ost worthy of admiration, his pallor or his serenity. On his return to the umble dwelling, which he designated, with a smile, as _his palace_, he said to is sister, _“I have just officiated pontifically.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.27#Since the most sublime things are often those which are the least nderstood, there were people in the town who said, when commenting on this onduct of the Bishop, _“It is affectation.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.28#This, however, was a remark which was confined to the drawing-rooms. The opulace, which perceives no jest in holy deeds, was touched, and admired im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.29#As for the Bishop, it was a shock to him to have beheld the guillotine, nd it was a long time before he recovered from it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.30#In fact, when the scaffold is there, all erected and prepared, it has omething about it which produces hallucination. One may feel a certain ndifference to the death penalty, one may refrain from pronouncing upon it, rom saying yes or no, so long as one has not seen a guillotine with one’s own yes: but if one encounters one of them, the shock is violent; one is forced to ecide, and to take part for or against. Some admire it, like de Maistre; others xecrate it, like Beccaria. The guillotine is the concretion of the law; it is alled _vindicate_; it is not neutral, and it does not permit you to remain eutral. He who sees it shivers with the most mysterious of shivers. All social roblems erect their interrogation point around this chopping-knife. The caffold is a vision. The scaffold is not a piece of carpentry; the scaffold is ot a machine; the scaffold is not an inert bit of mechanism constructed of ood, iron and cords.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.31#It seems as though it were a being, possessed of I know not what sombre nitiative; one would say that this piece of carpenter’s work saw, that this achine heard, that this mechanism understood, that this wood, this iron, and hese cords were possessed of will. In the frightful meditation into which its resence casts the soul the scaffold appears in terrible guise, and as though aking part in what is going on. The scaffold is the accomplice of the xecutioner; it devours, it eats flesh, it drinks blood; the scaffold is a sort f monster fabricated by the judge and the carpenter, a spectre which seems to ive with a horrible vitality composed of all the death which it has nflicted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.32#Therefore, the impression was terrible and profound; on the day following he execution, and on many succeeding days, the Bishop appeared to be crushed. he almost violent serenity of the funereal moment had disappeared; the phantom f social justice tormented him. He, who generally returned from all his deeds ith a radiant satisfaction, seemed to be reproaching himself. At times he alked to himself, and stammered lugubrious monologues in a low voice. This is ne which his sister overheard one evening and preserved: “I did not think that t was so monstrous. It is wrong to become absorbed in the divine law to such a egree as not to perceive human law. Death belongs to God alone. By what right o men touch that unknown thing?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.33#In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished. evertheless, it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided passing the lace of execution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.34#M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick and ying. He did not ignore the fact that therein lay his greatest duty and his reatest labor. Widowed and orphaned families had no need to summon him; he came f his own accord. He understood how to sit down and hold his peace for long ours beside the man who had lost the wife of his love, of the mother who had ost her child. As he knew the moment for silence he knew also the moment for peech. Oh, admirable consoler! He sought not to efface sorrow by forgetfulness, ut to magnify and dignify it by hope. He said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.4.35#“Have a care of the manner in which you turn towards the dead. Think not f that which perishes. Gaze steadily. You will perceive the living light of our well-beloved dead in the depths of heaven.” He knew that faith is holesome. He sought to counsel and calm the despairing man, by pointing out to im the resigned man, and to transform the grief which gazes upon a grave by howing him the grief which fixes its gaze upon a star.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.head#CHAPTER V—MONSEIGNEUR BIENVENU MADE HIS CASSOCKS LAST TOO LONG
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.1#The private life of M. Myriel was filled with the same thoughts as his ublic life. The voluntary poverty in which the Bishop of D—— lived, would have een a solemn and charming sight for any one who could have viewed it close at and.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.2#Like all old men, and like the majority of thinkers, he slept little. This rief slumber was profound. In the morning he meditated for an hour, then he aid his mass, either at the cathedral or in his own house. His mass said, he roke his fast on rye bread dipped in the milk of his own cows. Then he set to ork.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.3#A Bishop is a very busy man: he must every day receive the secretary of the ishopric, who is generally a canon, and nearly every day his vicars-general. He as congregations to reprove, privileges to grant, a whole ecclesiastical ibrary to examine,—prayer-books, diocesan catechisms, books of hours, tc.,—charges to write, sermons to authorize, curés and mayors to reconcile, a lerical correspondence, an administrative correspondence; on one side the tate, on the other the Holy See; and a thousand matters of business.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.4#What time was left to him, after these thousand details of business, and is offices and his breviary, he bestowed first on the necessitous, the sick, nd the afflicted; the time which was left to him from the afflicted, the sick, nd the necessitous, he devoted to work. Sometimes he dug in his garden; again, e read or wrote. He had but one word for both these kinds of toil; he called hem _gardening_. “The mind is a garden,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.5#Towards midday, when the weather was fine, he went forth and took a stroll n the country or in town, often entering lowly dwellings. He was seen walking lone, buried in his own thoughts, his eyes cast down, supporting himself on his ong cane, clad in his wadded purple garment of silk, which was very warm, earing purple stockings inside his coarse shoes, and surmounted by a flat hat hich allowed three golden tassels of large bullion to droop from its three oints.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.6#It was a perfect festival wherever he appeared. One would have said that is presence had something warming and luminous about it. The children and the ld people came out to the doorsteps for the Bishop as for the sun. He bestowed is blessing, and they blessed him. They pointed out his house to any one who as in need of anything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.7#Here and there he halted, accosted the little boys and girls, and smiled pon the mothers. He visited the poor so long as he had any money; when he no onger had any, he visited the rich.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.8#As he made his cassocks last a long while, and did not wish to have it oticed, he never went out in the town without his wadded purple cloak. This nconvenienced him somewhat in summer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.9#On his return, he dined. The dinner resembled his breakfast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.10#At half-past eight in the evening he supped with his sister, Madame agloire standing behind them and serving them at table. Nothing could be more rugal than this repast. If, however, the Bishop had one of his curés to supper, adame Magloire took advantage of the opportunity to serve Monseigneur with some xcellent fish from the lake, or with some fine game from the mountains. Every uré furnished the pretext for a good meal: the Bishop did not interfere. With hat exception, his ordinary diet consisted only of vegetables boiled in water, nd oil soup. Thus it was said in the town, _when the Bishop does not indulge in he cheer of a curé, he indulges in the cheer of a trappist_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.11#After supper he conversed for half an hour with Mademoiselle Baptistine nd Madame Magloire; then he retired to his own room and set to writing, ometimes on loose sheets, and again on the margin of some folio. He was a man f letters and rather learned. He left behind him five or six very curious anuscripts; among others, a dissertation on this verse in Genesis, _In the eginning, the spirit of God floated upon the waters_. With this verse he ompares three texts: the Arabic verse which says, _The winds of God blew;_ lavius Josephus who says, _A wind from above was precipitated upon the earth;_ nd finally, the Chaldaic paraphrase of Onkelos, which renders it, _A wind oming from God blew upon the face of the waters_. In another dissertation, he xamines the theological works of Hugo, Bishop of Ptolemaïs, great-grand-uncle o the writer of this book, and establishes the fact, that to this bishop must e attributed the divers little works published during the last century, under he pseudonym of Barleycourt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.12#Sometimes, in the midst of his reading, no matter what the book might be hich he had in his hand, he would suddenly fall into a profound meditation, hence he only emerged to write a few lines on the pages of the volume itself. hese lines have often no connection whatever with the book which contains them. e now have under our eyes a note written by him on the margin of a quarto ntitled _Correspondence of Lord Germain with Generals Clinton, Cornwallis, and he Admirals on the American station. Versailles, Poinçot, book-seller; and aris, Pissot, bookseller, Quai des Augustins._
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.13#Here is the note:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.14#“Oh, you who are!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.15#“Ecclesiastes calls you the All-powerful; the Maccabees call you the reator; the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty; Baruch calls you mmensity; the Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth; John calls you Light; the Books f Kings call you Lord; Exodus calls you Providence; Leviticus, Sanctity; sdras, Justice; the creation calls you God; man calls you Father; but Solomon alls you Compassion, and that is the most beautiful of all your names.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.16#Toward nine o’clock in the evening the two women retired and betook hemselves to their chambers on the first floor, leaving him alone until morning n the ground floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.5.17#It is necessary that we should, in this place, give an exact idea of the welling of the Bishop of D——
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.head#CHAPTER VI—WHO GUARDED HIS HOUSE FOR HIM
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.1#The house in which he lived consisted, as we have said, of a ground floor, nd one story above; three rooms on the ground floor, three chambers on the irst, and an attic above. Behind the house was a garden, a quarter of an acre n extent. The two women occupied the first floor; the Bishop was lodged below. he first room, opening on the street, served him as dining-room, the second was is bedroom, and the third his oratory. There was no exit possible from this ratory, except by passing through the bedroom, nor from the bedroom, without assing through the dining-room. At the end of the suite, in the oratory, there as a detached alcove with a bed, for use in cases of hospitality. The Bishop ffered this bed to country curates whom business or the requirements of their arishes brought to D——
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.2#The pharmacy of the hospital, a small building which had been added to the ouse, and abutted on the garden, had been transformed into a kitchen and ellar. In addition to this, there was in the garden a stable, which had ormerly been the kitchen of the hospital, and in which the Bishop kept two ows. No matter what the quantity of milk they gave, he invariably sent half of t every morning to the sick people in the hospital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.3#_“I am paying my tithes,”_ he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.4#His bedroom was tolerably large, and rather difficult to warm in bad eather. As wood is extremely dear at D——, he hit upon the idea of having a ompartment of boards constructed in the cow-shed. Here he passed his evenings uring seasons of severe cold: he called it his _winter salon_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.5#In this winter salon, as in the dining-room, there was no other furniture han a square table in white wood, and four straw-seated chairs. In addition to his the dining-room was ornamented with an antique sideboard, painted pink, in ater colors. Out of a similar sideboard, properly draped with white napery and mitation lace, the Bishop had constructed the altar which decorated his ratory.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.6#His wealthy penitents and the sainted women of D—— had more than once ssessed themselves to raise the money for a new altar for Monseigneur’s ratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and had given it to the poor. The most beautiful of altars,” he said, “is the soul of an unhappy creature onsoled and thanking God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.7#In his oratory there were two straw prie-Dieu, and there was an armchair, lso in straw, in his bedroom. When, by chance, he received seven or eight ersons at one time, the prefect, or the general, or the staff of the regiment n garrison, or several pupils from the little seminary, the chairs had to be etched from the winter salon in the stable, the prie-Dieu from the oratory, and he armchair from the bedroom: in this way as many as eleven chairs could be ollected for the visitors. A room was dismantled for each new guest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.8#It sometimes happened that there were twelve in the party; the Bishop then elieved the embarrassment of the situation by standing in front of the chimney f it was winter, or by strolling in the garden if it was summer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.9#There was still another chair in the detached alcove, but the straw was alf gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that it was of service only hen propped against the wall. Mademoiselle Baptistine had also in her own room very large easy-chair of wood, which had formerly been gilded, and which was overed with flowered pekin; but they had been obliged to hoist this bergère up o the first story through the window, as the staircase was too narrow; it could ot, therefore, be reckoned among the possibilities in the way of furniture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.10#Mademoiselle Baptistine’s ambition had been to be able to purchase a set f drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht velvet, stamped with a rose pattern, nd with mahogany in swan’s neck style, with a sofa. But this would have cost ive hundred francs at least, and in view of the fact that she had only been ble to lay by forty-two francs and ten sous for this purpose in the course of ive years, she had ended by renouncing the idea. However, who is there who has ttained his ideal?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.11#Nothing is more easy to present to the imagination than the Bishop’s edchamber. A glazed door opened on the garden; opposite this was the bed,—a ospital bed of iron, with a canopy of green serge; in the shadow of the bed, ehind a curtain, were the utensils of the toilet, which still betrayed the legant habits of the man of the world: there were two doors, one near the himney, opening into the oratory; the other near the bookcase, opening into the ining-room. The bookcase was a large cupboard with glass doors filled with ooks; the chimney was of wood painted to represent marble, and habitually ithout fire. In the chimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron, ornamented above ith two garlanded vases, and flutings which had formerly been silvered with ilver leaf, which was a sort of episcopal luxury; above the chimney-piece hung crucifix of copper, with the silver worn off, fixed on a background of hreadbare velvet in a wooden frame from which the gilding had fallen; near the lass door a large table with an inkstand, loaded with a confusion of papers and ith huge volumes; before the table an armchair of straw; in front of the bed a rie-Dieu, borrowed from the oratory.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.12#Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to the wall on each side of the ed. Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth at the side of hese figures indicated that the portraits represented, one the Abbé of Chaliot, ishop of Saint Claude; the other, the Abbé Tourteau, vicar-general of Agde, bbé of Grand-Champ, order of Cîteaux, diocese of Chartres. When the Bishop ucceeded to this apartment, after the hospital patients, he had found these ortraits there, and had left them. They were priests, and probably donors—two easons for respecting them. All that he knew about these two persons was, that hey had been appointed by the king, the one to his bishopric, the other to his enefice, on the same day, the 27th of April, 1785. Madame Magloire having taken he pictures down to dust, the Bishop had discovered these particulars written n whitish ink on a little square of paper, yellowed by time, and attached to he back of the portrait of the Abbé of Grand-Champ with four wafers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.13#At his window he had an antique curtain of a coarse woollen stuff, which inally became so old, that, in order to avoid the expense of a new one, Madame agloire was forced to take a large seam in the very middle of it. This seam ook the form of a cross. The Bishop often called attention to it: “How elightful that is!” he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.14#All the rooms in the house, without exception, those on the ground floor s well as those on the first floor, were white-washed, which is a fashion in arracks and hospitals.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.15#However, in their latter years, Madame Magloire discovered beneath the aper which had been washed over, paintings, ornamenting the apartment of ademoiselle Baptistine, as we shall see further on. Before becoming a hospital, his house had been the ancient parliament house of the Bourgeois. Hence this ecoration. The chambers were paved in red bricks, which were washed every week, ith straw mats in front of all the beds. Altogether, this dwelling, which was ttended to by the two women, was exquisitely clean from top to bottom. This was he sole luxury which the Bishop permitted. He said, _“That takes nothing from he poor.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.16#It must be confessed, however, that he still retained from his former ossessions six silver knives and forks and a soup-ladle, which Madame Magloire ontemplated every day with delight, as they glistened splendidly upon the oarse linen cloth. And since we are now painting the Bishop of D—— as he was in eality, we must add that he had said more than once, “I find it difficult to enounce eating from silver dishes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.17#To this silverware must be added two large candlesticks of massive silver, hich he had inherited from a great-aunt. These candlesticks held two wax andles, and usually figured on the Bishop’s chimney-piece. When he had any one o dinner, Madame Magloire lighted the two candles and set the candlesticks on he table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.18#In the Bishop’s own chamber, at the head of his bed, there was a small upboard, in which Madame Magloire locked up the six silver knives and forks and he big spoon every night. But it is necessary to add, that the key was never emoved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.19#The garden, which had been rather spoiled by the ugly buildings which we ave mentioned, was composed of four alleys in cross-form, radiating from a ank. Another walk made the circuit of the garden, and skirted the white wall hich enclosed it. These alleys left behind them four square plots rimmed with ox. In three of these, Madame Magloire cultivated vegetables; in the fourth, he Bishop had planted some flowers; here and there stood a few fruit-trees. adame Magloire had once remarked, with a sort of gentle malice: “Monseigneur, ou who turn everything to account, have, nevertheless, one useless plot. It ould be better to grow salads there than bouquets.” “Madame Magloire,” retorted he Bishop, “you are mistaken. The beautiful is as useful as the useful.” He dded after a pause, “More so, perhaps.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.20#This plot, consisting of three or four beds, occupied the Bishop almost as uch as did his books. He liked to pass an hour or two there, trimming, hoeing, nd making holes here and there in the earth, into which he dropped seeds. He as not as hostile to insects as a gardener could have wished to see him. oreover, he made no pretensions to botany; he ignored groups and consistency; e made not the slightest effort to decide between Tournefort and the natural ethod; he took part neither with the buds against the cotyledons, nor with ussieu against Linnæus. He did not study plants; he loved flowers. He respected earned men greatly; he respected the ignorant still more; and, without ever ailing in these two respects, he watered his flower-beds every summer evening ith a tin watering-pot painted green.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.21#The house had not a single door which could be locked. The door of the ining-room, which, as we have said, opened directly on the cathedral square, ad formerly been ornamented with locks and bolts like the door of a prison. The ishop had had all this ironwork removed, and this door was never fastened, ither by night or by day, with anything except the latch. All that the first asser-by had to do at any hour, was to give it a push. At first, the two women ad been very much tried by this door, which was never fastened, but Monsieur de —— had said to them, “Have bolts put on your rooms, if that will please you.” hey had ended by sharing his confidence, or by at least acting as though they hared it. Madame Magloire alone had frights from time to time. As for the ishop, his thought can be found explained, or at least indicated, in the three ines which he wrote on the margin of a Bible, “This is the shade of difference: he door of the physician should never be shut, the door of the priest should lways be open.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.22#On another book, entitled _Philosophy of the Medical Science_, he had ritten this other note: “Am not I a physician like them? I also have my atients, and then, too, I have some whom I call my unfortunates.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.23#Again he wrote: “Do not inquire the name of him who asks a shelter of you. he very man who is embarrassed by his name is the one who needs shelter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.24#It chanced that a worthy curé, I know not whether it was the curé of ouloubroux or the curé of Pompierry, took it into his head to ask him one day, robably at the instigation of Madame Magloire, whether Monsieur was sure that e was not committing an indiscretion, to a certain extent, in leaving his door nfastened day and night, at the mercy of any one who should choose to enter, nd whether, in short, he did not fear lest some misfortune might occur in a ouse so little guarded. The Bishop touched his shoulder, with gentle gravity, nd said to him, _“Nisi Dominus custodierit domum, in vanum vigilant qui ustodiunt eam,” Unless the Lord guard the house, in vain do they watch who uard it._
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.25#Then he spoke of something else.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.6.26#He was fond of saying, “There is a bravery of the priest as well as the ravery of a colonel of dragoons,—only,” he added, “ours must be tranquil.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.head#CHAPTER VII—CRAVATTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.1#It is here that a fact falls naturally into place, which we must not omit, ecause it is one of the sort which show us best what sort of a man the Bishop f D—— was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.2#After the destruction of the band of Gaspard Bès, who had infested the orges of Ollioules, one of his lieutenants, Cravatte, took refuge in the ountains. He concealed himself for some time with his bandits, the remnant of aspard Bès’s troop, in the county of Nice; then he made his way to Piédmont, nd suddenly reappeared in France, in the vicinity of Barcelonette. He was first een at Jauziers, then at Tuiles. He hid himself in the caverns of the oug-de-l’Aigle, and thence he descended towards the hamlets and villages hrough the ravines of Ubaye and Ubayette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.3#He even pushed as far as Embrun, entered the cathedral one night, and espoiled the sacristy. His highway robberies laid waste the country-side. The endarmes were set on his track, but in vain. He always escaped; sometimes he esisted by main force. He was a bold wretch. In the midst of all this terror he Bishop arrived. He was making his circuit to Chastelar. The mayor came to eet him, and urged him to retrace his steps. Cravatte was in possession of the ountains as far as Arche, and beyond; there was danger even with an escort; it erely exposed three or four unfortunate gendarmes to no purpose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.4#“Therefore,” said the Bishop, “I intend to go without escort.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.5#“You do not really mean that, Monseigneur!” exclaimed the mayor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.6#“I do mean it so thoroughly that I absolutely refuse any gendarmes, and hall set out in an hour.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.7#“Set out?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.8#“Set out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.9#“Alone?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.10#“Alone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.11#“Monseigneur, you will not do that!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.12#“There exists yonder in the mountains,” said the Bishop, “a tiny community o bigger than that, which I have not seen for three years. They are my good riends, those gentle and honest shepherds. They own one goat out of every hirty that they tend. They make very pretty woollen cords of various colors, nd they play the mountain airs on little flutes with six holes. They need to be old of the good God now and then. What would they say to a bishop who was fraid? What would they say if I did not go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.13#“But the brigands, Monseigneur?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.14#“Hold,” said the Bishop, “I must think of that. You are right. I may meet hem. They, too, need to be told of the good God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.15#“But, Monseigneur, there is a band of them! A flock of wolves!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.16#“Monsieur le maire, it may be that it is of this very flock of wolves that esus has constituted me the shepherd. Who knows the ways of Providence?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.17#“They will rob you, Monseigneur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.18#“I have nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.19#“They will kill you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.20#“An old goodman of a priest, who passes along mumbling his prayers? Bah! o what purpose?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.21#“Oh, mon Dieu! what if you should meet them!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.22#“I should beg alms of them for my poor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.23#“Do not go, Monseigneur. In the name of Heaven! You are risking your ife!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.24#“Monsieur le maire,” said the Bishop, “is that really all? I am not in the orld to guard my own life, but to guard souls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.25#They had to allow him to do as he pleased. He set out, accompanied only by child who offered to serve as a guide. His obstinacy was bruited about the ountry-side, and caused great consternation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.26#He would take neither his sister nor Madame Magloire. He traversed the ountain on mule-back, encountered no one, and arrived safe and sound at the esidence of his “good friends,” the shepherds. He remained there for a ortnight, preaching, administering the sacrament, teaching, exhorting. When the ime of his departure approached, he resolved to chant a _Te Deum_ pontifically. e mentioned it to the curé. But what was to be done? There were no episcopal rnaments. They could only place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy, ith a few ancient chasubles of threadbare damask adorned with imitation ace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.27#“Bah!” said the Bishop. “Let us announce our _Te Deum_ from the pulpit, evertheless, Monsieur le Curé. Things will arrange themselves.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.28#They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood. All the agnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficed to clothe he chorister of a cathedral properly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.29#While they were thus embarrassed, a large chest was brought and deposited n the presbytery for the Bishop, by two unknown horsemen, who departed on the nstant. The chest was opened; it contained a cope of cloth of gold, a mitre rnamented with diamonds, an archbishop’s cross, a magnificent crosier,—all the ontifical vestments which had been stolen a month previously from the treasury f Notre Dame d’Embrun. In the chest was a paper, on which these words were ritten, _“From Cravatte to Monseigneur Bienvenu.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.30#“Did not I say that things would come right of themselves?” said the ishop. Then he added, with a smile, “To him who contents himself with the urplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an archbishop.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.31#“Monseigneur,” murmured the curé, throwing back his head with a smile. God—or the Devil.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.32#The Bishop looked steadily at the curé, and repeated with authority, God!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.33#When he returned to Chastelar, the people came out to stare at him as at a uriosity, all along the road. At the priest’s house in Chastelar he rejoined ademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire, who were waiting for him, and he aid to his sister: “Well! was I in the right? The poor priest went to his poor ountaineers with empty hands, and he returns from them with his hands full. I et out bearing only my faith in God; I have brought back the treasure of a athedral.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.34#That evening, before he went to bed, he said again: “Let us never fear obbers nor murderers. Those are dangers from without, petty dangers. Let us ear ourselves. Prejudices are the real robbers; vices are the real murderers. he great dangers lie within ourselves. What matters it what threatens our head r our purse! Let us think only of that which threatens our soul.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.35#Then, turning to his sister: “Sister, never a precaution on the part of he priest, against his fellow-man. That which his fellow does, God permits. Let s confine ourselves to prayer, when we think that a danger is approaching us. et us pray, not for ourselves, but that our brother may not fall into sin on ur account.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.36#However, such incidents were rare in his life. We relate those of which we now; but generally he passed his life in doing the same things at the same oment. One month of his year resembled one hour of his day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.7.37#As to what became of “the treasure” of the cathedral of Embrun, we should e embarrassed by any inquiry in that direction. It consisted of very handsome hings, very tempting things, and things which were very well adapted to be tolen for the benefit of the unfortunate. Stolen they had already been lsewhere. Half of the adventure was completed; it only remained to impart a new irection to the theft, and to cause it to take a short trip in the direction of he poor. However, we make no assertions on this point. Only, a rather obscure ote was found among the Bishop’s papers, which may bear some relation to this atter, and which is couched in these terms, _“The question is, to decide hether this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the hospital.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—PHILOSOPHY AFTER DRINKING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.1#The senator above mentioned was a clever man, who had made his own way, eedless of those things which present obstacles, and which are called onscience, sworn faith, justice, duty: he had marched straight to his goal, ithout once flinching in the line of his advancement and his interest. He was n old attorney, softened by success; not a bad man by any means, who rendered ll the small services in his power to his sons, his sons-in-law, his relations, nd even to his friends, having wisely seized upon, in life, good sides, good pportunities, good windfalls. Everything else seemed to him very stupid. He was ntelligent, and just sufficiently educated to think himself a disciple of picurus; while he was, in reality, only a product of Pigault-Lebrun. He laughed illingly and pleasantly over infinite and eternal things, and at the “crotchets f that good old fellow the Bishop.” He even sometimes laughed at him with an miable authority in the presence of M. Myriel himself, who listened to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.2#On some semi-official occasion or other, I do not recollect what, Count*** this senator] and M. Myriel were to dine with the prefect. At dessert, the enator, who was slightly exhilarated, though still perfectly dignified, xclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.3#“Egad, Bishop, let’s have a discussion. It is hard for a senator and a ishop to look at each other without winking. We are two augurs. I am going to ake a confession to you. I have a philosophy of my own.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.4#“And you are right,” replied the Bishop. “As one makes one’s philosophy, so ne lies on it. You are on the bed of purple, senator.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.5#The senator was encouraged, and went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.6#“Let us be good fellows.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.7#“Good devils even,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.8#“I declare to you,” continued the senator, “that the Marquis d’Argens, yrrhon, Hobbes, and M. Naigeon are no rascals. I have all the philosophers in y library gilded on the edges.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.9#“Like yourself, Count,” interposed the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.10#The senator resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.11#“I hate Diderot; he is an ideologist, a declaimer, and a revolutionist, a eliever in God at bottom, and more bigoted than Voltaire. Voltaire made sport f Needham, and he was wrong, for Needham’s eels prove that God is useless. A rop of vinegar in a spoonful of flour paste supplies the _fiat lux_. Suppose he drop to be larger and the spoonful bigger; you have the world. Man is the el. Then what is the good of the Eternal Father? The Jehovah hypothesis tires e, Bishop. It is good for nothing but to produce shallow people, whose easoning is hollow. Down with that great All, which torments me! Hurrah for ero which leaves me in peace! Between you and me, and in order to empty my ack, and make confession to my pastor, as it behooves me to do, I will admit to ou that I have good sense. I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus, who preaches enunciation and sacrifice to the last extremity. ‘Tis the counsel of an varicious man to beggars. Renunciation; why? Sacrifice; to what end? I do not ee one wolf immolating himself for the happiness of another wolf. Let us stick o nature, then. We are at the top; let us have a superior philosophy. What is he advantage of being at the top, if one sees no further than the end of other eople’s noses? Let us live merrily. Life is all. That man has another future lsewhere, on high, below, anywhere, I don’t believe; not one single word of it. h! sacrifice and renunciation are recommended to me; I must take heed to verything I do; I must cudgel my brains over good and evil, over the just and he unjust, over the _fas_ and the _nefas_. Why? Because I shall have to render n account of my actions. When? After death. What a fine dream! After my death t will be a very clever person who can catch me. Have a handful of dust seized y a shadow-hand, if you can. Let us tell the truth, we who are initiated, and ho have raised the veil of Isis: there is no such thing as either good or evil; here is vegetation. Let us seek the real. Let us get to the bottom of it. Let s go into it thoroughly. What the deuce! let us go to the bottom of it! We must cent out the truth; dig in the earth for it, and seize it. Then it gives you xquisite joys. Then you grow strong, and you laugh. I am square on the bottom, am. Immortality, Bishop, is a chance, a waiting for dead men’s shoes. Ah! what charming promise! trust to it, if you like! What a fine lot Adam has! We are ouls, and we shall be angels, with blue wings on our shoulder-blades. Do come o my assistance: is it not Tertullian who says that the blessed shall travel rom star to star? Very well. We shall be the grasshoppers of the stars. And hen, besides, we shall see God. Ta, ta, ta! What twaddle all these paradises re! God is a nonsensical monster. I would not say that in the _Moniteur_, egad! ut I may whisper it among friends. _Inter pocula_. To sacrifice the world to aradise is to let slip the prey for the shadow. Be the dupe of the infinite! ’m not such a fool. I am a nought. I call myself Monsieur le Comte Nought, enator. Did I exist before my birth? No. Shall I exist after death? No. What am ? A little dust collected in an organism. What am I to do on this earth? The hoice rests with me: suffer or enjoy. Whither will suffering lead me? To othingness; but I shall have suffered. Whither will enjoyment lead me? To othingness; but I shall have enjoyed myself. My choice is made. One must eat or e eaten. I shall eat. It is better to be the tooth than the grass. Such is my isdom. After which, go whither I push thee, the grave-digger is there; the antheon for some of us: all falls into the great hole. End. _Finis_. Total iquidation. This is the vanishing-point. Death is death, believe me. I laugh at he idea of there being any one who has anything to tell me on that subject. ables of nurses; bugaboo for children; Jehovah for men. No; our to-morrow is he night. Beyond the tomb there is nothing but equal nothingness. You have been ardanapalus, you have been Vincent de Paul—it makes no difference. That is the ruth. Then live your life, above all things. Make use of your _I_ while you ave it. In truth, Bishop, I tell you that I have a philosophy of my own, and I ave my philosophers. I don’t let myself be taken in with that nonsense. Of ourse, there must be something for those who are down,—for the barefooted eggars, knife-grinders, and miserable wretches. Legends, chimæras, the soul, mmortality, paradise, the stars, are provided for them to swallow. They gobble t down. They spread it on their dry bread. He who has nothing else has the good od. That is the least he can have. I oppose no objection to that; but I reserve onsieur Naigeon for myself. The good God is good for the populace.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.12#The Bishop clapped his hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.8.13#“That’s talking!” he exclaimed. “What an excellent and really marvellous hing is this materialism! Not every one who wants it can have it. Ah! when one oes have it, one is no longer a dupe, one does not stupidly allow one’s self to e exiled like Cato, nor stoned like Stephen, nor burned alive like Jeanne ’Arc. Those who have succeeded in procuring this admirable materialism have the oy of feeling themselves irresponsible, and of thinking that they can devour verything without uneasiness,—places, sinecures, dignities, power, whether well r ill acquired, lucrative recantations, useful treacheries, savory apitulations of conscience,—and that they shall enter the tomb with their igestion accomplished. How agreeable that is! I do not say that with reference o you, senator. Nevertheless, it is impossible for me to refrain from ongratulating you. You great lords have, so you say, a philosophy of your own, nd for yourselves, which is exquisite, refined, accessible to the rich alone, ood for all sauces, and which seasons the voluptuousness of life admirably. his philosophy has been extracted from the depths, and unearthed by special eekers. But you are good-natured princes, and you do not think it a bad thing hat belief in the good God should constitute the philosophy of the people, very uch as the goose stuffed with chestnuts is the truffled turkey of the oor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.head#CHAPTER IX—THE BROTHER AS DEPICTED BY THE SISTER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.1#In order to furnish an idea of the private establishment of the Bishop of ——, and of the manner in which those two sainted women subordinated their ctions, their thoughts, their feminine instincts even, which are easily larmed, to the habits and purposes of the Bishop, without his even taking the rouble of speaking in order to explain them, we cannot do better than ranscribe in this place a letter from Mademoiselle Baptistine to Madame the icomtess de Boischevron, the friend of her childhood. This letter is in our ossession.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.2#D——, Dec. 16, 18—. MY GOOD MADAM: Not a day passes without our speaking of ou. It is our established custom; but there is another reason besides. Just magine, while washing and dusting the ceilings and walls, Madam Magloire has ade some discoveries; now our two chambers hung with antique paper whitewashed ver, would not discredit a château in the style of yours. Madam Magloire has ulled off all the paper. There were things beneath. My drawing-room, which ontains no furniture, and which we use for spreading out the linen after ashing, is fifteen feet in height, eighteen square, with a ceiling which was ormerly painted and gilded, and with beams, as in yours. This was covered with cloth while this was the hospital. And the woodwork was of the era of our randmothers. But my room is the one you ought to see. Madam Magloire has iscovered, under at least ten thicknesses of paper pasted on top, some aintings, which without being good are very tolerable. The subject is elemachus being knighted by Minerva in some gardens, the name of which escapes e. In short, where the Roman ladies repaired on one single night. What shall I ay to you? I have Romans, and Roman ladies [here occurs an illegible word], and he whole train. Madam Magloire has cleaned it all off; this summer she is going o have some small injuries repaired, and the whole revarnished, and my chamber ill be a regular museum. She has also found in a corner of the attic two wooden ier-tables of ancient fashion. They asked us two crowns of six francs each to egild them, but it is much better to give the money to the poor; and they are ery ugly besides, and I should much prefer a round table of mahogany.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.3#I am always very happy. My brother is so good. He gives all he has to the oor and sick. We are very much cramped. The country is trying in the winter, nd we really must do something for those who are in need. We are almost omfortably lighted and warmed. You see that these are great treats.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.4#My brother has ways of his own. When he talks, he says that a bishop ought o be so. Just imagine! the door of our house is never fastened. Whoever chooses o enter finds himself at once in my brother’s room. He fears nothing, even at ight. That is his sort of bravery, he says.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.5#He does not wish me or Madame Magloire feel any fear for him. He exposes imself to all sorts of dangers, and he does not like to have us even seem to otice it. One must know how to understand him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.6#He goes out in the rain, he walks in the water, he travels in winter. He ears neither suspicious roads nor dangerous encounters, nor night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.7#Last year he went quite alone into a country of robbers. He would not take s. He was absent for a fortnight. On his return nothing had happened to him; he as thought to be dead, but was perfectly well, and said, “This is the way I ave been robbed!” And then he opened a trunk full of jewels, all the jewels of he cathedral of Embrun, which the thieves had given him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.8#When he returned on that occasion, I could not refrain from scolding him a ittle, taking care, however, not to speak except when the carriage was making a oise, so that no one might hear me.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.9#At first I used to say to myself, “There are no dangers which will stop im; he is terrible.” Now I have ended by getting used to it. I make a sign to adam Magloire that she is not to oppose him. He risks himself as he sees fit. I arry off Madam Magloire, I enter my chamber, I pray for him and fall asleep. I m at ease, because I know that if anything were to happen to him, it would be he end of me. I should go to the good God with my brother and my bishop. It has ost Madam Magloire more trouble than it did me to accustom herself to what she erms his imprudences. But now the habit has been acquired. We pray together, we remble together, and we fall asleep. If the devil were to enter this house, he ould be allowed to do so. After all, what is there for us to fear in this ouse? There is always some one with us who is stronger than we. The devil may ass through it, but the good God dwells here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.10#This suffices me. My brother has no longer any need of saying a word to e. I understand him without his speaking, and we abandon ourselves to the care f Providence. That is the way one has to do with a man who possesses grandeur f soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.11#I have interrogated my brother with regard to the information which you esire on the subject of the Faux family. You are aware that he knows verything, and that he has memories, because he is still a very good royalist. hey really are a very ancient Norman family of the generalship of Caen. Five undred years ago there was a Raoul de Faux, a Jean de Faux, and a Thomas de aux, who were gentlemen, and one of whom was a seigneur de Rochefort. The last as Guy-Étienne-Alexandre, and was commander of a regiment, and something in the ight horse of Bretagne. His daughter, Marie-Louise, married Adrien-Charles de ramont, son of the Duke Louis de Gramont, peer of France, colonel of the French uards, and lieutenant-general of the army. It is written Faux, Fauq, and aoucq.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.12#Good Madame, recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative, onsieur the Cardinal. As for your dear Sylvanie, she has done well in not asting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me. She is well, orks as you would wish, and loves me.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.13#That is all that I desire. The souvenir which she sent through you reached e safely, and it makes me very happy. My health is not so very bad, and yet I row thinner every day. Farewell; my paper is at an end, and this forces me to eave you. A thousand good wishes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.14#BAPTISTINE.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.15#P.S. Your grand nephew is charming. Do you know that he will soon be five ears old? Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback who had on nee-caps, and he said, “What has he got on his knees?” He is a charming child! is little brother is dragging an old broom about the room, like a carriage, and aying, “Hu!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.16#As will be perceived from this letter, these two women understood how to ould themselves to the Bishop’s ways with that special feminine genius which omprehends the man better than he comprehends himself. The Bishop of D——, in pite of the gentle and candid air which never deserted him, sometimes did hings that were grand, bold, and magnificent, without seeming to have even a uspicion of the fact. They trembled, but they let him alone. Sometimes Madame agloire essayed a remonstrance in advance, but never at the time, nor fterwards. They never interfered with him by so much as a word or sign, in any ction once entered upon. At certain moments, without his having occasion to ention it, when he was not even conscious of it himself in all probability, so erfect was his simplicity, they vaguely felt that he was acting as a bishop; hen they were nothing more than two shadows in the house. They served him assively; and if obedience consisted in disappearing, they disappeared. They nderstood, with an admirable delicacy of instinct, that certain cares may be ut under constraint. Thus, even when believing him to be in peril, they nderstood, I will not say his thought, but his nature, to such a degree that hey no longer watched over him. They confided him to God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.9.17#Moreover, Baptistine said, as we have just read, that her brother’s end ould prove her own. Madame Magloire did not say this, but she knew it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.head#CHAPTER X—THE BISHOP IN THE PRESENCE OF AN UNKNOWN LIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.1#At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the receding pages, he did a thing which, if the whole town was to be believed, was ven more hazardous than his trip across the mountains infested with andits.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.2#In the country near D—— a man lived quite alone. This man, we will state at nce, was a former member of the Convention. His name was G——
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.3#Member of the Convention, G—— was mentioned with a sort of horror in the ittle world of D—— A member of the Convention—can you imagine such a thing? hat existed from the time when people called each other _thou_, and when they aid “citizen.” This man was almost a monster. He had not voted for the death of he king, but almost. He was a quasi-regicide. He had been a terrible man. How id it happen that such a man had not been brought before a provost’s court, on he return of the legitimate princes? They need not have cut off his head, if ou please; clemency must be exercised, agreed; but a good banishment for life. n example, in short, etc. Besides, he was an atheist, like all the rest of hose people. Gossip of the geese about the vulture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.4#Was G—— a vulture after all? Yes; if he were to be judged by the element of erocity in this solitude of his. As he had not voted for the death of the king, e had not been included in the decrees of exile, and had been able to remain in rance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.5#He dwelt at a distance of three-quarters of an hour from the city, far from ny hamlet, far from any road, in some hidden turn of a very wild valley, no one new exactly where. He had there, it was said, a sort of field, a hole, a lair. here were no neighbors, not even passers-by. Since he had dwelt in that valley, he path which led thither had disappeared under a growth of grass. The locality as spoken of as though it had been the dwelling of a hangman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.6#Nevertheless, the Bishop meditated on the subject, and from time to time he azed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees marked the valley of the ormer member of the Convention, and he said, “There is a soul yonder which is onely.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.7#And he added, deep in his own mind, “I owe him a visit.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.8#But, let us avow it, this idea, which seemed natural at the first blush, ppeared to him after a moment’s reflection, as strange, impossible, and almost epulsive. For, at bottom, he shared the general impression, and the old member f the Convention inspired him, without his being clearly conscious of the fact imself, with that sentiment which borders on hate, and which is so well xpressed by the word estrangement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.9#Still, should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to recoil? No. But hat a sheep!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.10#The good Bishop was perplexed. Sometimes he set out in that direction; hen he returned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.11#Finally, the rumor one day spread through the town that a sort of young hepherd, who served the member of the Convention in his hovel, had come in uest of a doctor; that the old wretch was dying, that paralysis was gaining on im, and that he would not live over night.—“Thank God!” some added.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.12#The Bishop took his staff, put on his cloak, on account of his too hreadbare cassock, as we have mentioned, and because of the evening breeze hich was sure to rise soon, and set out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.13#The sun was setting, and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishop rrived at the excommunicated spot. With a certain beating of the heart, he ecognized the fact that he was near the lair. He strode over a ditch, leaped a edge, made his way through a fence of dead boughs, entered a neglected paddock, ook a few steps with a good deal of boldness, and suddenly, at the extremity of he waste land, and behind lofty brambles, he caught sight of the cavern.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.14#It was a very low hut, poor, small, and clean, with a vine nailed against he outside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.15#Near the door, in an old wheel-chair, the armchair of the peasants, there as a white-haired man, smiling at the sun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.16#Near the seated man stood a young boy, the shepherd lad. He was offering he old man a jar of milk.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.17#While the Bishop was watching him, the old man spoke: “Thank you,” he aid, “I need nothing.” And his smile quitted the sun to rest upon the hild.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.18#The Bishop stepped forward. At the sound which he made in walking, the old an turned his head, and his face expressed the sum total of the surprise which man can still feel after a long life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.19#“This is the first time since I have been here,” said he, “that any one as entered here. Who are you, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.20#The Bishop answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.21#“My name is Bienvenu Myriel.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.22#“Bienvenu Myriel? I have heard that name. Are you the man whom the people all Monseigneur Welcome?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.23#“I am.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.24#The old man resumed with a half-smile
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.25#“In that case, you are my bishop?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.26#“Something of that sort.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.27#“Enter, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.28#The member of the Convention extended his hand to the Bishop, but the ishop did not take it. The Bishop confined himself to the remark:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.29#“I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed. You certainly do not eem to me to be ill.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.30#“Monsieur,” replied the old man, “I am going to recover.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.31#He paused, and then said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.32#“I shall die three hours hence.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.33#Then he continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.34#“I am something of a doctor; I know in what fashion the last hour draws n. Yesterday, only my feet were cold; to-day, the chill has ascended to my nees; now I feel it mounting to my waist; when it reaches the heart, I shall top. The sun is beautiful, is it not? I had myself wheeled out here to take a ast look at things. You can talk to me; it does not fatigue me. You have done ell to come and look at a man who is on the point of death. It is well that here should be witnesses at that moment. One has one’s caprices; I should have iked to last until the dawn, but I know that I shall hardly live three hours. t will be night then. What does it matter, after all? Dying is a simple affair. ne has no need of the light for that. So be it. I shall die by starlight.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.35#The old man turned to the shepherd lad:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.36#“Go to thy bed; thou wert awake all last night; thou art tired.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.37#The child entered the hut.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.38#The old man followed him with his eyes, and added, as though speaking to imself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.39#“I shall die while he sleeps. The two slumbers may be good neighbors.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.40#The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been. He did ot think he discerned God in this manner of dying; let us say the whole, for hese petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicated like the rest: he, ho on occasion, was so fond of laughing at “His Grace,” was rather shocked at ot being addressed as Monseigneur, and he was almost tempted to retort citizen.” He was assailed by a fancy for peevish familiarity, common enough to octors and priests, but which was not habitual with him. This man, after all, his member of the Convention, this representative of the people, had been one f the powerful ones of the earth; for the first time in his life, probably, the ishop felt in a mood to be severe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.41#Meanwhile, the member of the Convention had been surveying him with a odest cordiality, in which one could have distinguished, possibly, that umility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returning to dust.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.42#The Bishop, on his side, although he generally restrained his curiosity, hich, in his opinion, bordered on a fault, could not refrain from examining the ember of the Convention with an attention which, as it did not have its course n sympathy, would have served his conscience as a matter of reproach, in onnection with any other man. A member of the Convention produced on him omewhat the effect of being outside the pale of the law, even of the law of harity. G——, calm, his body almost upright, his voice vibrating, was one of hose octogenarians who form the subject of astonishment to the physiologist. he Revolution had many of these men, proportioned to the epoch. In this old man ne was conscious of a man put to the proof. Though so near to his end, he reserved all the gestures of health. In his clear glance, in his firm tone, in he robust movement of his shoulders, there was something calculated to isconcert death. Azrael, the Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre, would have urned back, and thought that he had mistaken the door. G—— seemed to be dying ecause he willed it so. There was freedom in his agony. His legs alone were otionless. It was there that the shadows held him fast. His feet were cold and ead, but his head survived with all the power of life, and seemed full of ight. G——, at this solemn moment, resembled the king in that tale of the Orient ho was flesh above and marble below.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.43#There was a stone there. The Bishop sat down. The exordium was abrupt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.44#“I congratulate you,” said he, in the tone which one uses for a reprimand. You did not vote for the death of the king, after all.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.45#The old member of the Convention did not appear to notice the bitter eaning underlying the words “after all.” He replied. The smile had quite isappeared from his face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.46#“Do not congratulate me too much, sir. I did vote for the death of the yrant.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.47#It was the tone of austerity answering the tone of severity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.48#“What do you mean to say?” resumed the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.49#“I mean to say that man has a tyrant,—ignorance. I voted for the death of hat tyrant. That tyrant engendered royalty, which is authority falsely nderstood, while science is authority rightly understood. Man should be overned only by science.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.50#“And conscience,” added the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.51#“It is the same thing. Conscience is the quantity of innate science which e have within us.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.52#Monseigneur Bienvenu listened in some astonishment to this language, which as very new to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.53#The member of the Convention resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.54#“So far as Louis XVI. was concerned, I said ‘no.’ I did not think that I ad the right to kill a man; but I felt it my duty to exterminate evil. I voted he end of the tyrant, that is to say, the end of prostitution for woman, the nd of slavery for man, the end of night for the child. In voting for the epublic, I voted for that. I voted for fraternity, concord, the dawn. I have ided in the overthrow of prejudices and errors. The crumbling away of rejudices and errors causes light. We have caused the fall of the old world, nd the old world, that vase of miseries, has become, through its upsetting upon he human race, an urn of joy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.55#“Mixed joy,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.56#“You may say troubled joy, and to-day, after that fatal return of the ast, which is called 1814, joy which has disappeared! Alas! The work was ncomplete, I admit: we demolished the ancient regime in deeds; we were not able o suppress it entirely in ideas. To destroy abuses is not sufficient; customs ust be modified. The mill is there no longer; the wind is still there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.57#“You have demolished. It may be of use to demolish, but I distrust a emolition complicated with wrath.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.58#“Right has its wrath, Bishop; and the wrath of right is an element of rogress. In any case, and in spite of whatever may be said, the French evolution is the most important step of the human race since the advent of hrist. Incomplete, it may be, but sublime. It set free all the unknown social uantities; it softened spirits, it calmed, appeased, enlightened; it caused the aves of civilization to flow over the earth. It was a good thing. The French evolution is the consecration of humanity.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.59#The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.60#“Yes? ’93!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.61#The member of the Convention straightened himself up in his chair with an lmost lugubrious solemnity, and exclaimed, so far as a dying man is capable of xclamation:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.62#“Ah, there you go; ’93! I was expecting that word. A cloud had been orming for the space of fifteen hundred years; at the end of fifteen hundred ears it burst. You are putting the thunderbolt on its trial.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.63#The Bishop felt, without, perhaps, confessing it, that something within im had suffered extinction. Nevertheless, he put a good face on the matter. He eplied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.64#“The judge speaks in the name of justice; the priest speaks in the name of ity, which is nothing but a more lofty justice. A thunderbolt should commit no rror.” And he added, regarding the member of the Convention steadily the while, Louis XVII.?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.65#The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop’s rm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.66#“Louis XVII.! let us see. For whom do you mourn? is it for the innocent hild? very good; in that case I mourn with you. Is it for the royal child? I emand time for reflection. To me, the brother of Cartouche, an innocent child ho was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Grève, until death ensued, for he sole crime of having been the brother of Cartouche, is no less painful than he grandson of Louis XV., an innocent child, martyred in the tower of the emple, for the sole crime of having been grandson of Louis XV.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.67#“Monsieur,” said the Bishop, “I like not this conjunction of names.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.68#“Cartouche? Louis XV.? To which of the two do you object?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.69#A momentary silence ensued. The Bishop almost regretted having come, and et he felt vaguely and strangely shaken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.70#The conventionary resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.71#“Ah, Monsieur Priest, you love not the crudities of the true. Christ loved hem. He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple. His scourge, full of ightnings, was a harsh speaker of truths. When he cried, _‘Sinite parvulos,’_ e made no distinction between the little children. It would not have mbarrassed him to bring together the Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of erod. Innocence, Monsieur, is its own crown. Innocence has no need to be a ighness. It is as august in rags as in fleurs de lys.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.72#“That is true,” said the Bishop in a low voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.73#“I persist,” continued the conventionary G—— “You have mentioned Louis VII. to me. Let us come to an understanding. Shall we weep for all the nnocent, all martyrs, all children, the lowly as well as the exalted? I agree o that. But in that case, as I have told you, we must go back further than ’93, nd our tears must begin before Louis XVII. I will weep with you over the hildren of kings, provided that you will weep with me over the children of the eople.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.74#“I weep for all,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.75#“Equally!” exclaimed conventionary G——; “and if the balance must incline, et it be on the side of the people. They have been suffering longer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.76#Another silence ensued. The conventionary was the first to break it. He aised himself on one elbow, took a bit of his cheek between his thumb and his orefinger, as one does mechanically when one interrogates and judges, and ppealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces of the death agony. It as almost an explosion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.77#“Yes, sir, the people have been suffering a long while. And hold! that is ot all, either; why have you just questioned me and talked to me about Louis VII.? I know you not. Ever since I have been in these parts I have dwelt in his enclosure alone, never setting foot outside, and seeing no one but that hild who helps me. Your name has reached me in a confused manner, it is true, nd very badly pronounced, I must admit; but that signifies nothing: clever men ave so many ways of imposing on that honest goodman, the people. By the way, I id not hear the sound of your carriage; you have left it yonder, behind the oppice at the fork of the roads, no doubt. I do not know you, I tell you. You ave told me that you are the Bishop; but that affords me no information as to our moral personality. In short, I repeat my question. Who are you? You are a ishop; that is to say, a prince of the church, one of those gilded men with eraldic bearings and revenues, who have vast prebends,—the bishopric of D—— ifteen thousand francs settled income, ten thousand in perquisites; total, wenty-five thousand francs,—who have kitchens, who have liveries, who make good heer, who eat moor-hens on Friday, who strut about, a lackey before, a lackey ehind, in a gala coach, and who have palaces, and who roll in their carriages n the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot! You are a prelate,—revenues, alace, horses, servants, good table, all the sensualities of life; you have his like the rest, and like the rest, you enjoy it; it is well; but this says ither too much or too little; this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and ssential value of the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing isdom to me. To whom do I speak? Who are you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.78#The Bishop hung his head and replied, _“Vermis sum_—I am a worm.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.79#“A worm of the earth in a carriage?” growled the conventionary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.80#It was the conventionary’s turn to be arrogant, and the Bishop’s to be umble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.81#The Bishop resumed mildly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.82#“So be it, sir. But explain to me how my carriage, which is a few paces ff behind the trees yonder, how my good table and the moor-hens which I eat on riday, how my twenty-five thousand francs income, how my palace and my lackeys rove that clemency is not a duty, and that ’93 was not inexorable.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.83#The conventionary passed his hand across his brow, as though to sweep away cloud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.84#“Before replying to you,” he said, “I beseech you to pardon me. I have ust committed a wrong, sir. You are at my house, you are my guest, I owe you ourtesy. You discuss my ideas, and it becomes me to confine myself to combating our arguments. Your riches and your pleasures are advantages which I hold over ou in the debate; but good taste dictates that I shall not make use of them. I romise you to make no use of them in the future.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.85#“I thank you,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.86#G—— resumed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.87#“Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me. Where were e? What were you saying to me? That ’93 was inexorable?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.88#“Inexorable; yes,” said the Bishop. “What think you of Marat clapping his ands at the guillotine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.89#“What think you of Bossuet chanting the _Te Deum_ over the ragonnades?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.90#The retort was a harsh one, but it attained its mark with the directness f a point of steel. The Bishop quivered under it; no reply occurred to him; but e was offended by this mode of alluding to Bossuet. The best of minds will have heir fetiches, and they sometimes feel vaguely wounded by the want of respect f logic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.91#The conventionary began to pant; the asthma of the agony which is mingled ith the last breaths interrupted his voice; still, there was a perfect lucidity f soul in his eyes. He went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.92#“Let me say a few words more in this and that direction; I am willing. part from the Revolution, which, taken as a whole, is an immense human ffirmation, ’93 is, alas! a rejoinder. You think it inexorable, sir; but what f the whole monarchy, sir? Carrier is a bandit; but what name do you give to ontrevel? Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal; but what is your opinion as to amoignon-Bâville? Maillard is terrible; but Saulx-Tavannes, if you please? uchêne senior is ferocious; but what epithet will you allow me for the elder etellier? Jourdan-Coupe-Tetê is a monster; but not so great a one as M. the arquis de Louvois. Sir, sir, I am sorry for Marie Antoinette, archduchess and ueen; but I am also sorry for that poor Huguenot woman, who, in 1685, under ouis the Great, sir, while with a nursing infant, was bound, naked to the aist, to a stake, and the child kept at a distance; her breast swelled with ilk and her heart with anguish; the little one, hungry and pale, beheld that reast and cried and agonized; the executioner said to the woman, a mother and a urse, ‘Abjure!’ giving her her choice between the death of her infant and the eath of her conscience. What say you to that torture of Tantalus as applied to mother? Bear this well in mind sir: the French Revolution had its reasons for xistence; its wrath will be absolved by the future; its result is the world ade better. From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the uman race. I abridge, I stop, I have too much the advantage; moreover, I am ying.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.93#And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop, the conventionary concluded his houghts in these tranquil words:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.94#“Yes, the brutalities of progress are called revolutions. When they are ver, this fact is recognized,—that the human race has been treated harshly, but hat it has progressed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.95#The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all the nmost intrenchments of the Bishop. One remained, however, and from this ntrenchment, the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu’s resistance, came forth his reply, wherein appeared nearly all the harshness of the beginning:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.96#“Progress should believe in God. Good cannot have an impious servitor. He ho is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.97#The former representative of the people made no reply. He was seized with fit of trembling. He looked towards heaven, and in his glance a tear gathered lowly. When the eyelid was full, the tear trickled down his livid cheek, and he aid, almost in a stammer, quite low, and to himself, while his eyes were lunged in the depths:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.98#“O thou! O ideal! Thou alone existest!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.99#The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.100#After a pause, the old man raised a finger heavenward and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.101#“The infinite is. He is there. If the infinite had no person, person ould be without limit; it would not be infinite; in other words, it would not xist. There is, then, an _I_. That _I_ of the infinite is God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.102#The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice, and with he shiver of ecstasy, as though he beheld some one. When he had spoken, his yes closed. The effort had exhausted him. It was evident that he had just lived hrough in a moment the few hours which had been left to him. That which he had aid brought him nearer to him who is in death. The supreme moment was pproaching.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.103#The Bishop understood this; time pressed; it was as a priest that he had ome: from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme emotion; he azed at those closed eyes, he took that wrinkled, aged and ice-cold hand in is, and bent over the dying man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.104#“This hour is the hour of God. Do you not think that it would be egrettable if we had met in vain?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.105#The conventionary opened his eyes again. A gravity mingled with gloom was mprinted on his countenance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.106#“Bishop,” said he, with a slowness which probably arose more from his ignity of soul than from the failing of his strength, “I have passed my life in editation, study, and contemplation. I was sixty years of age when my country alled me and commanded me to concern myself with its affairs. I obeyed. Abuses xisted, I combated them; tyrannies existed, I destroyed them; rights and rinciples existed, I proclaimed and confessed them. Our territory was invaded, defended it; France was menaced, I offered my breast. I was not rich; I am oor. I have been one of the masters of the state; the vaults of the treasury ere encumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore up the alls, which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold and ilver; I dined in Dead Tree Street, at twenty-two sous. I have succored the ppressed, I have comforted the suffering. I tore the cloth from the altar, it s true; but it was to bind up the wounds of my country. I have always upheld he march forward of the human race, forward towards the light, and I have ometimes resisted progress without pity. I have, when the occasion offered, rotected my own adversaries, men of your profession. And there is at Peteghem, n Flanders, at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summer alace, a convent of Urbanists, the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu, which I aved in 1793. I have done my duty according to my powers, and all the good that was able. After which, I was hunted down, pursued, persecuted, blackened, eered at, scorned, cursed, proscribed. For many years past, I with my white air have been conscious that many people think they have the right to despise e; to the poor ignorant masses I present the visage of one damned. And I accept his isolation of hatred, without hating any one myself. Now I am eighty-six ears old; I am on the point of death. What is it that you have come to ask of e?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.107#_“Your blessing,”_ said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.108#And he knelt down.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.109#When the Bishop raised his head again, the face of the conventionary had ecome august. He had just expired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.110#The Bishop returned home, deeply absorbed in thoughts which cannot be nown to us. He passed the whole night in prayer. On the following morning some old and curious persons attempted to speak to him about member of the onvention G——; he contented himself with pointing heavenward.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.111#From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling owards all children and sufferers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.112#Any allusion to “that old wretch of a G——” caused him to fall into a ingular preoccupation. No one could say that the passage of that soul before is, and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his, did not count for omething in his approach to perfection.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.113#This “pastoral visit” naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur of omment in all the little local coteries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.114#“Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a ishop? There was evidently no conversion to be expected. All those evolutionists are backsliders. Then why go there? What was there to be seen here? He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried off by the evil.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.10.115#One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herself piritual, addressed this sally to him, “Monseigneur, people are inquiring when our Greatness will receive the red cap!”—“Oh! oh! that’s a coarse color,” eplied the Bishop. “It is lucky that those who despise it in a cap revere it in hat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.head#CHAPTER XI—A RESTRICTION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.1#We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves, were we to conclude rom this that Monseigneur Welcome was “a philosophical bishop,” or a “patriotic uré.” His meeting, which may almost be designated as his union, with onventionary G——, left behind it in his mind a sort of astonishment, which endered him still more gentle. That is all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.2#Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician, this is, erhaps, the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in the events f that epoch, supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever dreamed of having an ttitude.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.3#Let us, then, go back a few years.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.4#Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate, the Emperor ad made him a baron of the Empire, in company with many other bishops. The rrest of the Pope took place, as every one knows, on the night of the 5th to he 6th of July, 1809; on this occasion, M. Myriel was summoned by Napoleon to he synod of the bishops of France and Italy convened at Paris. This synod was eld at Notre-Dame, and assembled for the first time on the 15th of June, 1811, nder the presidency of Cardinal Fesch. M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five ishops who attended it. But he was present only at one sitting and at three or our private conferences. Bishop of a mountain diocese, living so very close to ature, in rusticity and deprivation, it appeared that he imported among these minent personages, ideas which altered the temperature of the assembly. He very oon returned to D—— He was interrogated as to this speedy return, and he eplied: _“I embarrassed them. The outside air penetrated to them through me. I roduced on them the effect of an open door.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.5#On another occasion he said, _“What would you have? Those gentlemen are rinces. I am only a poor peasant bishop.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.6#The fact is that he displeased them. Among other strange things, it is said hat he chanced to remark one evening, when he found himself at the house of one f his most notable colleagues: “What beautiful clocks! What beautiful carpets! hat beautiful liveries! They must be a great trouble. I would not have all hose superfluities, crying incessantly in my ears: ‘There are people who are ungry! There are people who are cold! There are poor people! There are poor eople!’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.7#Let us remark, by the way, that the hatred of luxury is not an intelligent atred. This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts. Nevertheless, in hurchmen, luxury is wrong, except in connection with representations and eremonies. It seems to reveal habits which have very little that is charitable bout them. An opulent priest is a contradiction. The priest must keep close to he poor. Now, can one come in contact incessantly night and day with all this istress, all these misfortunes, and this poverty, without having about one’s wn person a little of that misery, like the dust of labor? Is it possible to magine a man near a brazier who is not warm? Can one imagine a workman who is orking near a furnace, and who has neither a singed hair, nor blackened nails, or a drop of sweat, nor a speck of ashes on his face? The first proof of harity in the priest, in the bishop especially, is poverty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.8#This is, no doubt, what the Bishop of D—— thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.9#It must not be supposed, however, that he shared what we call the “ideas of he century” on certain delicate points. He took very little part in the heological quarrels of the moment, and maintained silence on questions in which hurch and State were implicated; but if he had been strongly pressed, it seems hat he would have been found to be an ultramontane rather than a gallican. ince we are making a portrait, and since we do not wish to conceal anything, we re forced to add that he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline. Beginning ith 1813, he gave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations. e refused to see him, as he passed through on his return from the island of lba, and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperor in his iocese during the Hundred Days.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.10#Besides his sister, Mademoiselle Baptistine, he had two brothers, one a eneral, the other a prefect. He wrote to both with tolerable frequency. He was arsh for a time towards the former, because, holding a command in Provence at he epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes, the general had put himself at the ead of twelve hundred men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had een a person whom one is desirous of allowing to escape. His correspondence ith the other brother, the ex-prefect, a fine, worthy man who lived in etirement at Paris, Rue Cassette, remained more affectionate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.11#Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit, his hour of itterness, his cloud. The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this rand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things. Certainly, such a man ould have done well not to entertain any political opinions. Let there be no istake as to our meaning: we are not confounding what is called “political pinions” with the grand aspiration for progress, with the sublime faith, atriotic, democratic, humane, which in our day should be the very foundation of very generous intellect. Without going deeply into questions which are only ndirectly connected with the subject of this book, we will simply say this: It ould have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist, and if his lance had never been, for a single instant, turned away from that serene ontemplation in which is distinctly discernible, above the fictions and the atreds of this world, above the stormy vicissitudes of human things, the eaming of those three pure radiances, truth, justice, and charity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.12#While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created onseigneur Welcome, we should have understood and admired his protest in the ame of right and liberty, his proud opposition, his just but perilous esistance to the all-powerful Napoleon. But that which pleases us in people who re rising pleases us less in the case of people who are falling. We only love he fray so long as there is danger, and in any case, the combatants of the irst hour have alone the right to be the exterminators of the last. He who has ot been a stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of uin. The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall. s for us, when Providence intervenes and strikes, we let it work. 1812 ommenced to disarm us. In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence of that taciturn egislative body, emboldened by catastrophe, possessed only traits which aroused ndignation. And it was a crime to applaud, in 1814, in the presence of those arshals who betrayed; in the presence of that senate which passed from one unghill to another, insulting after having deified; in the presence of that dolatry which was loosing its footing and spitting on its idol,—it was a duty o turn aside the head. In 1815, when the supreme disasters filled the air, when rance was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach, when Waterloo could e dimly discerned opening before Napoleon, the mournful acclamation of the army nd the people to the condemned of destiny had nothing laughable in it, and, fter making all allowance for the despot, a heart like that of the Bishop of ——, ought not perhaps to have failed to recognize the august and touching eatures presented by the embrace of a great nation and a great man on the brink f the abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.13#With this exception, he was in all things just, true, equitable, ntelligent, humble and dignified, beneficent and kindly, which is only another ort of benevolence. He was a priest, a sage, and a man. It must be admitted, hat even in the political views with which we have just reproached him, and hich we are disposed to judge almost with severity, he was tolerant and easy, ore so, perhaps, than we who are speaking here. The porter of the town-hall had een placed there by the Emperor. He was an old non-commissioned officer of the ld guard, a member of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz, as much of a onapartist as the eagle. This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate emarks, which the law then stigmatized as _seditious speeches_. After the mperial profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor, he never dressed himself n his regimentals, as he said, so that he should not be obliged to wear his ross. He had himself devoutly removed the imperial effigy from the cross which apoleon had given him; this made a hole, and he would not put anything in its lace. _“I will die,”_ he said, _“rather than wear the three frogs upon my eart!”_ He liked to scoff aloud at Louis XVIII. “The gouty old creature in nglish gaiters!” he said; _“let him take himself off to Prussia with that queue f his.”_ He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the two things which e most detested, Prussia and England. He did it so often that he lost his lace. There he was, turned out of the house, with his wife and children, and ithout bread. The Bishop sent for him, reproved him gently, and appointed him eadle in the cathedral.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.11.14#In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had, by dint of holy eeds and gentle manners, filled the town of D——with a sort of tender and filial everence. Even his conduct towards Napoleon had been accepted and tacitly ardoned, as it were, by the people, the good and weakly flock who adored their mperor, but loved their bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.12.head#CHAPTER XII—THE SOLITUDE OF MONSEIGNEUR WELCOME
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.12.1#A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of little abbés, ust as a general is by a covey of young officers. This is what that charming aint François de Sales calls somewhere “les prêtres blancs-becs,” callow riests. Every career has its aspirants, who form a train for those who have ttained eminence in it. There is no power which has not its dependents. There s no fortune which has not its court. The seekers of the future eddy around the plendid present. Every metropolis has its staff of officials. Every bishop who ossesses the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the eminary, which goes the round, and maintains good order in the episcopal alace, and mounts guard over monseigneur’s smile. To please a bishop is quivalent to getting one’s foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate. It is ecessary to walk one’s path discreetly; the apostleship does not disdain the anonship.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.12.2#Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere, there are big mitres in the Church. hese are the bishops who stand well at Court, who are rich, well endowed, kilful, accepted by the world, who know how to pray, no doubt, but who know lso how to beg, who feel little scruple at making a whole diocese dance ttendance in their person, who are connecting links between the sacristy and iplomacy, who are abbés rather than priests, prelates rather than bishops. appy those who approach them! Being persons of influence, they create a shower bout them, upon the assiduous and the favored, and upon all the young men who nderstand the art of pleasing, of large parishes, prebends, archidiaconates, haplaincies, and cathedral posts, while awaiting episcopal honors. As they dvance themselves, they cause their satellites to progress also; it is a whole olar system on the march. Their radiance casts a gleam of purple over their uite. Their prosperity is crumbled up behind the scenes, into nice little romotions. The larger the diocese of the patron, the fatter the curacy for the avorite. And then, there is Rome. A bishop who understands how to become an rchbishop, an archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal, carries you with im as conclavist; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction, you receive the allium, and behold! you are an auditor, then a papal chamberlain, then onsignor, and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step, and between the minence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot. Every skull-cap ay dream of the tiara. The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a ing in a regular manner; and what a king! the supreme king. Then what a nursery f aspirations is a seminary! How many blushing choristers, how many youthful bbés bear on their heads Perrette’s pot of milk! Who knows how easy it is for mbition to call itself vocation? in good faith, perchance, and deceiving tself, devotee that it is.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.12.3#Monseigneur Bienvenu, poor, humble, retiring, was not accounted among the ig mitres. This was plain from the complete absence of young priests about him. e have seen that he “did not take” in Paris. Not a single future dreamed of ngrafting itself on this solitary old man. Not a single sprouting ambition ommitted the folly of putting forth its foliage in his shadow. His canons and rand-vicars were good old men, rather vulgar like himself, walled up like him n this diocese, without exit to a cardinalship, and who resembled their bishop, ith this difference, that they were finished and he was completed. The mpossibility of growing great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so well nderstood, that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the seminary han they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix or of Auch, and ent off in a great hurry. For, in short, we repeat it, men wish to be pushed. A aint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegation is a dangerous neighbor; he might ommunicate to you, by contagion, an incurable poverty, an anchylosis of the oints, which are useful in advancement, and in short, more renunciation than ou desire; and this infectious virtue is avoided. Hence the isolation of onseigneur Bienvenu. We live in the midst of a gloomy society. Success; that is he lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.12.4#Be it said in passing, that success is a very hideous thing. Its false esemblance to merit deceives men. For the masses, success has almost the same rofile as supremacy. Success, that Menæchmus of talent, has one dupe,—history. uvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it. In our day, a philosophy which is lmost official has entered into its service, wears the livery of success, and erforms the service of its antechamber. Succeed: theory. Prosperity argues apacity. Win in the lottery, and behold! you are a clever man. He who triumphs s venerated. Be born with a silver spoon in your mouth! everything lies in hat. Be lucky, and you will have all the rest; be happy, and people will think ou great. Outside of five or six immense exceptions, which compose the splendor f a century, contemporary admiration is nothing but short-sightedness. Gilding s gold. It does no harm to be the first arrival by pure chance, so long as you o arrive. The common herd is an old Narcissus who adores himself, and who pplauds the vulgar herd. That enormous ability by virtue of which one is Moses, schylus, Dante, Michael Angelo, or Napoleon, the multitude awards on the spot, nd by acclamation, to whomsoever attains his object, in whatsoever it may onsist. Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy: let a false Corneille ompose _Tiridate;_ let a eunuch come to possess a harem; let a military rudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch; let an apothecary nvent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the Sambre-and-Meuse, and construct or himself, out of this cardboard, sold as leather, four hundred thousand rancs of income; let a pork-packer espouse usury, and cause it to bring forth even or eight millions, of which he is the father and of which it is the other; let a preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl; let the teward of a fine family be so rich on retiring from service that he is made inister of finances,—and men call that Genius, just as they call the face of ousqueton _Beauty_, and the mien of Claude _Majesty_. With the constellations f space they confound the stars of the abyss which are made in the soft mire of he puddle by the feet of ducks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.head#CHAPTER XIII—WHAT HE BELIEVED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.1#We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D—— on the score of orthodoxy. In he presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood but respect. The onscience of the just man should be accepted on his word. Moreover, certain atures being given, we admit the possible development of all beauties of human irtue in a belief that differs from our own.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.2#What did he think of this dogma, or of that mystery? These secrets of the nner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb, where souls enter aked. The point on which we are certain is, that the difficulties of faith ever resolved themselves into hypocrisy in his case. No decay is possible to he diamond. He believed to the extent of his powers. _“Credo in Patrem,”_ he ften exclaimed. Moreover, he drew from good works that amount of satisfaction hich suffices to the conscience, and which whispers to a man, “Thou art with od!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.3#The point which we consider it our duty to note is, that outside of and eyond his faith, as it were, the Bishop possessed an excess of love. It was in hat quarter, _quia multum amavit_,—because he loved much—that he was regarded s vulnerable by “serious men,” “grave persons” and “reasonable people”; avorite locutions of our sad world where egotism takes its word of command from edantry. What was this excess of love? It was a serene benevolence which verflowed men, as we have already pointed out, and which, on occasion, extended ven to things. He lived without disdain. He was indulgent towards God’s reation. Every man, even the best, has within him a thoughtless harshness which e reserves for animals. The Bishop of D—— had none of that harshness, which is eculiar to many priests, nevertheless. He did not go as far as the Brahmin, but e seemed to have weighed this saying of Ecclesiastes: “Who knoweth whither the oul of the animal goeth?” Hideousness of aspect, deformity of instinct, roubled him not, and did not arouse his indignation. He was touched, almost oftened by them. It seemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond he bounds of life which is apparent, the cause, the explanation, or the excuse or them. He seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties. He xamined without wrath, and with the eye of a linguist who is deciphering a alimpsest, that portion of chaos which still exists in nature. This reverie ometimes caused him to utter odd sayings. One morning he was in his garden, and hought himself alone, but his sister was walking behind him, unseen by him: uddenly he paused and gazed at something on the ground; it was a large, black, airy, frightful spider. His sister heard him say:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.4#“Poor beast! It is not its fault!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.5#Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness? Puerile hey may be; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar to Saint Francis ’Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius. One day he sprained his ankle in his effort to void stepping on an ant. Thus lived this just man. Sometimes he fell asleep in is garden, and then there was nothing more venerable possible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.6#Monseigneur Bienvenu had formerly been, if the stories anent his youth, and ven in regard to his manhood, were to be believed, a passionate, and, possibly, violent man. His universal suavity was less an instinct of nature than the esult of a grand conviction which had filtered into his heart through the edium of life, and had trickled there slowly, thought by thought; for, in a haracter, as in a rock, there may exist apertures made by drops of water. These ollows are uneffaceable; these formations are indestructible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.7#In 1815, as we think we have already said, he reached his seventy-fifth irthday, but he did not appear to be more than sixty. He was not tall; he was ather plump; and, in order to combat this tendency, he was fond of taking long trolls on foot; his step was firm, and his form was but slightly bent, a detail rom which we do not pretend to draw any conclusion. Gregory XVI., at the age of ighty, held himself erect and smiling, which did not prevent him from being a ad bishop. Monseigneur Welcome had what the people term a “fine head,” but so miable was he that they forgot that it was fine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.8#When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his charms, nd of which we have already spoken, people felt at their ease with him, and joy eemed to radiate from his whole person. His fresh and ruddy complexion, his ery white teeth, all of which he had preserved, and which were displayed by his mile, gave him that open and easy air which cause the remark to be made of a an, “He’s a good fellow”; and of an old man, “He is a fine man.” That, it will e recalled, was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon. On the first ncounter, and to one who saw him for the first time, he was nothing, in fact, ut a fine man. But if one remained near him for a few hours, and beheld him in he least degree pensive, the fine man became gradually transfigured, and took n some imposing quality, I know not what; his broad and serious brow, rendered ugust by his white locks, became august also by virtue of meditation; majesty adiated from his goodness, though his goodness ceased not to be radiant; one xperienced something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smiling ngel slowly unfold his wings, without ceasing to smile. Respect, an unutterable espect, penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your heart, and one felt that ne had before him one of those strong, thoroughly tried, and indulgent souls here thought is so grand that it can no longer be anything but gentle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.9#As we have seen, prayer, the celebration of the offices of religion, lms-giving, the consolation of the afflicted, the cultivation of a bit of land, raternity, frugality, hospitality, renunciation, confidence, study, work, illed every day of his life. _Filled_ is exactly the word; certainly the ishop’s day was quite full to the brim, of good words and good deeds. evertheless, it was not complete if cold or rainy weather prevented his passing n hour or two in his garden before going to bed, and after the two women had etired. It seemed to be a sort of rite with him, to prepare himself for slumber y meditation in the presence of the grand spectacles of the nocturnal heavens. ometimes, if the two old women were not asleep, they heard him pacing slowly long the walks at a very advanced hour of the night. He was there alone, ommuning with himself, peaceful, adoring, comparing the serenity of his heart ith the serenity of the ether, moved amid the darkness by the visible splendor f the constellations and the invisible splendor of God, opening his heart to he thoughts which fall from the Unknown. At such moments, while he offered his eart at the hour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume, illuminated like a amp amid the starry night, as he poured himself out in ecstasy in the midst of he universal radiance of creation, he could not have told himself, probably, hat was passing in his spirit; he felt something take its flight from him, and omething descend into him. Mysterious exchange of the abysses of the soul with he abysses of the universe!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.10#He thought of the grandeur and presence of God; of the future eternity, hat strange mystery; of the eternity past, a mystery still more strange; of all he infinities, which pierced their way into all his senses, beneath his eyes; nd, without seeking to comprehend the incomprehensible, he gazed upon it. He id not study God; he was dazzled by him. He considered those magnificent onjunctions of atoms, which communicate aspects to matter, reveal forces by erifying them, create individualities in unity, proportions in extent, the nnumerable in the infinite, and, through light, produce beauty. These onjunctions are formed and dissolved incessantly; hence life and death.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.11#He seated himself on a wooden bench, with his back against a decrepit ine; he gazed at the stars, past the puny and stunted silhouettes of his ruit-trees. This quarter of an acre, so poorly planted, so encumbered with mean uildings and sheds, was dear to him, and satisfied his wants.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.13.12#What more was needed by this old man, who divided the leisure of his life, here there was so little leisure, between gardening in the daytime and ontemplation at night? Was not this narrow enclosure, with the heavens for a eiling, sufficient to enable him to adore God in his most divine works, in urn? Does not this comprehend all, in fact? and what is there left to desire eyond it? A little garden in which to walk, and immensity in which to dream. At ne’s feet that which can be cultivated and plucked; over head that which one an study and meditate upon: some flowers on earth, and all the stars in the ky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.head#CHAPTER XIV—WHAT HE THOUGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.1#One last word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.2#Since this sort of details might, particularly at the present moment, and o use an expression now in fashion, give to the Bishop of D—— a certain pantheistical” physiognomy, and induce the belief, either to his credit or iscredit, that he entertained one of those personal philosophies which are eculiar to our century, which sometimes spring up in solitary spirits, and here take on a form and grow until they usurp the place of religion, we insist pon it, that not one of those persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have hought himself authorized to think anything of the sort. That which enlightened his man was his heart. His wisdom was made of the light which comes from here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.3#No systems; many works. Abstruse speculations contain vertigo; no, there is othing to indicate that he risked his mind in apocalypses. The apostle may be aring, but the bishop must be timid. He would probably have felt a scruple at ounding too far in advance certain problems which are, in a manner, reserved or terrible great minds. There is a sacred horror beneath the porches of the nigma; those gloomy openings stand yawning there, but something tells you, you, passer-by in life, that you must not enter. Woe to him who penetrates hither!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.4#Geniuses in the impenetrable depths of abstraction and pure speculation, ituated, so to speak, above all dogmas, propose their ideas to God. Their rayer audaciously offers discussion. Their adoration interrogates. This is irect religion, which is full of anxiety and responsibility for him who ttempts its steep cliffs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.5#Human meditation has no limits. At his own risk and peril, it analyzes and igs deep into its own bedazzlement. One might almost say, that by a sort of plendid reaction, it with it dazzles nature; the mysterious world which urrounds us renders back what it has received; it is probable that the ontemplators are contemplated. However that may be, there are on earth men ho—are they men?—perceive distinctly at the verge of the horizons of reverie he heights of the absolute, and who have the terrible vision of the infinite ountain. Monseigneur Welcome was one of these men; Monseigneur Welcome was not genius. He would have feared those sublimities whence some very great men ven, like Swedenborg and Pascal, have slipped into insanity. Certainly, these owerful reveries have their moral utility, and by these arduous paths one pproaches to ideal perfection. As for him, he took the path which shortens,—the ospel’s.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.6#He did not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah’s mantle; e projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell of events; he did not ee to condense in flame the light of things; he had nothing of the prophet and othing of the magician about him. This humble soul loved, and that was all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.7#That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration is probable: ut one can no more pray too much than one can love too much; and if it is a eresy to pray beyond the texts, Saint Theresa and Saint Jerome would be eretics.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.8#He inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates. The universe ppeared to him like an immense malady; everywhere he felt fever, everywhere he eard the sound of suffering, and, without seeking to solve the enigma, he trove to dress the wound. The terrible spectacle of created things developed enderness in him; he was occupied only in finding for himself, and in inspiring thers with the best way to compassionate and relieve. That which exists was for his good and rare priest a permanent subject of sadness which sought onsolation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.9#There are men who toil at extracting gold; he toiled at the extraction of ity. Universal misery was his mine. The sadness which reigned everywhere was ut an excuse for unfailing kindness. _Love each other;_ he declared this to be omplete, desired nothing further, and that was the whole of his doctrine. One ay, that man who believed himself to be a “philosopher,” the senator who has lready been alluded to, said to the Bishop: “Just survey the spectacle of the orld: all war against all; the strongest has the most wit. Your _love each ther_ is nonsense.”—_“Well,”_ replied Monseigneur Welcome, without contesting he point, _“if it is nonsense, the soul should shut itself up in it, as the earl in the oyster.”_ Thus he shut himself up, he lived there, he was bsolutely satisfied with it, leaving on one side the prodigious questions which ttract and terrify, the fathomless perspectives of abstraction, the precipices f metaphysics—all those profundities which converge, for the apostle in God, or the atheist in nothingness; destiny, good and evil, the way of being against eing, the conscience of man, the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal, the ransformation in death, the recapitulation of existences which the tomb ontains, the incomprehensible grafting of successive loves on the persistent I_, the essence, the substance, the Nile, and the Ens, the soul, nature, iberty, necessity; perpendicular problems, sinister obscurities, where lean the igantic archangels of the human mind; formidable abysses, which Lucretius, anou, Saint Paul, Dante, contemplate with eyes flashing lightning, which seems y its steady gaze on the infinite to cause stars to blaze forth there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.1.14.10#Monseigneur Bienvenu was simply a man who took note of the exterior of ysterious questions without scrutinizing them, and without troubling his own ind with them, and who cherished in his own soul a grave respect for arkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.head#BOOK SECOND—THE FALL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE EVENING OF A DAY OF WALKING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.1#Early in the month of October, 1815, about an hour before sunset, a man who as travelling on foot entered the little town of D—— The few inhabitants who ere at their windows or on their thresholds at the moment stared at this raveller with a sort of uneasiness. It was difficult to encounter a wayfarer of ore wretched appearance. He was a man of medium stature, thickset and robust, n the prime of life. He might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old. A ap with a drooping leather visor partly concealed his face, burned and tanned y sun and wind, and dripping with perspiration. His shirt of coarse yellow inen, fastened at the neck by a small silver anchor, permitted a view of his airy breast: he had a cravat twisted into a string; trousers of blue drilling, orn and threadbare, white on one knee and torn on the other; an old gray, attered blouse, patched on one of the elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on ith twine; a tightly packed soldier knapsack, well buckled and perfectly new, n his back; an enormous, knotty stick in his hand; iron-shod shoes on his tockingless feet; a shaved head and a long beard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.2#The sweat, the heat, the journey on foot, the dust, added I know not what ordid quality to this dilapidated whole. His hair was closely cut, yet ristling, for it had begun to grow a little, and did not seem to have been cut or some time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.3#No one knew him. He was evidently only a chance passer-by. Whence came he? rom the south; from the seashore, perhaps, for he made his entrance into D—— by he same street which, seven months previously, had witnessed the passage of the mperor Napoleon on his way from Cannes to Paris. This man must have been alking all day. He seemed very much fatigued. Some women of the ancient market own which is situated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees of he boulevard Gassendi, and drink at the fountain which stands at the end of the romenade. He must have been very thirsty: for the children who followed him saw im stop again for a drink, two hundred paces further on, at the fountain in the arket-place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.4#On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert, he turned to the left, and irected his steps toward the town-hall. He entered, then came out a quarter of n hour later. A gendarme was seated near the door, on the stone bench which eneral Drouot had mounted on the 4th of March to read to the frightened throng f the inhabitants of D—— the proclamation of the Gulf Juan. The man pulled off is cap and humbly saluted the gendarme.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.5#The gendarme, without replying to his salute, stared attentively at him, ollowed him for a while with his eyes, and then entered the town-hall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.6#There then existed at D—— a fine inn at the sign of the _Cross of Colbas_. his inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre, a man of consideration in he town on account of his relationship to another Labarre, who kept the inn of he _Three Dauphins_ in Grenoble, and had served in the Guides. At the time of he Emperor’s landing, many rumors had circulated throughout the country with egard to this inn of the _Three Dauphins_. It was said that General Bertrand, isguised as a carter, had made frequent trips thither in the month of January, nd that he had distributed crosses of honor to the soldiers and handfuls of old to the citizens. The truth is, that when the Emperor entered Grenoble he ad refused to install himself at the hotel of the prefecture; he had thanked he mayor, saying, _“I am going to the house of a brave man of my cquaintance”;_ and he had betaken himself to the _Three Dauphins_. This glory f the Labarre of the _Three Dauphins_ was reflected upon the Labarre of the Cross of Colbas_, at a distance of five and twenty leagues. It was said of him n the town, _“That is the cousin of the man of Grenoble.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.7#The man bent his steps towards this inn, which was the best in the ountry-side. He entered the kitchen, which opened on a level with the street. ll the stoves were lighted; a huge fire blazed gayly in the fireplace. The ost, who was also the chief cook, was going from one stew-pan to another, very usily superintending an excellent dinner designed for the wagoners, whose loud alking, conversation, and laughter were audible from an adjoining apartment. ny one who has travelled knows that there is no one who indulges in better heer than wagoners. A fat marmot, flanked by white partridges and eather-cocks, was turning on a long spit before the fire; on the stove, two uge carps from Lake Lauzet and a trout from Lake Alloz were cooking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.8#The host, hearing the door open and seeing a newcomer enter, said, without aising his eyes from his stoves:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.9#“What do you wish, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.10#“Food and lodging,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.11#“Nothing easier,” replied the host. At that moment he turned his head, ook in the traveller’s appearance with a single glance, and added, “By paying or it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.12#The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse, and nswered, “I have money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.13#“In that case, we are at your service,” said the host.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.14#The man put his purse back in his pocket, removed his knapsack from his ack, put it on the ground near the door, retained his stick in his hand, and eated himself on a low stool close to the fire. D—— is in the mountains. The venings are cold there in October.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.15#But as the host went back and forth, he scrutinized the traveller.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.16#“Will dinner be ready soon?” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.17#“Immediately,” replied the landlord.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.18#While the newcomer was warming himself before the fire, with his back urned, the worthy host, Jacquin Labarre, drew a pencil from his pocket, then ore off the corner of an old newspaper which was lying on a small table near he window. On the white margin he wrote a line or two, folded it without ealing, and then intrusted this scrap of paper to a child who seemed to serve im in the capacity both of scullion and lackey. The landlord whispered a word n the scullion’s ear, and the child set off on a run in the direction of the own-hall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.19#The traveller saw nothing of all this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.20#Once more he inquired, “Will dinner be ready soon?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.21#“Immediately,” responded the host.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.22#The child returned. He brought back the paper. The host unfolded it agerly, like a person who is expecting a reply. He seemed to read it ttentively, then tossed his head, and remained thoughtful for a moment. Then he ook a step in the direction of the traveller, who appeared to be immersed in eflections which were not very serene.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.23#“I cannot receive you, sir,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.24#The man half rose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.25#“What! Are you afraid that I will not pay you? Do you want me to pay you n advance? I have money, I tell you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.26#“It is not that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.27#“What then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.28#“You have money—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.29#“Yes,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.30#“And I,” said the host, “have no room.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.31#The man resumed tranquilly, “Put me in the stable.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.32#“I cannot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.33#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.34#“The horses take up all the space.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.35#“Very well!” retorted the man; “a corner of the loft then, a truss of traw. We will see about that after dinner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.36#“I cannot give you any dinner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.37#This declaration, made in a measured but firm tone, struck the stranger as rave. He rose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.38#“Ah! bah! But I am dying of hunger. I have been walking since sunrise. I ave travelled twelve leagues. I pay. I wish to eat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.39#“I have nothing,” said the landlord.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.40#The man burst out laughing, and turned towards the fireplace and the toves: “Nothing! and all that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.41#“All that is engaged.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.42#“By whom?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.43#“By messieurs the wagoners.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.44#“How many are there of them?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.45#“Twelve.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.46#“There is enough food there for twenty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.47#“They have engaged the whole of it and paid for it in advance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.48#The man seated himself again, and said, without raising his voice, “I am t an inn; I am hungry, and I shall remain.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.49#Then the host bent down to his ear, and said in a tone which made him tart, “Go away!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.50#At that moment the traveller was bending forward and thrusting some brands nto the fire with the iron-shod tip of his staff; he turned quickly round, and s he opened his mouth to reply, the host gazed steadily at him and added, still n a low voice: “Stop! there’s enough of that sort of talk. Do you want me to ell you your name? Your name is Jean Valjean. Now do you want me to tell you ho you are? When I saw you come in I suspected something; I sent to the own-hall, and this was the reply that was sent to me. Can you read?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.51#So saying, he held out to the stranger, fully unfolded, the paper which ad just travelled from the inn to the town-hall, and from the town-hall to the nn. The man cast a glance upon it. The landlord resumed after a pause.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.52#“I am in the habit of being polite to every one. Go away!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.53#The man dropped his head, picked up the knapsack which he had deposited on he ground, and took his departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.54#He chose the principal street. He walked straight on at a venture, keeping lose to the houses like a sad and humiliated man. He did not turn round a ingle time. Had he done so, he would have seen the host of the _Cross of olbas_ standing on his threshold, surrounded by all the guests of his inn, and ll the passers-by in the street, talking vivaciously, and pointing him out with is finger; and, from the glances of terror and distrust cast by the group, he ight have divined that his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole own.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.55#He saw nothing of all this. People who are crushed do not look behind hem. They know but too well the evil fate which follows them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.56#Thus he proceeded for some time, walking on without ceasing, traversing at andom streets of which he knew nothing, forgetful of his fatigue, as is often he case when a man is sad. All at once he felt the pangs of hunger sharply. ight was drawing near. He glanced about him, to see whether he could not iscover some shelter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.57#The fine hostelry was closed to him; he was seeking some very humble ublic house, some hovel, however lowly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.58#Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets; a pine branch uspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white sky of the wilight. He proceeded thither.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.59#It proved to be, in fact, a public house. The public house which is in the ue de Chaffaut.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.60#The wayfarer halted for a moment, and peeped through the window into the nterior of the low-studded room of the public house, illuminated by a small amp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth. Some men were engaged in rinking there. The landlord was warming himself. An iron pot, suspended from a rane, bubbled over the flame.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.61#The entrance to this public house, which is also a sort of an inn, is by wo doors. One opens on the street, the other upon a small yard filled with anure. The traveller dare not enter by the street door. He slipped into the ard, halted again, then raised the latch timidly and opened the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.62#“Who goes there?” said the master.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.63#“Some one who wants supper and bed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.64#“Good. We furnish supper and bed here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.65#He entered. All the men who were drinking turned round. The lamp lluminated him on one side, the firelight on the other. They examined him for ome time while he was taking off his knapsack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.66#The host said to him, “There is the fire. The supper is cooking in the ot. Come and warm yourself, comrade.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.67#He approached and seated himself near the hearth. He stretched out his eet, which were exhausted with fatigue, to the fire; a fine odor was emitted by he pot. All that could be distinguished of his face, beneath his cap, which was ell pulled down, assumed a vague appearance of comfort, mingled with that other oignant aspect which habitual suffering bestows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.68#It was, moreover, a firm, energetic, and melancholy profile. This hysiognomy was strangely composed; it began by seeming humble, and ended by eeming severe. The eye shone beneath its lashes like a fire beneath rushwood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.69#One of the men seated at the table, however, was a fishmonger who, before ntering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut, had been to stable his horse t Labarre’s. It chanced that he had that very morning encountered this nprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras d’Asse and—I have forgotten he name. I think it was Escoublon. Now, when he met him, the man, who then eemed already extremely weary, had requested him to take him on his crupper; to hich the fishmonger had made no reply except by redoubling his gait. This ishmonger had been a member half an hour previously of the group which urrounded Jacquin Labarre, and had himself related his disagreeable encounter f the morning to the people at the _Cross of Colbas_. From where he sat he made n imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper. The tavern-keeper went to him. They xchanged a few words in a low tone. The man had again become absorbed in his eflections.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.70#The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace, laid his hand abruptly on the houlder of the man, and said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.71#“You are going to get out of here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.72#The stranger turned round and replied gently, “Ah! You know?—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.73#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.74#“I was sent away from the other inn.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.75#“And you are to be turned out of this one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.76#“Where would you have me go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.77#“Elsewhere.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.78#The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.79#As he went out, some children who had followed him from the _Cross of olbas_, and who seemed to be lying in wait for him, threw stones at him. He etraced his steps in anger, and threatened them with his stick: the children ispersed like a flock of birds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.80#He passed before the prison. At the door hung an iron chain attached to a ell. He rang.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.81#The wicket opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.82#“Turnkey,” said he, removing his cap politely, “will you have the kindness o admit me, and give me a lodging for the night?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.83#A voice replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.84#“The prison is not an inn. Get yourself arrested, and you will be dmitted.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.85#The wicket closed again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.86#He entered a little street in which there were many gardens. Some of them re enclosed only by hedges, which lends a cheerful aspect to the street. In the idst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of a small house of a single tory, the window of which was lighted up. He peered through the pane as he had one at the public house. Within was a large whitewashed room, with a bed draped n printed cotton stuff, and a cradle in one corner, a few wooden chairs, and a ouble-barrelled gun hanging on the wall. A table was spread in the centre of he room. A copper lamp illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen, the ewter jug shining like silver, and filled with wine, and the brown, smoking oup-tureen. At this table sat a man of about forty, with a merry and open ountenance, who was dandling a little child on his knees. Close by a very young oman was nursing another child. The father was laughing, the child was aughing, the mother was smiling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.87#The stranger paused a moment in reverie before this tender and calming pectacle. What was taking place within him? He alone could have told. It is robable that he thought that this joyous house would be hospitable, and that, n a place where he beheld so much happiness, he would find perhaps a little ity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.88#He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.89#They did not hear him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.90#He tapped again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.91#He heard the woman say, “It seems to me, husband, that some one is nocking.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.92#“No,” replied the husband.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.93#He tapped a third time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.94#The husband rose, took the lamp, and went to the door, which he pened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.95#He was a man of lofty stature, half peasant, half artisan. He wore a huge eather apron, which reached to his left shoulder, and which a hammer, a red andkerchief, a powder-horn, and all sorts of objects which were upheld by the irdle, as in a pocket, caused to bulge out. He carried his head thrown ackwards; his shirt, widely opened and turned back, displayed his bull neck, hite and bare. He had thick eyelashes, enormous black whiskers, prominent eyes, he lower part of his face like a snout; and besides all this, that air of being n his own ground, which is indescribable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.96#“Pardon me, sir,” said the wayfarer, “Could you, in consideration of ayment, give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed yonder in the garden, n which to sleep? Tell me; can you? For money?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.97#“Who are you?” demanded the master of the house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.98#The man replied: “I have just come from Puy-Moisson. I have walked all day ong. I have travelled twelve leagues. Can you?—if I pay?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.99#“I would not refuse,” said the peasant, “to lodge any respectable man who ould pay me. But why do you not go to the inn?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.100#“There is no room.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.101#“Bah! Impossible. This is neither a fair nor a market day. Have you been o Labarre?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.102#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.103#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.104#The traveller replied with embarrassment: “I do not know. He did not eceive me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.105#“Have you been to What’s-his-name’s, in the Rue Chaffaut?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.106#The stranger’s embarrassment increased; he stammered, “He did not receive e either.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.107#The peasant’s countenance assumed an expression of distrust; he surveyed he newcomer from head to feet, and suddenly exclaimed, with a sort of hudder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.108#“Are you the man?—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.109#He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger, took three steps backwards, laced the lamp on the table, and took his gun down from the wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.110#Meanwhile, at the words, _Are you the man?_ the woman had risen, had lasped her two children in her arms, and had taken refuge precipitately behind er husband, staring in terror at the stranger, with her bosom uncovered, and ith frightened eyes, as she murmured in a low tone, _“Tso-maraude.”_1
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.111#All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it to one’s elf. After having scrutinized the man for several moments, as one scrutinizes a iper, the master of the house returned to the door and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.112#“Clear out!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.113#“For pity’s sake, a glass of water,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.114#“A shot from my gun!” said the peasant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.115#Then he closed the door violently, and the man heard him shoot two large olts. A moment later, the window-shutter was closed, and the sound of a bar of ron which was placed against it was audible outside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.116#Night continued to fall. A cold wind from the Alps was blowing. By the ight of the expiring day the stranger perceived, in one of the gardens which ordered the street, a sort of hut, which seemed to him to be built of sods. He limbed over the wooden fence resolutely, and found himself in the garden. He pproached the hut; its door consisted of a very low and narrow aperture, and it esembled those buildings which road-laborers construct for themselves along the oads. He thought without doubt, that it was, in fact, the dwelling of a oad-laborer; he was suffering from cold and hunger, but this was, at least, a helter from the cold. This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night. e threw himself flat on his face, and crawled into the hut. It was warm there, nd he found a tolerably good bed of straw. He lay, for a moment, stretched out n this bed, without the power to make a movement, so fatigued was he. Then, as he knapsack on his back was in his way, and as it furnished, moreover, a pillow eady to his hand, he set about unbuckling one of the straps. At that moment, a erocious growl became audible. He raised his eyes. The head of an enormous dog as outlined in the darkness at the entrance of the hut.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.117#It was a dog’s kennel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.118#He was himself vigorous and formidable; he armed himself with his staff, ade a shield of his knapsack, and made his way out of the kennel in the best ay he could, not without enlarging the rents in his rags.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.119#He left the garden in the same manner, but backwards, being obliged, in rder to keep the dog respectful, to have recourse to that manœuvre with his tick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as _la rose couverte_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.120#When he had, not without difficulty, repassed the fence, and found imself once more in the street, alone, without refuge, without shelter, without roof over his head, chased even from that bed of straw and from that miserable ennel, he dropped rather than seated himself on a stone, and it appears that a asser-by heard him exclaim, “I am not even a dog!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.121#He soon rose again and resumed his march. He went out of the town, hoping o find some tree or haystack in the fields which would afford him shelter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.122#He walked thus for some time, with his head still drooping. When he felt imself far from every human habitation, he raised his eyes and gazed earchingly about him. He was in a field. Before him was one of those low hills overed with close-cut stubble, which, after the harvest, resemble shaved eads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.123#The horizon was perfectly black. This was not alone the obscurity of ight; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed to rest upon the ill itself, and which were mounting and filling the whole sky. Meanwhile, as he moon was about to rise, and as there was still floating in the zenith a emnant of the brightness of twilight, these clouds formed at the summit of the ky a sort of whitish arch, whence a gleam of light fell upon the earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.124#The earth was thus better lighted than the sky, which produces a articularly sinister effect, and the hill, whose contour was poor and mean, was utlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon. The whole effect was hideous, etty, lugubrious, and narrow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.125#There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree, hich writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.126#This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits of ntelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysterious aspects of hings; nevertheless, there was something in that sky, in that hill, in that lain, in that tree, which was so profoundly desolate, that after a moment of mmobility and reverie he turned back abruptly. There are instants when nature eems hostile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.127#He retraced his steps; the gates of D—— were closed. D——, which had ustained sieges during the wars of religion, was still surrounded in 1815 by ncient walls flanked by square towers which have been demolished since. He assed through a breach and entered the town again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.128#It might have been eight o’clock in the evening. As he was not acquainted ith the streets, he recommenced his walk at random.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.129#In this way he came to the prefecture, then to the seminary. As he passed hrough the Cathedral Square, he shook his fist at the church.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.130#At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment. It is here that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial Guard to the rmy, brought from the Island of Elba and dictated by Napoleon himself, were rinted for the first time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.131#Worn out with fatigue, and no longer entertaining any hope, he lay down n a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this printing office.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.132#At that moment an old woman came out of the church. She saw the man tretched out in the shadow. “What are you doing there, my friend?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.133#He answered harshly and angrily: “As you see, my good woman, I am leeping.” The good woman, who was well worthy the name, in fact, was the arquise de R——
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.134#“On this bench?” she went on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.135#“I have had a mattress of wood for nineteen years,” said the man; “to-day have a mattress of stone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.136#“You have been a soldier?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.137#“Yes, my good woman, a soldier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.138#“Why do you not go to the inn?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.139#“Because I have no money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.140#“Alas!” said Madame de R——, “I have only four sous in my purse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.141#“Give it to me all the same.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.142#The man took the four sous. Madame de R—— continued: “You cannot obtain odgings in an inn for so small a sum. But have you tried? It is impossible for ou to pass the night thus. You are cold and hungry, no doubt. Some one might ave given you a lodging out of charity.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.143#“I have knocked at all doors.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.144#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.145#“I have been driven away everywhere.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.146#The “good woman” touched the man’s arm, and pointed out to him on the ther side of the street a small, low house, which stood beside the Bishop’s alace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.147#“You have knocked at all doors?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.148#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.149#“Have you knocked at that one?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.150#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.1.151#“Knock there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.head#CHAPTER II—PRUDENCE COUNSELLED TO WISDOM.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.1#That evening, the Bishop of D——, after his promenade through the town, emained shut up rather late in his room. He was busy over a great work on Duties_, which was never completed, unfortunately. He was carefully compiling verything that the Fathers and the doctors have said on this important subject. is book was divided into two parts: firstly, the duties of all; secondly, the uties of each individual, according to the class to which he belongs. The uties of all are the great duties. There are four of these. Saint Matthew oints them out: duties towards God (_Matt._ vi.); duties towards one’s self _Matt._ v. 29, 30); duties towards one’s neighbor (_Matt._ vii. 12); duties owards animals (_Matt._ vi. 20, 25). As for the other duties the Bishop found hem pointed out and prescribed elsewhere: to sovereigns and subjects, in the pistle to the Romans; to magistrates, to wives, to mothers, to young men, by aint Peter; to husbands, fathers, children and servants, in the Epistle to the phesians; to the faithful, in the Epistle to the Hebrews; to virgins, in the pistle to the Corinthians. Out of these precepts he was laboriously onstructing a harmonious whole, which he desired to present to souls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.2#At eight o’clock he was still at work, writing with a good deal of nconvenience upon little squares of paper, with a big book open on his knees, hen Madame Magloire entered, according to her wont, to get the silver-ware from he cupboard near his bed. A moment later, the Bishop, knowing that the table as set, and that his sister was probably waiting for him, shut his book, rose rom his table, and entered the dining-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.3#The dining-room was an oblong apartment, with a fireplace, which had a door pening on the street (as we have said), and a window opening on the garden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.4#Madame Magloire was, in fact, just putting the last touches to the able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.5#As she performed this service, she was conversing with Mademoiselle aptistine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.6#A lamp stood on the table; the table was near the fireplace. A wood fire as burning there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.7#One can easily picture to one’s self these two women, both of whom were ver sixty years of age. Madame Magloire small, plump, vivacious; Mademoiselle aptistine gentle, slender, frail, somewhat taller than her brother, dressed in gown of puce-colored silk, of the fashion of 1806, which she had purchased at hat date in Paris, and which had lasted ever since. To borrow vulgar phrases, hich possess the merit of giving utterance in a single word to an idea which a hole page would hardly suffice to express, Madame Magloire had the air of a peasant_, and Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a _lady_. Madame Magloire wore a hite quilted cap, a gold Jeannette cross on a velvet ribbon upon her neck, the nly bit of feminine jewelry that there was in the house, a very white fichu uffing out from a gown of coarse black woollen stuff, with large, short leeves, an apron of cotton cloth in red and green checks, knotted round the aist with a green ribbon, with a stomacher of the same attached by two pins at he upper corners, coarse shoes on her feet, and yellow stockings, like the omen of Marseilles. Mademoiselle Baptistine’s gown was cut on the patterns of 806, with a short waist, a narrow, sheath-like skirt, puffed sleeves, with laps and buttons. She concealed her gray hair under a frizzed wig known as the baby_ wig. Madame Magloire had an intelligent, vivacious, and kindly air; the wo corners of her mouth unequally raised, and her upper lip, which was larger han the lower, imparted to her a rather crabbed and imperious look. So long as onseigneur held his peace, she talked to him resolutely with a mixture of espect and freedom; but as soon as Monseigneur began to speak, as we have seen, he obeyed passively like her mistress. Mademoiselle Baptistine did not even peak. She confined herself to obeying and pleasing him. She had never been retty, even when she was young; she had large, blue, prominent eyes, and a long rched nose; but her whole visage, her whole person, breathed forth an ineffable oodness, as we stated in the beginning. She had always been predestined to entleness; but faith, charity, hope, those three virtues which mildly warm the oul, had gradually elevated that gentleness to sanctity. Nature had made her a amb, religion had made her an angel. Poor sainted virgin! Sweet memory which as vanished!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.8#Mademoiselle Baptistine has so often narrated what passed at the episcopal esidence that evening, that there are many people now living who still recall he most minute details.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.9#At the moment when the Bishop entered, Madame Magloire was talking with onsiderable vivacity. She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine on a subject hich was familiar to her and to which the Bishop was also accustomed. The uestion concerned the lock upon the entrance door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.10#It appears that while procuring some provisions for supper, Madame agloire had heard things in divers places. People had spoken of a prowler of vil appearance; a suspicious vagabond had arrived who must be somewhere about he town, and those who should take it into their heads to return home late that ight might be subjected to unpleasant encounters. The police was very badly rganized, moreover, because there was no love lost between the Prefect and the ayor, who sought to injure each other by making things happen. It behooved wise eople to play the part of their own police, and to guard themselves well, and are must be taken to duly close, bar and barricade their houses, and to _fasten he doors well_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.11#Madame Magloire emphasized these last words; but the Bishop had just come rom his room, where it was rather cold. He seated himself in front of the fire, nd warmed himself, and then fell to thinking of other things. He did not take p the remark dropped with design by Madame Magloire. She repeated it. Then ademoiselle Baptistine, desirous of satisfying Madame Magloire without ispleasing her brother, ventured to say timidly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.12#“Did you hear what Madame Magloire is saying, brother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.13#“I have heard something of it in a vague way,” replied the Bishop. Then alf-turning in his chair, placing his hands on his knees, and raising towards he old servant woman his cordial face, which so easily grew joyous, and which as illuminated from below by the firelight,—“Come, what is the matter? What is he matter? Are we in any great danger?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.14#Then Madame Magloire began the whole story afresh, exaggerating it a ittle without being aware of the fact. It appeared that a Bohemian, a are-footed vagabond, a sort of dangerous mendicant, was at that moment in the own. He had presented himself at Jacquin Labarre’s to obtain lodgings, but the atter had not been willing to take him in. He had been seen to arrive by the ay of the boulevard Gassendi and roam about the streets in the gloaming. A allows-bird with a terrible face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.15#“Really!” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.16#This willingness to interrogate encouraged Madame Magloire; it seemed to er to indicate that the Bishop was on the point of becoming alarmed; she ursued triumphantly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.17#“Yes, Monseigneur. That is how it is. There will be some sort of atastrophe in this town to-night. Every one says so. And withal, the police is o badly regulated” (a useful repetition). “The idea of living in a mountainous ountry, and not even having lights in the streets at night! One goes out. Black s ovens, indeed! And I say, Monseigneur, and Mademoiselle there says with e—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.18#“I,” interrupted his sister, “say nothing. What my brother does is well one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.19#Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.20#“We say that this house is not safe at all; that if Monseigneur will ermit, I will go and tell Paulin Musebois, the locksmith, to come and replace he ancient locks on the doors; we have them, and it is only the work of a oment; for I say that nothing is more terrible than a door which can be opened rom the outside with a latch by the first passer-by; and I say that we need olts, Monseigneur, if only for this night; moreover, Monseigneur has the habit f always saying ‘come in’; and besides, even in the middle of the night, O mon ieu! there is no need to ask permission.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.21#At that moment there came a tolerably violent knock on the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.2.22#“Come in,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE HEROISM OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.1#The door opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.2#It opened wide with a rapid movement, as though some one had given it an nergetic and resolute push.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.3#A man entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.4#We already know the man. It was the wayfarer whom we have seen wandering bout in search of shelter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.5#He entered, advanced a step, and halted, leaving the door open behind him. e had his knapsack on his shoulders, his cudgel in his hand, a rough, udacious, weary, and violent expression in his eyes. The fire on the hearth ighted him up. He was hideous. It was a sinister apparition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.6#Madame Magloire had not even the strength to utter a cry. She trembled, and tood with her mouth wide open.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.7#Mademoiselle Baptistine turned round, beheld the man entering, and half tarted up in terror; then, turning her head by degrees towards the fireplace gain, she began to observe her brother, and her face became once more rofoundly calm and serene.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.8#The Bishop fixed a tranquil eye on the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.9#As he opened his mouth, doubtless to ask the newcomer what he desired, the an rested both hands on his staff, directed his gaze at the old man and the two omen, and without waiting for the Bishop to speak, he said, in a loud oice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.10#“See here. My name is Jean Valjean. I am a convict from the galleys. I ave passed nineteen years in the galleys. I was liberated four days ago, and am n my way to Pontarlier, which is my destination. I have been walking for four ays since I left Toulon. I have travelled a dozen leagues to-day on foot. This vening, when I arrived in these parts, I went to an inn, and they turned me ut, because of my yellow passport, which I had shown at the town-hall. I had to o it. I went to an inn. They said to me, ‘Be off,’ at both places. No one would ake me. I went to the prison; the jailer would not admit me. I went into a og’s kennel; the dog bit me and chased me off, as though he had been a man. One ould have said that he knew who I was. I went into the fields, intending to leep in the open air, beneath the stars. There were no stars. I thought it was oing to rain, and I re-entered the town, to seek the recess of a doorway. onder, in the square, I meant to sleep on a stone bench. A good woman pointed ut your house to me, and said to me, ‘Knock there!’ I have knocked. What is his place? Do you keep an inn? I have money—savings. One hundred and nine rancs fifteen sous, which I earned in the galleys by my labor, in the course of ineteen years. I will pay. What is that to me? I have money. I am very weary; welve leagues on foot; I am very hungry. Are you willing that I should emain?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.11#“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “you will set another place.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.12#The man advanced three paces, and approached the lamp which was on the able. “Stop,” he resumed, as though he had not quite understood; “that’s not t. Did you hear? I am a galley-slave; a convict. I come from the galleys.” He rew from his pocket a large sheet of yellow paper, which he unfolded. “Here’s y passport. Yellow, as you see. This serves to expel me from every place where go. Will you read it? I know how to read. I learned in the galleys. There is a chool there for those who choose to learn. Hold, this is what they put on this assport: ‘Jean Valjean, discharged convict, native of’—that is nothing to ou—‘has been nineteen years in the galleys: five years for house-breaking and urglary; fourteen years for having attempted to escape on four occasions. He is very dangerous man.’ There! Every one has cast me out. Are you willing to eceive me? Is this an inn? Will you give me something to eat and a bed? Have ou a stable?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.13#“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “you will put white sheets on the bed n the alcove.” We have already explained the character of the two women’s bedience.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.14#Madame Magloire retired to execute these orders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.15#The Bishop turned to the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.16#“Sit down, sir, and warm yourself. We are going to sup in a few moments, nd your bed will be prepared while you are supping.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.17#At this point the man suddenly comprehended. The expression of his face, p to that time sombre and harsh, bore the imprint of stupefaction, of doubt, of oy, and became extraordinary. He began stammering like a crazy man:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.18#“Really? What! You will keep me? You do not drive me forth? A convict! You all me _sir!_ You do not address me as _thou?_ ‘Get out of here, you dog!’ is hat people always say to me. I felt sure that you would expel me, so I told you t once who I am. Oh, what a good woman that was who directed me hither! I am oing to sup! A bed with a mattress and sheets, like the rest of the world! a ed! It is nineteen years since I have slept in a bed! You actually do not want e to go! You are good people. Besides, I have money. I will pay well. Pardon e, monsieur the inn-keeper, but what is your name? I will pay anything you ask. ou are a fine man. You are an inn-keeper, are you not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.19#“I am,” replied the Bishop, “a priest who lives here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.20#“A priest!” said the man. “Oh, what a fine priest! Then you are not going o demand any money of me? You are the curé, are you not? the curé of this big hurch? Well! I am a fool, truly! I had not perceived your skull-cap.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.21#As he spoke, he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner, eplaced his passport in his pocket, and seated himself. Mademoiselle Baptistine azed mildly at him. He continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.22#“You are humane, Monsieur le Curé; you have not scorned me. A good priest s a very good thing. Then you do not require me to pay?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.23#“No,” said the Bishop; “keep your money. How much have you? Did you not ell me one hundred and nine francs?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.24#“And fifteen sous,” added the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.25#“One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous. And how long did it take you to arn that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.26#“Nineteen years.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.27#“Nineteen years!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.28#The Bishop sighed deeply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.29#The man continued: “I have still the whole of my money. In four days I ave spent only twenty-five sous, which I earned by helping unload some wagons t Grasse. Since you are an abbé, I will tell you that we had a chaplain in the alleys. And one day I saw a bishop there. Monseigneur is what they call him. He as the Bishop of Majore at Marseilles. He is the curé who rules over the other urés, you understand. Pardon me, I say that very badly; but it is such a ar-off thing to me! You understand what we are! He said mass in the middle of he galleys, on an altar. He had a pointed thing, made of gold, on his head; it littered in the bright light of midday. We were all ranged in lines on the hree sides, with cannons with lighted matches facing us. We could not see very ell. He spoke; but he was too far off, and we did not hear. That is what a ishop is like.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.30#While he was speaking, the Bishop had gone and shut the door, which had emained wide open.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.31#Madame Magloire returned. She brought a silver fork and spoon, which she laced on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.32#“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “place those things as near the fire s possible.” And turning to his guest: “The night wind is harsh on the Alps. ou must be cold, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.33#Each time that he uttered the word _sir_, in his voice which was so gently rave and polished, the man’s face lighted up. _Monsieur_ to a convict is like a lass of water to one of the shipwrecked of the _Medusa_. Ignominy thirsts for onsideration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.34#“This lamp gives a very bad light,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.35#Madame Magloire understood him, and went to get the two silver andlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur’s bed-chamber, and placed hem, lighted, on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.36#“Monsieur le Curé,” said the man, “you are good; you do not despise me. ou receive me into your house. You light your candles for me. Yet I have not oncealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortunate man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.37#The Bishop, who was sitting close to him, gently touched his hand. “You ould not help telling me who you were. This is not my house; it is the house of esus Christ. This door does not demand of him who enters whether he has a name, ut whether he has a grief. You suffer, you are hungry and thirsty; you are elcome. And do not thank me; do not say that I receive you in my house. No one s at home here, except the man who needs a refuge. I say to you, who are assing by, that you are much more at home here than I am myself. Everything ere is yours. What need have I to know your name? Besides, before you told me ou had one which I knew.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.38#The man opened his eyes in astonishment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.39#“Really? You knew what I was called?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.40#“Yes,” replied the Bishop, “you are called my brother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.41#“Stop, Monsieur le Curé,” exclaimed the man. “I was very hungry when I ntered here; but you are so good, that I no longer know what has happened to e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.42#The Bishop looked at him, and said,—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.43#“You have suffered much?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.44#“Oh, the red coat, the ball on the ankle, a plank to sleep on, heat, cold, oil, the convicts, the thrashings, the double chain for nothing, the cell for ne word; even sick and in bed, still the chain! Dogs, dogs are happier! ineteen years! I am forty-six. Now there is the yellow passport. That is what t is like.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.45#“Yes,” resumed the Bishop, “you have come from a very sad place. Listen. here will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face of a repentant sinner han over the white robes of a hundred just men. If you emerge from that sad lace with thoughts of hatred and of wrath against mankind, you are deserving of ity; if you emerge with thoughts of good-will and of peace, you are more worthy han any one of us.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.46#In the meantime, Madame Magloire had served supper: soup, made with water, il, bread, and salt; a little bacon, a bit of mutton, figs, a fresh cheese, and large loaf of rye bread. She had, of her own accord, added to the Bishop’s rdinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves wine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.47#The Bishop’s face at once assumed that expression of gayety which is eculiar to hospitable natures. “To table!” he cried vivaciously. As was his ustom when a stranger supped with him, he made the man sit on his right. ademoiselle Baptistine, perfectly peaceable and natural, took her seat at his eft.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.48#The Bishop asked a blessing; then helped the soup himself, according to is custom. The man began to eat with avidity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.49#All at once the Bishop said: “It strikes me there is something missing on his table.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.50#Madame Magloire had, in fact, only placed the three sets of forks and poons which were absolutely necessary. Now, it was the usage of the house, when he Bishop had any one to supper, to lay out the whole six sets of silver on the able-cloth—an innocent ostentation. This graceful semblance of luxury was a ind of child’s play, which was full of charm in that gentle and severe ousehold, which raised poverty into dignity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.3.51#Madame Magloire understood the remark, went out without saying a word, and moment later the three sets of silver forks and spoons demanded by the Bishop ere glittering upon the cloth, symmetrically arranged before the three persons eated at the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.head#CHAPTER IV—DETAILS CONCERNING THE CHEESE-DAIRIES OF ONTARLIER.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.1#Now, in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table, we cannot do etter than to transcribe here a passage from one of Mademoiselle Baptistine’s etters to Madame Boischevron, wherein the conversation between the convict and he Bishop is described with ingenious minuteness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.2#“. . . This man paid no attention to any one. He ate with the voracity of a tarving man. However, after supper he said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.3#“‘Monsieur le Curé of the good God, all this is far too good for me; but I ust say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with them keep a better able than you do.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.4#“Between ourselves, the remark rather shocked me. My brother replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.5#“‘They are more fatigued than I.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.6#“‘No,’ returned the man, ‘they have more money. You are poor; I see that lainly. You cannot be even a curate. Are you really a curé? Ah, if the good God ere but just, you certainly ought to be a curé!’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.7#“‘The good God is more than just,’ said my brother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.8#“A moment later he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.9#“‘Monsieur Jean Valjean, is it to Pontarlier that you are going?’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.10#“‘With my road marked out for me.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.11#“I think that is what the man said. Then he went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.12#“‘I must be on my way by daybreak to-morrow. Travelling is hard. If the ights are cold, the days are hot.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.13#“‘You are going to a good country,’ said my brother. ‘During the evolution my family was ruined. I took refuge in Franche-Comté at first, and here I lived for some time by the toil of my hands. My will was good. I found lenty to occupy me. One has only to choose. There are paper mills, tanneries, istilleries, oil factories, watch factories on a large scale, steel mills, opper works, twenty iron foundries at least, four of which, situated at Lods, t Châtillon, at Audincourt, and at Beure, are tolerably large.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.14#“I think I am not mistaken in saying that those are the names which my rother mentioned. Then he interrupted himself and addressed me:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.15#“‘Have we not some relatives in those parts, my dear sister?’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.16#“I replied,—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.17#“‘We did have some; among others, M. de Lucenet, who was captain of the ates at Pontarlier under the old régime.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.18#“‘Yes,’ resumed my brother; ‘but in ’93, one had no longer any relatives, ne had only one’s arms. I worked. They have, in the country of Pontarlier, hither you are going, Monsieur Valjean, a truly patriarchal and truly charming ndustry, my sister. It is their cheese-dairies, which they call fruitières_.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.19#“Then my brother, while urging the man to eat, explained to him, with reat minuteness, what these _fruitières_ of Pontarlier were; that they were ivided into two classes: the _big barns_ which belong to the rich, and where here are forty or fifty cows which produce from seven to eight thousand cheeses ach summer, and the _associated fruitières_, which belong to the poor; these re the peasants of mid-mountain, who hold their cows in common, and share the roceeds. ‘They engage the services of a cheese-maker, whom they call the grurin_; the _grurin_ receives the milk of the associates three times a day, nd marks the quantity on a double tally. It is towards the end of April that he work of the cheese-dairies begins; it is towards the middle of June that the heese-makers drive their cows to the mountains.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.20#“The man recovered his animation as he ate. My brother made him drink that ood Mauves wine, which he does not drink himself, because he says that wine is xpensive. My brother imparted all these details with that easy gayety of his ith which you are acquainted, interspersing his words with graceful attentions o me. He recurred frequently to that comfortable trade of _grurin_, as though e wished the man to understand, without advising him directly and harshly, that his would afford him a refuge. One thing struck me. This man was what I have old you. Well, neither during supper, nor during the entire evening, did my rother utter a single word, with the exception of a few words about Jesus when e entered, which could remind the man of what he was, nor of what my brother as. To all appearances, it was an occasion for preaching him a little sermon, nd of impressing the Bishop on the convict, so that a mark of the passage might emain behind. This might have appeared to any one else who had this, nfortunate man in his hands to afford a chance to nourish his soul as well as is body, and to bestow upon him some reproach, seasoned with moralizing and dvice, or a little commiseration, with an exhortation to conduct himself better n the future. My brother did not even ask him from what country he came, nor hat was his history. For in his history there is a fault, and my brother seemed o avoid everything which could remind him of it. To such a point did he carry t, that at one time, when my brother was speaking of the mountaineers of ontarlier, _who exercise a gentle labor near heaven, and who_, he added, _are appy because they are innocent_, he stopped short, fearing lest in this remark here might have escaped him something which might wound the man. By dint of eflection, I think I have comprehended what was passing in my brother’s heart. e was thinking, no doubt, that this man, whose name is Jean Valjean, had his isfortune only too vividly present in his mind; that the best thing was to ivert him from it, and to make him believe, if only momentarily, that he was a erson like any other, by treating him just in his ordinary way. Is not this ndeed, to understand charity well? Is there not, dear Madame, something truly vangelical in this delicacy which abstains from sermon, from moralizing, from llusions? and is not the truest pity, when a man has a sore point, not to touch t at all? It has seemed to me that this might have been my brother’s private hought. In any case, what I can say is that, if he entertained all these ideas, e gave no sign of them; from beginning to end, even to me he was the same as he s every evening, and he supped with this Jean Valjean with the same air and in he same manner in which he would have supped with M. Gédéon le Prévost, or with he curate of the parish.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.21#“Towards the end, when he had reached the figs, there came a knock at the oor. It was Mother Gerbaud, with her little one in her arms. My brother kissed he child on the brow, and borrowed fifteen sous which I had about me to give to other Gerbaud. The man was not paying much heed to anything then. He was no onger talking, and he seemed very much fatigued. After poor old Gerbaud had aken her departure, my brother said grace; then he turned to the man and said o him, ‘You must be in great need of your bed.’ Madame Magloire cleared the able very promptly. I understood that we must retire, in order to allow this raveller to go to sleep, and we both went upstairs. Nevertheless, I sent Madame agloire down a moment later, to carry to the man’s bed a goat skin from the lack Forest, which was in my room. The nights are frigid, and that keeps one arm. It is a pity that this skin is old; all the hair is falling out. My rother bought it while he was in Germany, at Tottlingen, near the sources of he Danube, as well as the little ivory-handled knife which I use at table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.4.22#“Madame Magloire returned immediately. We said our prayers in the rawing-room, where we hang up the linen, and then we each retired to our own hambers, without saying a word to each other.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.head#CHAPTER V—TRANQUILLITY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.1#After bidding his sister good night, Monseigneur Bienvenu took one of the wo silver candlesticks from the table, handed the other to his guest, and said o him,—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.2#“Monsieur, I will conduct you to your room.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.3#The man followed him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.4#As might have been observed from what has been said above, the house was so rranged that in order to pass into the oratory where the alcove was situated, r to get out of it, it was necessary to traverse the Bishop’s bedroom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.5#At the moment when he was crossing this apartment, Madame Magloire was utting away the silverware in the cupboard near the head of the bed. This was er last care every evening before she went to bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.6#The Bishop installed his guest in the alcove. A fresh white bed had been repared there. The man set the candle down on a small table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.7#“Well,” said the Bishop, “may you pass a good night. To-morrow morning, efore you set out, you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.8#“Thanks, Monsieur l’ Abbé,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.9#Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace, when all of a sudden, nd without transition, he made a strange movement, which would have frozen the wo sainted women with horror, had they witnessed it. Even at this day it is ifficult for us to explain what inspired him at that moment. Did he intend to onvey a warning or to throw out a menace? Was he simply obeying a sort of nstinctive impulse which was obscure even to himself? He turned abruptly to the ld man, folded his arms, and bending upon his host a savage gaze, he exclaimed n a hoarse voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.10#“Ah! really! You lodge me in your house, close to yourself like this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.11#He broke off, and added with a laugh in which there lurked something onstrous:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.12#“Have you really reflected well? How do you know that I have not been an ssassin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.13#The Bishop replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.14#“That is the concern of the good God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.15#Then gravely, and moving his lips like one who is praying or talking to imself, he raised two fingers of his right hand and bestowed his benediction on he man, who did not bow, and without turning his head or looking behind him, he eturned to his bedroom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.16#When the alcove was in use, a large serge curtain drawn from wall to wall oncealed the altar. The Bishop knelt before this curtain as he passed and said brief prayer. A moment later he was in his garden, walking, meditating, ontemplating, his heart and soul wholly absorbed in those grand and mysterious hings which God shows at night to the eyes which remain open.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.17#As for the man, he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profit by he nice white sheets. Snuffing out his candle with his nostrils after the anner of convicts, he dropped, all dressed as he was, upon the bed, where he mmediately fell into a profound sleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.18#Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to his partment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.5.19#A few minutes later all were asleep in the little house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.head#CHAPTER VI—JEAN VALJEAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.1#Towards the middle of the night Jean Valjean woke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.2#Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie. He had not learned to ead in his childhood. When he reached man’s estate, he became a tree-pruner at averolles. His mother was named Jeanne Mathieu; his father was called Jean aljean or Vlajean, probably a sobriquet, and a contraction of _voilà_ Jean, here’s Jean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.3#Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition which onstitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures. On the whole, however, here was something decidedly sluggish and insignificant about Jean Valjean in ppearance, at least. He had lost his father and mother at a very early age. His other had died of a milk fever, which had not been properly attended to. His ather, a tree-pruner, like himself, had been killed by a fall from a tree. All hat remained to Jean Valjean was a sister older than himself,—a widow with even children, boys and girls. This sister had brought up Jean Valjean, and so ong as she had a husband she lodged and fed her young brother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.4#The husband died. The eldest of the seven children was eight years old. The oungest, one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.5#Jean Valjean had just attained his twenty-fifth year. He took the father’s lace, and, in his turn, supported the sister who had brought him up. This was one simply as a duty and even a little churlishly on the part of Jean Valjean. hus his youth had been spent in rude and ill-paid toil. He had never known a kind woman friend” in his native parts. He had not had the time to fall in ove.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.6#He returned at night weary, and ate his broth without uttering a word. His ister, mother Jeanne, often took the best part of his repast from his bowl hile he was eating,—a bit of meat, a slice of bacon, the heart of the abbage,—to give to one of her children. As he went on eating, with his head ent over the table and almost into his soup, his long hair falling about his owl and concealing his eyes, he had the air of perceiving nothing and allowing t. There was at Faverolles, not far from the Valjean thatched cottage, on the ther side of the lane, a farmer’s wife named Marie-Claude; the Valjean hildren, habitually famished, sometimes went to borrow from Marie-Claude a pint f milk, in their mother’s name, which they drank behind a hedge or in some lley corner, snatching the jug from each other so hastily that the little girls pilled it on their aprons and down their necks. If their mother had known of his marauding, she would have punished the delinquents severely. Jean Valjean ruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude for the pint of milk behind their other’s back, and the children were not punished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.7#In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day; then he hired out as a ay-maker, as laborer, as neat-herd on a farm, as a drudge. He did whatever he ould. His sister worked also but what could she do with seven little children? t was a sad group enveloped in misery, which was being gradually annihilated. A ery hard winter came. Jean had no work. The family had no bread. No bread iterally. Seven children!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.8#One Sunday evening, Maubert Isabeau, the baker on the Church Square at averolles, was preparing to go to bed, when he heard a violent blow on the rated front of his shop. He arrived in time to see an arm passed through a hole ade by a blow from a fist, through the grating and the glass. The arm seized a oaf of bread and carried it off. Isabeau ran out in haste; the robber fled at he full speed of his legs. Isabeau ran after him and stopped him. The thief had lung away the loaf, but his arm was still bleeding. It was Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.9#This took place in 1795. Jean Valjean was taken before the tribunals of the ime for theft and breaking and entering an inhabited house at night. He had a un which he used better than any one else in the world, he was a bit of a oacher, and this injured his case. There exists a legitimate prejudice against oachers. The poacher, like the smuggler, smacks too strongly of the brigand. evertheless, we will remark cursorily, there is still an abyss between these aces of men and the hideous assassin of the towns. The poacher lives in the orest, the smuggler lives in the mountains or on the sea. The cities make erocious men because they make corrupt men. The mountain, the sea, the forest, ake savage men; they develop the fierce side, but often without destroying the umane side.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.10#Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty. The terms of the Code were explicit. here occur formidable hours in our civilization; there are moments when the enal laws decree a shipwreck. What an ominous minute is that in which society raws back and consummates the irreparable abandonment of a sentient being! Jean aljean was condemned to five years in the galleys.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.11#On the 22d of April, 1796, the victory of Montenotte, won by the eneral-in-chief of the army of Italy, whom the message of the Directory to the ive Hundred, of the 2d of Floréal, year IV., calls Buona-Parte, was announced n Paris; on that same day a great gang of galley-slaves was put in chains at icêtre. Jean Valjean formed a part of that gang. An old turnkey of the prison, ho is now nearly eighty years old, still recalls perfectly that unfortunate retch who was chained to the end of the fourth line, in the north angle of the ourtyard. He was seated on the ground like the others. He did not seem to omprehend his position, except that it was horrible. It is probable that he, lso, was disentangling from amid the vague ideas of a poor man, ignorant of verything, something excessive. While the bolt of his iron collar was being iveted behind his head with heavy blows from the hammer, he wept, his tears tifled him, they impeded his speech; he only managed to say from time to time, I was a tree-pruner at Faverolles.” Then still sobbing, he raised his right and and lowered it gradually seven times, as though he were touching in uccession seven heads of unequal heights, and from this gesture it was divined hat the thing which he had done, whatever it was, he had done for the sake of lothing and nourishing seven little children.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.12#He set out for Toulon. He arrived there, after a journey of twenty-seven ays, on a cart, with a chain on his neck. At Toulon he was clothed in the red assock. All that had constituted his life, even to his name, was effaced; he as no longer even Jean Valjean; he was number 24,601. What became of his ister? What became of the seven children? Who troubled himself about that? What ecomes of the handful of leaves from the young tree which is sawed off at the oot?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.13#It is always the same story. These poor living beings, these creatures of od, henceforth without support, without guide, without refuge, wandered away at andom,—who even knows?—each in his own direction perhaps, and little by little uried themselves in that cold mist which engulfs solitary destinies; gloomy hades, into which disappear in succession so many unlucky heads, in the sombre arch of the human race. They quitted the country. The clock-tower of what had een their village forgot them; the boundary line of what had been their field orgot them; after a few years’ residence in the galleys, Jean Valjean himself orgot them. In that heart, where there had been a wound, there was a scar. That s all. Only once, during all the time which he spent at Toulon, did he hear his ister mentioned. This happened, I think, towards the end of the fourth year of is captivity. I know not through what channels the news reached him. Some one ho had known them in their own country had seen his sister. She was in Paris. he lived in a poor street near Saint-Sulpice, in the Rue du Gindre. She had ith her only one child, a little boy, the youngest. Where were the other six? erhaps she did not know herself. Every morning she went to a printing office, o. 3 Rue du Sabot, where she was a folder and stitcher. She was obliged to be here at six o’clock in the morning—long before daylight in winter. In the same uilding with the printing office there was a school, and to this school she ook her little boy, who was seven years old. But as she entered the printing ffice at six, and the school only opened at seven, the child had to wait in the ourtyard, for the school to open, for an hour—one hour of a winter night in the pen air! They would not allow the child to come into the printing office, ecause he was in the way, they said. When the workmen passed in the morning, hey beheld this poor little being seated on the pavement, overcome with rowsiness, and often fast asleep in the shadow, crouched down and doubled up ver his basket. When it rained, an old woman, the portress, took pity on him; he took him into her den, where there was a pallet, a spinning-wheel, and two ooden chairs, and the little one slumbered in a corner, pressing himself close o the cat that he might suffer less from cold. At seven o’clock the school pened, and he entered. That is what was told to Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.14#They talked to him about it for one day; it was a moment, a flash, as hough a window had suddenly been opened upon the destiny of those things whom e had loved; then all closed again. He heard nothing more forever. Nothing from hem ever reached him again; he never beheld them; he never met them again; and n the continuation of this mournful history they will not be met with any ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.15#Towards the end of this fourth year Jean Valjean’s turn to escape arrived. is comrades assisted him, as is the custom in that sad place. He escaped. He andered for two days in the fields at liberty, if being at liberty is to be unted, to turn the head every instant, to quake at the slightest noise, to be fraid of everything,—of a smoking roof, of a passing man, of a barking dog, of galloping horse, of a striking clock, of the day because one can see, of the ight because one cannot see, of the highway, of the path, of a bush, of sleep. n the evening of the second day he was captured. He had neither eaten nor slept or thirty-six hours. The maritime tribunal condemned him, for this crime, to a rolongation of his term for three years, which made eight years. In the sixth ear his turn to escape occurred again; he availed himself of it, but could not ccomplish his flight fully. He was missing at roll-call. The cannon were fired, nd at night the patrol found him hidden under the keel of a vessel in process f construction; he resisted the galley guards who seized him. Escape and ebellion. This case, provided for by a special code, was punished by an ddition of five years, two of them in the double chain. Thirteen years. In the enth year his turn came round again; he again profited by it; he succeeded no etter. Three years for this fresh attempt. Sixteen years. Finally, I think it as during his thirteenth year, he made a last attempt, and only succeeded in etting retaken at the end of four hours of absence. Three years for those four ours. Nineteen years. In October, 1815, he was released; he had entered there n 1796, for having broken a pane of glass and taken a loaf of bread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.16#Room for a brief parenthesis. This is the second time, during his studies n the penal question and damnation by law, that the author of this book has ome across the theft of a loaf of bread as the point of departure for the isaster of a destiny. Claude Gaux had stolen a loaf; Jean Valjean had stolen a oaf. English statistics prove the fact that four thefts out of five in London ave hunger for their immediate cause.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.17#Jean Valjean had entered the galleys sobbing and shuddering; he emerged mpassive. He had entered in despair; he emerged gloomy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.6.18#What had taken place in that soul?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE INTERIOR OF DESPAIR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.1#Let us try to say it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.2#It is necessary that society should look at these things, because it is tself which creates them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.3#He was, as we have said, an ignorant man, but he was not a fool. The light f nature was ignited in him. Unhappiness, which also possesses a clearness of ision of its own, augmented the small amount of daylight which existed in this ind. Beneath the cudgel, beneath the chain, in the cell, in hardship, beneath he burning sun of the galleys, upon the plank bed of the convict, he withdrew nto his own consciousness and meditated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.4#He constituted himself the tribunal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.5#He began by putting himself on trial.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.6#He recognized the fact that he was not an innocent man unjustly punished. e admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthy act; that that loaf f bread would probably not have been refused to him had he asked for it; that, n any case, it would have been better to wait until he could get it through ompassion or through work; that it is not an unanswerable argument to say, “Can ne wait when one is hungry?” That, in the first place, it is very rare for any ne to die of hunger, literally; and next, that, fortunately or unfortunately, an is so constituted that he can suffer long and much, both morally and hysically, without dying; that it is therefore necessary to have patience; that hat would even have been better for those poor little children; that it had een an act of madness for him, a miserable, unfortunate wretch, to take society t large violently by the collar, and to imagine that one can escape from misery hrough theft; that that is in any case a poor door through which to escape from isery through which infamy enters; in short, that he was in the wrong.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.7#Then he asked himself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.8#Whether he had been the only one in fault in his fatal history. Whether it as not a serious thing, that he, a laborer, out of work, that he, an ndustrious man, should have lacked bread. And whether, the fault once committed nd confessed, the chastisement had not been ferocious and disproportioned. hether there had not been more abuse on the part of the law, in respect to the enalty, than there had been on the part of the culprit in respect to his fault. hether there had not been an excess of weights in one balance of the scale, in he one which contains expiation. Whether the over-weight of the penalty was not quivalent to the annihilation of the crime, and did not result in reversing the ituation, of replacing the fault of the delinquent by the fault of the epression, of converting the guilty man into the victim, and the debtor into he creditor, and of ranging the law definitely on the side of the man who had iolated it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.9#Whether this penalty, complicated by successive aggravations for attempts t escape, had not ended in becoming a sort of outrage perpetrated by the tronger upon the feebler, a crime of society against the individual, a crime hich was being committed afresh every day, a crime which had lasted nineteen ears.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.10#He asked himself whether human society could have the right to force its embers to suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lack of oresight, and in the other case for its pitiless foresight; and to seize a poor an forever between a defect and an excess, a default of work and an excess of unishment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.11#Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely those of ts members who were the least well endowed in the division of goods made by hance, and consequently the most deserving of consideration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.12#These questions put and answered, he judged society and condemned it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.13#He condemned it to his hatred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.14#He made it responsible for the fate which he was suffering, and he said to imself that it might be that one day he should not hesitate to call it to ccount. He declared to himself that there was no equilibrium between the harm hich he had caused and the harm which was being done to him; he finally arrived t the conclusion that his punishment was not, in truth, unjust, but that it ost assuredly was iniquitous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.15#Anger may be both foolish and absurd; one can be irritated wrongfully; one s exasperated only when there is some show of right on one’s side at bottom. ean Valjean felt himself exasperated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.16#And besides, human society had done him nothing but harm; he had never een anything of it save that angry face which it calls Justice, and which it hows to those whom it strikes. Men had only touched him to bruise him. Every ontact with them had been a blow. Never, since his infancy, since the days of is mother, of his sister, had he ever encountered a friendly word and a kindly lance. From suffering to suffering, he had gradually arrived at the conviction hat life is a war; and that in this war he was the conquered. He had no other eapon than his hate. He resolved to whet it in the galleys and to bear it away ith him when he departed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.17#There was at Toulon a school for the convicts, kept by the Ignorantin riars, where the most necessary branches were taught to those of the nfortunate men who had a mind for them. He was of the number who had a mind. He ent to school at the age of forty, and learned to read, to write, to cipher. He elt that to fortify his intelligence was to fortify his hate. In certain cases, ducation and enlightenment can serve to eke out evil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.18#This is a sad thing to say; after having judged society, which had caused is unhappiness, he judged Providence, which had made society, and he condemned t also.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.19#Thus during nineteen years of torture and slavery, this soul mounted and t the same time fell. Light entered it on one side, and darkness on the ther.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.20#Jean Valjean had not, as we have seen, an evil nature. He was still good hen he arrived at the galleys. He there condemned society, and felt that he was ecoming wicked; he there condemned Providence, and was conscious that he was ecoming impious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.21#It is difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.22#Does human nature thus change utterly and from top to bottom? Can the man reated good by God be rendered wicked by man? Can the soul be completely made ver by fate, and become evil, fate being evil? Can the heart become misshapen nd contract incurable deformities and infirmities under the oppression of a isproportionate unhappiness, as the vertebral column beneath too low a vault? s there not in every human soul, was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in articular, a first spark, a divine element, incorruptible in this world, mmortal in the other, which good can develop, fan, ignite, and make to glow ith splendor, and which evil can never wholly extinguish?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.23#Grave and obscure questions, to the last of which every physiologist would robably have responded no, and that without hesitation, had he beheld at oulon, during the hours of repose, which were for Jean Valjean hours of everie, this gloomy galley-slave, seated with folded arms upon the bar of some apstan, with the end of his chain thrust into his pocket to prevent its ragging, serious, silent, and thoughtful, a pariah of the laws which regarded he man with wrath, condemned by civilization, and regarding heaven with everity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.24#Certainly,—and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact,—the observing hysiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery; he would, perchance, have itied this sick man, of the law’s making; but he would not have even essayed ny treatment; he would have turned aside his gaze from the caverns of which he ould have caught a glimpse within this soul, and, like Dante at the portals of ell, he would have effaced from this existence the word which the finger of God as, nevertheless, inscribed upon the brow of every man,—hope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.25#Was this state of his soul, which we have attempted to analyze, as erfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for those who read s? Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive, after their formation, and had he seen istinctly during the process of their formation, all the elements of which his oral misery was composed? Had this rough and unlettered man gathered a erfectly clear perception of the succession of ideas through which he had, by egrees, mounted and descended to the lugubrious aspects which had, for so many ears, formed the inner horizon of his spirit? Was he conscious of all that assed within him, and of all that was working there? That is something which we o not presume to state; it is something which we do not even believe. There was oo much ignorance in Jean Valjean, even after his misfortune, to prevent much agueness from still lingering there. At times he did not rightly know himself hat he felt. Jean Valjean was in the shadows; he suffered in the shadows; he ated in the shadows; one might have said that he hated in advance of himself. e dwelt habitually in this shadow, feeling his way like a blind man and a reamer. Only, at intervals, there suddenly came to him, from without and from ithin, an access of wrath, a surcharge of suffering, a livid and rapid flash hich illuminated his whole soul, and caused to appear abruptly all around him, n front, behind, amid the gleams of a frightful light, the hideous precipices nd the sombre perspective of his destiny.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.26#The flash passed, the night closed in again; and where was he? He no onger knew. The peculiarity of pains of this nature, in which that which is itiless—that is to say, that which is brutalizing—predominates, is to transform man, little by little, by a sort of stupid transfiguration, into a wild beast; ometimes into a ferocious beast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.27#Jean Valjean’s successive and obstinate attempts at escape would alone uffice to prove this strange working of the law upon the human soul. Jean aljean would have renewed these attempts, utterly useless and foolish as they ere, as often as the opportunity had presented itself, without reflecting for n instant on the result, nor on the experiences which he had already gone hrough. He escaped impetuously, like the wolf who finds his cage open. Instinct aid to him, “Flee!” Reason would have said, “Remain!” But in the presence of so iolent a temptation, reason vanished; nothing remained but instinct. The beast lone acted. When he was recaptured, the fresh severities inflicted on him only erved to render him still more wild.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.28#One detail, which we must not omit, is that he possessed a physical trength which was not approached by a single one of the denizens of the alleys. At work, at paying out a cable or winding up a capstan, Jean Valjean as worth four men. He sometimes lifted and sustained enormous weights on his ack; and when the occasion demanded it, he replaced that implement which is alled a jack-screw, and was formerly called _orgueil_ [pride], whence, we may emark in passing, is derived the name of the Rue Montorgueil, near the Halles Fishmarket] in Paris. His comrades had nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw. Once, hen they were repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon, one of those dmirable caryatids of Puget, which support the balcony, became loosened, and as on the point of falling. Jean Valjean, who was present, supported the aryatid with his shoulder, and gave the workmen time to arrive.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.29#His suppleness even exceeded his strength. Certain convicts who were orever dreaming of escape, ended by making a veritable science of force and kill combined. It is the science of muscles. An entire system of mysterious tatics is daily practised by prisoners, men who are forever envious of the lies and birds. To climb a vertical surface, and to find points of support here hardly a projection was visible, was play to Jean Valjean. An angle of the all being given, with the tension of his back and legs, with his elbows and his eels fitted into the unevenness of the stone, he raised himself as if by magic o the third story. He sometimes mounted thus even to the roof of the galley rison.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.30#He spoke but little. He laughed not at all. An excessive emotion was equired to wring from him, once or twice a year, that lugubrious laugh of the onvict, which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon. To all appearance, he eemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation of something terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.31#He was absorbed, in fact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.32#Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushed ntelligence, he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing was resting n him. In that obscure and wan shadow within which he crawled, each time that e turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance, he perceived with terror, ingled with rage, a sort of frightful accumulation of things, collecting and ounting above him, beyond the range of his vision,—laws, prejudices, men, and eeds,—whose outlines escaped him, whose mass terrified him, and which was othing else than that prodigious pyramid which we call civilization. He istinguished, here and there in that swarming and formless mass, now near him, ow afar off and on inaccessible table-lands, some group, some detail, vividly lluminated; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel; there the gendarme and his word; yonder the mitred archbishop; away at the top, like a sort of sun, the mperor, crowned and dazzling. It seemed to him that these distant splendors, ar from dissipating his night, rendered it more funereal and more black. All his—laws, prejudices, deeds, men, things—went and came above him, over his ead, in accordance with the complicated and mysterious movement which God mparts to civilization, walking over him and crushing him with I know not what eacefulness in its cruelty and inexorability in its indifference. Souls which ave fallen to the bottom of all possible misfortune, unhappy men lost in the owest of those limbos at which no one any longer looks, the reproved of the aw, feel the whole weight of this human society, so formidable for him who is ithout, so frightful for him who is beneath, resting upon their heads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.33#In this situation Jean Valjean meditated; and what could be the nature of is meditation?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.34#If the grain of millet beneath the millstone had thoughts, it would, oubtless, think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.35#All these things, realities full of spectres, phantasmagories full of ealities, had eventually created for him a sort of interior state which is lmost indescribable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.36#At times, amid his convict toil, he paused. He fell to thinking. His eason, at one and the same time riper and more troubled than of yore, rose in evolt. Everything which had happened to him seemed to him absurd; everything hat surrounded him seemed to him impossible. He said to himself, “It is a ream.” He gazed at the galley-sergeant standing a few paces from him; the alley-sergeant seemed a phantom to him. All of a sudden the phantom dealt him a low with his cudgel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.37#Visible nature hardly existed for him. It would almost be true to say that here existed for Jean Valjean neither sun, nor fine summer days, nor radiant ky, nor fresh April dawns. I know not what vent-hole daylight habitually llumined his soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.38#To sum up, in conclusion, that which can be summed up and translated into ositive results in all that we have just pointed out, we will confine ourselves o the statement that, in the course of nineteen years, Jean Valjean, the noffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles, the formidable convict of Toulon, had ecome capable, thanks to the manner in which the galleys had moulded him, of wo sorts of evil action: firstly, of evil action which was rapid, npremeditated, dashing, entirely instinctive, in the nature of reprisals for he evil which he had undergone; secondly, of evil action which was serious, rave, consciously argued out and premeditated, with the false ideas which such misfortune can furnish. His deliberate deeds passed through three successive hases, which natures of a certain stamp can alone traverse,—reasoning, will, erseverance. He had for moving causes his habitual wrath, bitterness of soul, a rofound sense of indignities suffered, the reaction even against the good, the nnocent, and the just, if there are any such. The point of departure, like the oint of arrival, for all his thoughts, was hatred of human law; that hatred hich, if it be not arrested in its development by some providential incident, ecomes, within a given time, the hatred of society, then the hatred of the uman race, then the hatred of creation, and which manifests itself by a vague, ncessant, and brutal desire to do harm to some living being, no matter whom. It ill be perceived that it was not without reason that Jean Valjean’s passport escribed him as _a very dangerous man_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.7.39#From year to year this soul had dried away slowly, but with fatal ureness. When the heart is dry, the eye is dry. On his departure from the alleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—BILLOWS AND SHADOWS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.1#A man overboard!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.2#What matters it? The vessel does not halt. The wind blows. That sombre ship as a path which it is forced to pursue. It passes on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.3#The man disappears, then reappears; he plunges, he rises again to the urface; he calls, he stretches out his arms; he is not heard. The vessel, rembling under the hurricane, is wholly absorbed in its own workings; the assengers and sailors do not even see the drowning man; his miserable head is ut a speck amid the immensity of the waves. He gives vent to desperate cries rom out of the depths. What a spectre is that retreating sail! He gazes and azes at it frantically. It retreats, it grows dim, it diminishes in size. He as there but just now, he was one of the crew, he went and came along the deck ith the rest, he had his part of breath and of sunlight, he was a living man. ow, what has taken place? He has slipped, he has fallen; all is at an end.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.4#He is in the tremendous sea. Under foot he has nothing but what flees and rumbles. The billows, torn and lashed by the wind, encompass him hideously; the ossings of the abyss bear him away; all the tongues of water dash over his ead; a populace of waves spits upon him; confused openings half devour him; very time that he sinks, he catches glimpses of precipices filled with night; rightful and unknown vegetations seize him, knot about his feet, draw him to hem; he is conscious that he is becoming an abyss, that he forms part of the oam; the waves toss him from one to another; he drinks in the bitterness; the owardly ocean attacks him furiously, to drown him; the enormity plays with his gony. It seems as though all that water were hate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.5#Nevertheless, he struggles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.6#He tries to defend himself; he tries to sustain himself; he makes an ffort; he swims. He, his petty strength all exhausted instantly, combats the nexhaustible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.7#Where, then, is the ship? Yonder. Barely visible in the pale shadows of the orizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.8#The wind blows in gusts; all the foam overwhelms him. He raises his eyes nd beholds only the lividness of the clouds. He witnesses, amid his eath-pangs, the immense madness of the sea. He is tortured by this madness; he ears noises strange to man, which seem to come from beyond the limits of the arth, and from one knows not what frightful region beyond.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.9#There are birds in the clouds, just as there are angels above human istresses; but what can they do for him? They sing and fly and float, and he, e rattles in the death agony.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.10#He feels himself buried in those two infinities, the ocean and the sky, at ne and the same time: the one is a tomb; the other is a shroud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.11#Night descends; he has been swimming for hours; his strength is exhausted; hat ship, that distant thing in which there were men, has vanished; he is alone n the formidable twilight gulf; he sinks, he stiffens himself, he twists imself; he feels under him the monstrous billows of the invisible; he houts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.12#There are no more men. Where is God?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.13#He shouts. Help! Help! He still shouts on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.14#Nothing on the horizon; nothing in heaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.15#He implores the expanse, the waves, the seaweed, the reef; they are deaf. e beseeches the tempest; the imperturbable tempest obeys only the infinite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.16#Around him darkness, fog, solitude, the stormy and nonsentient tumult, the ndefined curling of those wild waters. In him horror and fatigue. Beneath him he depths. Not a point of support. He thinks of the gloomy adventures of the orpse in the limitless shadow. The bottomless cold paralyzes him. His hands ontract convulsively; they close, and grasp nothingness. Winds, clouds, hirlwinds, gusts, useless stars! What is to be done? The desperate man gives p; he is weary, he chooses the alternative of death; he resists not; he lets imself go; he abandons his grip; and then he tosses forevermore in the ugubrious dreary depths of engulfment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.17#Oh, implacable march of human societies! Oh, losses of men and of souls on he way! Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip! Disastrous absence f help! Oh, moral death!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.18#The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws fling heir condemned. The sea is the immensity of wretchedness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.8.19#The soul, going downstream in this gulf, may become a corpse. Who shall esuscitate it?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.head#CHAPTER IX—NEW TROUBLES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.1#When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys, when ean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words, _Thou art free!_ the moment eemed improbable and unprecedented; a ray of vivid light, a ray of the true ight of the living, suddenly penetrated within him. But it was not long before his ray paled. Jean Valjean had been dazzled by the idea of liberty. He had elieved in a new life. He very speedily perceived what sort of liberty it is to hich a yellow passport is provided.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.2#And this was encompassed with much bitterness. He had calculated that his arnings, during his sojourn in the galleys, ought to amount to a hundred and eventy-one francs. It is but just to add that he had forgotten to include in is calculations the forced repose of Sundays and festival days during nineteen ears, which entailed a diminution of about eighty francs. At all events, his oard had been reduced by various local levies to the sum of one hundred and ine francs fifteen sous, which had been counted out to him on his departure. He ad understood nothing of this, and had thought himself wronged. Let us say the ord—robbed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.3#On the day following his liberation, he saw, at Grasse, in front of an range-flower distillery, some men engaged in unloading bales. He offered his ervices. Business was pressing; they were accepted. He set to work. He was ntelligent, robust, adroit; he did his best; the master seemed pleased. While e was at work, a gendarme passed, observed him, and demanded his papers. It was ecessary to show him the yellow passport. That done, Jean Valjean resumed his abor. A little while before he had questioned one of the workmen as to the mount which they earned each day at this occupation; he had been told _thirty ous_. When evening arrived, as he was forced to set out again on the following ay, he presented himself to the owner of the distillery and requested to be aid. The owner did not utter a word, but handed him fifteen sous. He objected. e was told, _“That is enough for thee.”_ He persisted. The master looked him traight between the eyes, and said to him _“Beware of the prison.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.4#There, again, he considered that he had been robbed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.5#Society, the State, by diminishing his hoard, had robbed him wholesale. Now t was the individual who was robbing him at retail.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.6#Liberation is not deliverance. One gets free from the galleys, but not from he sentence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.9.7#That is what happened to him at Grasse. We have seen in what manner he was eceived at D——
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.head#CHAPTER X—THE MAN AROUSED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.1#As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning, Jean Valjean awoke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.2#What woke him was that his bed was too good. It was nearly twenty years ince he had slept in a bed, and, although he had not undressed, the sensation as too novel not to disturb his slumbers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.3#He had slept more than four hours. His fatigue had passed away. He was ccustomed not to devote many hours to repose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.4#He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him; then he losed them again, with the intention of going to sleep once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.5#When many varied sensations have agitated the day, when various matters reoccupy the mind, one falls asleep once, but not a second time. Sleep comes ore easily than it returns. This is what happened to Jean Valjean. He could not et to sleep again, and he fell to thinking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.6#He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one’s ind are troubled. There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain. His memories f the olden time and of the immediate present floated there pell-mell and ingled confusedly, losing their proper forms, becoming disproportionately arge, then suddenly disappearing, as in a muddy and perturbed pool. Many houghts occurred to him; but there was one which kept constantly presenting tself afresh, and which drove away all others. We will mention this thought at nce: he had observed the six sets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle hich Madame Magloire had placed on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.7#Those six sets of silver haunted him.—They were there.—A few paces istant.—Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the one in which e then was, the old servant-woman had been in the act of placing them in a ittle cupboard near the head of the bed.—He had taken careful note of this upboard.—On the right, as you entered from the dining-room.—They were olid.—And old silver.—From the ladle one could get at least two hundred rancs.—Double what he had earned in nineteen years.—It is true that he would ave earned more if “the _administration_ had not _robbed him_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.8#His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there was ertainly mingled some struggle. Three o’clock struck. He opened his eyes again, rew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture, stretched out his arm and felt f his knapsack, which he had thrown down on a corner of the alcove; then he ung his legs over the edge of the bed, and placed his feet on the floor, and hus found himself, almost without knowing it, seated on his bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.9#He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude, which would have been uggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen him thus in the dark, he only person awake in that house where all were sleeping. All of a sudden he tooped down, removed his shoes and placed them softly on the mat beside the ed; then he resumed his thoughtful attitude, and became motionless once ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.10#Throughout this hideous meditation, the thoughts which we have above ndicated moved incessantly through his brain; entered, withdrew, re-entered, nd in a manner oppressed him; and then he thought, also, without knowing why, nd with the mechanical persistence of reverie, of a convict named Brevet, whom e had known in the galleys, and whose trousers had been upheld by a single uspender of knitted cotton. The checkered pattern of that suspender recurred ncessantly to his mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.11#He remained in this situation, and would have so remained indefinitely, ven until daybreak, had not the clock struck one—the half or quarter hour. It eemed to him that that stroke said to him, “Come on!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.12#He rose to his feet, hesitated still another moment, and listened; all was uiet in the house; then he walked straight ahead, with short steps, to the indow, of which he caught a glimpse. The night was not very dark; there was a ull moon, across which coursed large clouds driven by the wind. This created, utdoors, alternate shadow and gleams of light, eclipses, then bright openings f the clouds; and indoors a sort of twilight. This twilight, sufficient to nable a person to see his way, intermittent on account of the clouds, resembled he sort of livid light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar, before hich the passers-by come and go. On arriving at the window, Jean Valjean xamined it. It had no grating; it opened in the garden and was fastened, ccording to the fashion of the country, only by a small pin. He opened it; but s a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated the room abruptly, he closed it gain immediately. He scrutinized the garden with that attentive gaze which tudies rather than looks. The garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white all, easy to climb. Far away, at the extremity, he perceived tops of trees, paced at regular intervals, which indicated that the wall separated the garden rom an avenue or lane planted with trees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.13#Having taken this survey, he executed a movement like that of a man who as made up his mind, strode to his alcove, grasped his knapsack, opened it, umbled in it, pulled out of it something which he placed on the bed, put his hoes into one of his pockets, shut the whole thing up again, threw the knapsack n his shoulders, put on his cap, drew the visor down over his eyes, felt for is cudgel, went and placed it in the angle of the window; then returned to the ed, and resolutely seized the object which he had deposited there. It resembled short bar of iron, pointed like a pike at one end. It would have been ifficult to distinguish in that darkness for what employment that bit of iron ould have been designed. Perhaps it was a lever; possibly it was a club.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.14#In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothing more han a miner’s candlestick. Convicts were, at that period, sometimes employed in uarrying stone from the lofty hills which environ Toulon, and it was not rare or them to have miners’ tools at their command. These miners’ candlesticks are f massive iron, terminated at the lower extremity by a point, by means of which hey are stuck into the rock.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.15#He took the candlestick in his right hand; holding his breath and trying o deaden the sound of his tread, he directed his steps to the door of the djoining room, occupied by the Bishop, as we already know.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.10.16#On arriving at this door, he found it ajar. The Bishop had not closed t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.head#CHAPTER XI—WHAT HE DOES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.1#Jean Valjean listened. Not a sound.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.2#He gave the door a push.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.3#He pushed it gently with the tip of his finger, lightly, with the furtive nd uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.4#The door yielded to this pressure, and made an imperceptible and silent ovement, which enlarged the opening a little.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.5#He waited a moment; then gave the door a second and a bolder push.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.6#It continued to yield in silence. The opening was now large enough to allow im to pass. But near the door there stood a little table, which formed an mbarrassing angle with it, and barred the entrance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.7#Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty. It was necessary, at any cost, to nlarge the aperture still further.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.8#He decided on his course of action, and gave the door a third push, more nergetic than the two preceding. This time a badly oiled hinge suddenly emitted mid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.9#Jean Valjean shuddered. The noise of the hinge rang in his ears with omething of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump of the Day of udgment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.10#In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imagined that hat hinge had just become animated, and had suddenly assumed a terrible life, nd that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one, and warn and to wake hose who were asleep. He halted, shuddering, bewildered, and fell back from the ips of his toes upon his heels. He heard the arteries in his temples beating ike two forge hammers, and it seemed to him that his breath issued from his reast with the roar of the wind issuing from a cavern. It seemed impossible to im that the horrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not have disturbed he entire household, like the shock of an earthquake; the door, pushed by him, ad taken the alarm, and had shouted; the old man would rise at once; the two ld women would shriek out; people would come to their assistance; in less than quarter of an hour the town would be in an uproar, and the gendarmerie on and. For a moment he thought himself lost.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.11#He remained where he was, petrified like the statue of salt, not daring to ake a movement. Several minutes elapsed. The door had fallen wide open. He entured to peep into the next room. Nothing had stirred there. He lent an ear. othing was moving in the house. The noise made by the rusty hinge had not wakened any one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.12#This first danger was past; but there still reigned a frightful tumult ithin him. Nevertheless, he did not retreat. Even when he had thought himself ost, he had not drawn back. His only thought now was to finish as soon as ossible. He took a step and entered the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.13#This room was in a state of perfect calm. Here and there vague and onfused forms were distinguishable, which in the daylight were papers scattered n a table, open folios, volumes piled upon a stool, an armchair heaped with lothing, a prie-Dieu, and which at that hour were only shadowy corners and hitish spots. Jean Valjean advanced with precaution, taking care not to knock gainst the furniture. He could hear, at the extremity of the room, the even and ranquil breathing of the sleeping Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.14#He suddenly came to a halt. He was near the bed. He had arrived there ooner than he had thought for.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.15#Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with our actions ith sombre and intelligent appropriateness, as though she desired to make us eflect. For the last half-hour a large cloud had covered the heavens. At the oment when Jean Valjean paused in front of the bed, this cloud parted, as hough on purpose, and a ray of light, traversing the long window, suddenly lluminated the Bishop’s pale face. He was sleeping peacefully. He lay in his ed almost completely dressed, on account of the cold of the Basses-Alps, in a arment of brown wool, which covered his arms to the wrists. His head was thrown ack on the pillow, in the careless attitude of repose; his hand, adorned with he pastoral ring, and whence had fallen so many good deeds and so many holy ctions, was hanging over the edge of the bed. His whole face was illumined with vague expression of satisfaction, of hope, and of felicity. It was more than a mile, and almost a radiance. He bore upon his brow the indescribable reflection f a light which was invisible. The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a ysterious heaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.16#A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.17#It was, at the same time, a luminous transparency, for that heaven was ithin him. That heaven was his conscience.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.18#At the moment when the ray of moonlight superposed itself, so to speak, pon that inward radiance, the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory. It emained, however, gentle and veiled in an ineffable half-light. That moon in he sky, that slumbering nature, that garden without a quiver, that house which as so calm, the hour, the moment, the silence, added some solemn and nspeakable quality to the venerable repose of this man, and enveloped in a sort f serene and majestic aureole that white hair, those closed eyes, that face in hich all was hope and all was confidence, that head of an old man, and that lumber of an infant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.19#There was something almost divine in this man, who was thus august, ithout being himself aware of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.20#Jean Valjean was in the shadow, and stood motionless, with his iron andlestick in his hand, frightened by this luminous old man. Never had he eheld anything like this. This confidence terrified him. The moral world has no rander spectacle than this: a troubled and uneasy conscience, which has arrived n the brink of an evil action, contemplating the slumber of the just.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.21#That slumber in that isolation, and with a neighbor like himself, had bout it something sublime, of which he was vaguely but imperiously onscious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.22#No one could have told what was passing within him, not even himself. In rder to attempt to form an idea of it, it is necessary to think of the most iolent of things in the presence of the most gentle. Even on his visage it ould have been impossible to distinguish anything with certainty. It was a sort f haggard astonishment. He gazed at it, and that was all. But what was his hought? It would have been impossible to divine it. What was evident was, that e was touched and astounded. But what was the nature of this emotion?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.23#His eye never quitted the old man. The only thing which was clearly to be nferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strange indecision. One ould have said that he was hesitating between the two abysses,—the one in which ne loses one’s self and that in which one saves one’s self. He seemed prepared o crush that skull or to kiss that hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.24#At the expiration of a few minutes his left arm rose slowly towards his row, and he took off his cap; then his arm fell back with the same eliberation, and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more, his cap in his left and, his club in his right hand, his hair bristling all over his savage ead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.25#The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that terrifying aze.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.26#The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix over the himney-piece, which seemed to be extending its arms to both of them, with a enediction for one and pardon for the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.11.27#Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow; then stepped rapidly ast the bed, without glancing at the Bishop, straight to the cupboard, which he aw near the head; he raised his iron candlestick as though to force the lock; he key was there; he opened it; the first thing which presented itself to him as the basket of silverware; he seized it, traversed the chamber with long trides, without taking any precautions and without troubling himself about the oise, gained the door, re-entered the oratory, opened the window, seized his udgel, bestrode the window-sill of the ground floor, put the silver into his napsack, threw away the basket, crossed the garden, leaped over the wall like a iger, and fled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.head#CHAPTER XII—THE BISHOP WORKS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.1#The next morning at sunrise Monseigneur Bienvenu was strolling in his arden. Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.2#“Monseigneur, Monseigneur!” she exclaimed, “does your Grace know where the asket of silver is?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.3#“Yes,” replied the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.4#“Jesus the Lord be blessed!” she resumed; “I did not know what had become f it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.5#The Bishop had just picked up the basket in a flower-bed. He presented it o Madame Magloire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.6#“Here it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.7#“Well!” said she. “Nothing in it! And the silver?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.8#“Ah,” returned the Bishop, “so it is the silver which troubles you? I don’t now where it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.9#“Great, good God! It is stolen! That man who was here last night has stolen t.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.10#In a twinkling, with all the vivacity of an alert old woman, Madame agloire had rushed to the oratory, entered the alcove, and returned to the ishop. The Bishop had just bent down, and was sighing as he examined a plant of ochlearia des Guillons, which the basket had broken as it fell across the bed. e rose up at Madame Magloire’s cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.11#“Monseigneur, the man is gone! The silver has been stolen!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.12#As she uttered this exclamation, her eyes fell upon a corner of the arden, where traces of the wall having been scaled were visible. The coping of he wall had been torn away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.13#“Stay! yonder is the way he went. He jumped over into Cochefilet Lane. Ah, he abomination! He has stolen our silver!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.14#The Bishop remained silent for a moment; then he raised his grave eyes, nd said gently to Madame Magloire:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.15#“And, in the first place, was that silver ours?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.16#Madame Magloire was speechless. Another silence ensued; then the Bishop ent on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.17#“Madame Magloire, I have for a long time detained that silver wrongfully. t belonged to the poor. Who was that man? A poor man, evidently.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.18#“Alas! Jesus!” returned Madame Magloire. “It is not for my sake, nor for ademoiselle’s. It makes no difference to us. But it is for the sake of onseigneur. What is Monseigneur to eat with now?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.19#The Bishop gazed at her with an air of amazement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.20#“Ah, come! Are there no such things as pewter forks and spoons?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.21#Madame Magloire shrugged her shoulders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.22#“Pewter has an odor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.23#“Iron forks and spoons, then.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.24#Madame Magloire made an expressive grimace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.25#“Iron has a taste.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.26#“Very well,” said the Bishop; “wooden ones then.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.27#A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which Jean aljean had sat on the previous evening. As he ate his breakfast, Monseigneur elcome remarked gayly to his sister, who said nothing, and to Madame Magloire, ho was grumbling under her breath, that one really does not need either fork or poon, even of wood, in order to dip a bit of bread in a cup of milk.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.28#“A pretty idea, truly,” said Madame Magloire to herself, as she went and ame, “to take in a man like that! and to lodge him close to one’s self! And how ortunate that he did nothing but steal! Ah, mon Dieu! it makes one shudder to hink of it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.29#As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table, there came a nock at the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.30#“Come in,” said the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.31#The door opened. A singular and violent group made its appearance on the hreshold. Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar. The three men were endarmes; the other was Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.32#A brigadier of gendarmes, who seemed to be in command of the group, was tanding near the door. He entered and advanced to the Bishop, making a military alute.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.33#“Monseigneur—” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.34#At this word, Jean Valjean, who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed, aised his head with an air of stupefaction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.35#“Monseigneur!” he murmured. “So he is not the curé?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.36#“Silence!” said the gendarme. “He is Monseigneur the Bishop.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.37#In the meantime, Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly as his great ge permitted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.38#“Ah! here you are!” he exclaimed, looking at Jean Valjean. “I am glad to ee you. Well, but how is this? I gave you the candlesticks too, which are of ilver like the rest, and for which you can certainly get two hundred francs. hy did you not carry them away with your forks and spoons?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.39#Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide, and stared at the venerable Bishop with n expression which no human tongue can render any account of.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.40#“Monseigneur,” said the brigadier of gendarmes, “so what this man said is rue, then? We came across him. He was walking like a man who is running away. e stopped him to look into the matter. He had this silver—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.41#“And he told you,” interposed the Bishop with a smile, “that it had been iven to him by a kind old fellow of a priest with whom he had passed the night? see how the matter stands. And you have brought him back here? It is a istake.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.42#“In that case,” replied the brigadier, “we can let him go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.43#“Certainly,” replied the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.44#The gendarmes released Jean Valjean, who recoiled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.45#“Is it true that I am to be released?” he said, in an almost inarticulate oice, and as though he were talking in his sleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.46#“Yes, thou art released; dost thou not understand?” said one of the endarmes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.47#“My friend,” resumed the Bishop, “before you go, here are your andlesticks. Take them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.48#He stepped to the chimney-piece, took the two silver candlesticks, and rought them to Jean Valjean. The two women looked on without uttering a word, ithout a gesture, without a look which could disconcert the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.49#Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb. He took the two candlesticks echanically, and with a bewildered air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.50#“Now,” said the Bishop, “go in peace. By the way, when you return, my riend, it is not necessary to pass through the garden. You can always enter and epart through the street door. It is never fastened with anything but a latch, ither by day or by night.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.51#Then, turning to the gendarmes:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.52#“You may retire, gentlemen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.53#The gendarmes retired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.54#Jean Valjean was like a man on the point of fainting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.55#The Bishop drew near to him, and said in a low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.56#“Do not forget, never forget, that you have promised to use this money in ecoming an honest man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.57#Jean Valjean, who had no recollection of ever having promised anything, emained speechless. The Bishop had emphasized the words when he uttered them. e resumed with solemnity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.12.58#“Jean Valjean, my brother, you no longer belong to evil, but to good. It s your soul that I buy from you; I withdraw it from black thoughts and the pirit of perdition, and I give it to God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.head#CHAPTER XIII—LITTLE GERVAIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.1#Jean Valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it. He set out at very hasty pace through the fields, taking whatever roads and paths presented hemselves to him, without perceiving that he was incessantly retracing his teps. He wandered thus the whole morning, without having eaten anything and ithout feeling hungry. He was the prey of a throng of novel sensations. He was onscious of a sort of rage; he did not know against whom it was directed. He ould not have told whether he was touched or humiliated. There came over him at oments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed the hardness cquired during the last twenty years of his life. This state of mind fatigued im. He perceived with dismay that the sort of frightful calm which the njustice of his misfortune had conferred upon him was giving way within him. He sked himself what would replace this. At times he would have actually preferred o be in prison with the gendarmes, and that things should not have happened in his way; it would have agitated him less. Although the season was tolerably far dvanced, there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows here and there, hose odor as he passed through them in his march recalled to him memories of is childhood. These memories were almost intolerable to him, it was so long ince they had recurred to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.2#Unutterable thoughts assembled within him in this manner all day long.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.3#As the sun declined to its setting, casting long shadows athwart the soil rom every pebble, Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon a large ruddy plain, hich was absolutely deserted. There was nothing on the horizon except the Alps. ot even the spire of a distant village. Jean Valjean might have been three eagues distant from D—— A path which intersected the plain passed a few paces rom the bush.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.4#In the middle of this meditation, which would have contributed not a little o render his rags terrifying to any one who might have encountered him, a oyous sound became audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.5#He turned his head and saw a little Savoyard, about ten years of age, oming up the path and singing, his hurdy-gurdy on his hip, and his marmot-box n his back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.6#One of those gay and gentle children, who go from land to land affording a iew of their knees through the holes in their trousers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.7#Without stopping his song, the lad halted in his march from time to time, nd played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his hand—his whole ortune, probably.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.8#Among this money there was one forty-sou piece.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.9#The child halted beside the bush, without perceiving Jean Valjean, and ossed up his handful of sous, which, up to that time, he had caught with a good eal of adroitness on the back of his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.10#This time the forty-sou piece escaped him, and went rolling towards the rushwood until it reached Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.11#Jean Valjean set his foot upon it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.12#In the meantime, the child had looked after his coin and had caught sight f him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.13#He showed no astonishment, but walked straight up to the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.14#The spot was absolutely solitary. As far as the eye could see there was ot a person on the plain or on the path. The only sound was the tiny, feeble ries of a flock of birds of passage, which was traversing the heavens at an mmense height. The child was standing with his back to the sun, which cast hreads of gold in his hair and empurpled with its blood-red gleam the savage ace of Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.15#“Sir,” said the little Savoyard, with that childish confidence which is omposed of ignorance and innocence, “my money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.16#“What is your name?” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.17#“Little Gervais, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.18#“Go away,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.19#“Sir,” resumed the child, “give me back my money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.20#Jean Valjean dropped his head, and made no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.21#The child began again, “My money, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.22#Jean Valjean’s eyes remained fixed on the earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.23#“My piece of money!” cried the child, “my white piece! my silver!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.24#It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him. The child grasped him y the collar of his blouse and shook him. At the same time he made an effort to isplace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on his treasure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.25#“I want my piece of money! my piece of forty sous!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.26#The child wept. Jean Valjean raised his head. He still remained seated. is eyes were troubled. He gazed at the child, in a sort of amazement, then he tretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a terrible voice, “Who’s here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.27#“I, sir,” replied the child. “Little Gervais! I! Give me back my forty ous, if you please! Take your foot away, sir, if you please!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.28#Then irritated, though he was so small, and becoming almost menacing:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.29#“Come now, will you take your foot away? Take your foot away, or we’ll ee!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.30#“Ah! It’s still you!” said Jean Valjean, and rising abruptly to his feet, is foot still resting on the silver piece, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.31#“Will you take yourself off!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.32#The frightened child looked at him, then began to tremble from head to oot, and after a few moments of stupor he set out, running at the top of his peed, without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.33#Nevertheless, lack of breath forced him to halt after a certain distance, nd Jean Valjean heard him sobbing, in the midst of his own reverie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.34#At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.35#The sun had set.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.36#The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean. He had eaten nothing all ay; it is probable that he was feverish.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.37#He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after the hild’s flight. The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular intervals. His aze, fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him, seemed to be scrutinizing with rofound attention the shape of an ancient fragment of blue earthenware which ad fallen in the grass. All at once he shivered; he had just begun to feel the hill of evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.38#He settled his cap more firmly on his brow, sought mechanically to cross nd button his blouse, advanced a step and stopped to pick up his cudgel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.39#At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece, which his foot had alf ground into the earth, and which was shining among the pebbles. It was as hough he had received a galvanic shock. “What is this?” he muttered between his eeth. He recoiled three paces, then halted, without being able to detach his aze from the spot which his foot had trodden but an instant before, as though he thing which lay glittering there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted pon him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.40#At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards the ilver coin, seized it, and straightened himself up again and began to gaze afar ff over the plain, at the same time casting his eyes towards all points of the orizon, as he stood there erect and shivering, like a terrified wild animal hich is seeking refuge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.41#He saw nothing. Night was falling, the plain was cold and vague, great anks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.42#He said, “Ah!” and set out rapidly in the direction in which the child had isappeared. After about thirty paces he paused, looked about him and saw othing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.43#Then he shouted with all his might:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.44#“Little Gervais! Little Gervais!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.45#He paused and waited.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.46#There was no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.47#The landscape was gloomy and deserted. He was encompassed by space. There as nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was lost, and a ilence which engulfed his voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.48#An icy north wind was blowing, and imparted to things around him a sort of ugubrious life. The bushes shook their thin little arms with incredible fury. ne would have said that they were threatening and pursuing some one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.49#He set out on his march again, then he began to run; and from time to time e halted and shouted into that solitude, with a voice which was the most ormidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible to hear, “Little ervais! Little Gervais!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.50#Assuredly, if the child had heard him, he would have been alarmed and ould have taken good care not to show himself. But the child was no doubt lready far away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.51#He encountered a priest on horseback. He stepped up to him and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.52#“Monsieur le Curé, have you seen a child pass?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.53#“No,” said the priest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.54#“One named Little Gervais?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.55#“I have seen no one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.56#He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to the riest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.57#“Monsieur le Curé, this is for your poor people. Monsieur le Curé, he was little lad, about ten years old, with a marmot, I think, and a hurdy-gurdy. ne of those Savoyards, you know?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.58#“I have not seen him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.59#“Little Gervais? There are no villages here? Can you tell me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.60#“If he is like what you say, my friend, he is a little stranger. Such ersons pass through these parts. We know nothing of them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.61#Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence, and ave them to the priest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.62#“For your poor,” he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.63#Then he added, wildly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.64#“Monsieur l’Abbé, have me arrested. I am a thief.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.65#The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste, much alarmed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.66#Jean Valjean set out on a run, in the direction which he had first aken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.67#In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance, gazing, calling, houting, but he met no one. Two or three times he ran across the plain towards omething which conveyed to him the effect of a human being reclining or rouching down; it turned out to be nothing but brushwood or rocks nearly on a evel with the earth. At length, at a spot where three paths intersected each ther, he stopped. The moon had risen. He sent his gaze into the distance and houted for the last time, “Little Gervais! Little Gervais! Little Gervais!” His hout died away in the mist, without even awakening an echo. He murmured yet nce more, “Little Gervais!” but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice. It as his last effort; his legs gave way abruptly under him, as though an nvisible power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of his evil onscience; he fell exhausted, on a large stone, his fists clenched in his hair nd his face on his knees, and he cried, “I am a wretch!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.68#Then his heart burst, and he began to cry. It was the first time that he ad wept in nineteen years.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.69#When Jean Valjean left the Bishop’s house, he was, as we have seen, quite hrown out of everything that had been his thought hitherto. He could not yield o the evidence of what was going on within him. He hardened himself against the ngelic action and the gentle words of the old man. “You have promised me to ecome an honest man. I buy your soul. I take it away from the spirit of erversity; I give it to the good God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.70#This recurred to his mind unceasingly. To this celestial kindness he pposed pride, which is the fortress of evil within us. He was indistinctly onscious that the pardon of this priest was the greatest assault and the most ormidable attack which had moved him yet; that his obduracy was finally settled f he resisted this clemency; that if he yielded, he should be obliged to enounce that hatred with which the actions of other men had filled his soul hrough so many years, and which pleased him; that this time it was necessary to onquer or to be conquered; and that a struggle, a colossal and final struggle, ad been begun between his viciousness and the goodness of that man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.71#In the presence of these lights, he proceeded like a man who is ntoxicated. As he walked thus with haggard eyes, did he have a distinct erception of what might result to him from his adventure at D——? Did he nderstand all those mysterious murmurs which warn or importune the spirit at ertain moments of life? Did a voice whisper in his ear that he had just passed he solemn hour of his destiny; that there no longer remained a middle course or him; that if he were not henceforth the best of men, he would be the worst; hat it behooved him now, so to speak, to mount higher than the Bishop, or fall ower than the convict; that if he wished to become good he must become an ngel; that if he wished to remain evil, he must become a monster?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.72#Here, again, some questions must be put, which we have already put to urselves elsewhere: did he catch some shadow of all this in his thought, in a onfused way? Misfortune certainly, as we have said, does form the education of he intelligence; nevertheless, it is doubtful whether Jean Valjean was in a ondition to disentangle all that we have here indicated. If these ideas ccurred to him, he but caught glimpses of, rather than saw them, and they only ucceeded in throwing him into an unutterable and almost painful state of motion. On emerging from that black and deformed thing which is called the alleys, the Bishop had hurt his soul, as too vivid a light would have hurt his yes on emerging from the dark. The future life, the possible life which offered tself to him henceforth, all pure and radiant, filled him with tremors and nxiety. He no longer knew where he really was. Like an owl, who should suddenly ee the sun rise, the convict had been dazzled and blinded, as it were, by irtue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.73#That which was certain, that which he did not doubt, was that he was no onger the same man, that everything about him was changed, that it was no onger in his power to make it as though the Bishop had not spoken to him and ad not touched him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.74#In this state of mind he had encountered little Gervais, and had robbed im of his forty sous. Why? He certainly could not have explained it; was this he last effect and the supreme effort, as it were, of the evil thoughts which e had brought away from the galleys,—a remnant of impulse, a result of what is alled in statics, _acquired force?_ It was that, and it was also, perhaps, even ess than that. Let us say it simply, it was not he who stole; it was not the an; it was the beast, who, by habit and instinct, had simply placed his foot pon that money, while the intelligence was struggling amid so many novel and itherto unheard-of thoughts besetting it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.75#When intelligence reawakened and beheld that action of the brute, Jean aljean recoiled with anguish and uttered a cry of terror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.76#It was because,—strange phenomenon, and one which was possible only in the ituation in which he found himself,—in stealing the money from that child, he ad done a thing of which he was no longer capable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.77#However that may be, this last evil action had a decisive effect on him; t abruptly traversed that chaos which he bore in his mind, and dispersed it, laced on one side the thick obscurity, and on the other the light, and acted on is soul, in the state in which it then was, as certain chemical reagents act pon a troubled mixture by precipitating one element and clarifying the ther.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.78#First of all, even before examining himself and reflecting, all ewildered, like one who seeks to save himself, he tried to find the child in rder to return his money to him; then, when he recognized the fact that this as impossible, he halted in despair. At the moment when he exclaimed “I am a retch!” he had just perceived what he was, and he was already separated from imself to such a degree, that he seemed to himself to be no longer anything ore than a phantom, and as if he had, there before him, in flesh and blood, the ideous galley-convict, Jean Valjean, cudgel in hand, his blouse on his hips, is knapsack filled with stolen objects on his back, with his resolute and loomy visage, with his thoughts filled with abominable projects.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.79#Excess of unhappiness had, as we have remarked, made him in some sort a isionary. This, then, was in the nature of a vision. He actually saw that Jean aljean, that sinister face, before him. He had almost reached the point of sking himself who that man was, and he was horrified by him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.80#His brain was going through one of those violent and yet perfectly calm oments in which reverie is so profound that it absorbs reality. One no longer eholds the object which one has before one, and one sees, as though apart from ne’s self, the figures which one has in one’s own mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.81#Thus he contemplated himself, so to speak, face to face, and at the same ime, athwart this hallucination, he perceived in a mysterious depth a sort of ight which he at first took for a torch. On scrutinizing this light which ppeared to his conscience with more attention, he recognized the fact that it ossessed a human form and that this torch was the Bishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.82#His conscience weighed in turn these two men thus placed before it,—the ishop and Jean Valjean. Nothing less than the first was required to soften the econd. By one of those singular effects, which are peculiar to this sort of cstasies, in proportion as his reverie continued, as the Bishop grew great and esplendent in his eyes, so did Jean Valjean grow less and vanish. After a ertain time he was no longer anything more than a shade. All at once he isappeared. The Bishop alone remained; he filled the whole soul of this retched man with a magnificent radiance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.83#Jean Valjean wept for a long time. He wept burning tears, he sobbed with ore weakness than a woman, with more fright than a child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.84#As he wept, daylight penetrated more and more clearly into his soul; an xtraordinary light; a light at once ravishing and terrible. His past life, his irst fault, his long expiation, his external brutishness, his internal ardness, his dismissal to liberty, rejoicing in manifold plans of vengeance, hat had happened to him at the Bishop’s, the last thing that he had done, that heft of forty sous from a child, a crime all the more cowardly, and all the ore monstrous since it had come after the Bishop’s pardon,—all this recurred to is mind and appeared clearly to him, but with a clearness which he had never itherto witnessed. He examined his life, and it seemed horrible to him; his oul, and it seemed frightful to him. In the meantime a gentle light rested over his life and this soul. It seemed to him that he beheld Satan by the light of aradise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.2.13.85#How many hours did he weep thus? What did he do after he had wept? Whither id he go! No one ever knew. The only thing which seems to be authenticated is hat that same night the carrier who served Grenoble at that epoch, and who rrived at D—— about three o’clock in the morning, saw, as he traversed the treet in which the Bishop’s residence was situated, a man in the attitude of rayer, kneeling on the pavement in the shadow, in front of the door of onseigneur Welcome.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.head#BOOK THIRD—IN THE YEAR 1817
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE YEAR 1817
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.1.1#1817 is the year which Louis XVIII., with a certain royal assurance which as not wanting in pride, entitled the twenty-second of his reign. It is the ear in which M. Bruguière de Sorsum was celebrated. All the hairdressers’ hops, hoping for powder and the return of the royal bird, were besmeared with zure and decked with fleurs-de-lys. It was the candid time at which Count Lynch at every Sunday as church-warden in the church-warden’s pew of aint-Germain-des-Prés, in his costume of a peer of France, with his red ribbon nd his long nose and the majesty of profile peculiar to a man who has performed brilliant action. The brilliant action performed by M. Lynch was this: being ayor of Bordeaux, on the 12th of March, 1814, he had surrendered the city a ittle too promptly to M. the Duke d’Angoulême. Hence his peerage. In 1817 ashion swallowed up little boys of from four to six years of age in vast caps f morocco leather with ear-tabs resembling Esquimaux mitres. The French army as dressed in white, after the mode of the Austrian; the regiments were called egions; instead of numbers they bore the names of departments; Napoleon was at t. Helena; and since England refused him green cloth, he was having his old oats turned. In 1817 Pelligrini sang; Mademoiselle Bigottini danced; Potier eigned; Odry did not yet exist. Madame Saqui had succeeded to Forioso. There ere still Prussians in France. M. Delalot was a personage. Legitimacy had just sserted itself by cutting off the hand, then the head, of Pleignier, of arbonneau, and of Tolleron. The Prince de Talleyrand, grand chamberlain, and he Abbé Louis, appointed minister of finance, laughed as they looked at each ther, with the laugh of the two augurs; both of them had celebrated, on the 4th of July, 1790, the mass of federation in the Champ de Mars; Talleyrand had aid it as bishop, Louis had served it in the capacity of deacon. In 1817, in he side-alleys of this same Champ de Mars, two great cylinders of wood might ave been seen lying in the rain, rotting amid the grass, painted blue, with races of eagles and bees, from which the gilding was falling. These were the olumns which two years before had upheld the Emperor’s platform in the Champ de ai. They were blackened here and there with the scorches of the bivouac of ustrians encamped near Gros-Caillou. Two or three of these columns had isappeared in these bivouac fires, and had warmed the large hands of the mperial troops. The Field of May had this remarkable point: that it had been eld in the month of June and in the Field of March (Mars). In this year, 1817, wo things were popular: the Voltaire-Touquet and the snuff-box _à la Charter_. he most recent Parisian sensation was the crime of Dautun, who had thrown his rother’s head into the fountain of the Flower-Market.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.1.2#They had begun to feel anxious at the Naval Department, on account of the ack of news from that fatal frigate, _The Medusa_, which was destined to cover haumareix with infamy and Géricault with glory. Colonel Selves was going to gypt to become Soliman-Pasha. The palace of Thermes, in the Rue de La Harpe, erved as a shop for a cooper. On the platform of the octagonal tower of the otel de Cluny, the little shed of boards, which had served as an observatory to essier, the naval astronomer under Louis XVI., was still to be seen. The uchesse de Duras read to three or four friends her unpublished _Ourika_, in her oudoir furnished by X. in sky-blue satin. The N’s were scratched off the ouvre. The bridge of Austerlitz had abdicated, and was entitled the bridge of he King’s Garden [du Jardin du Roi], a double enigma, which disguised the ridge of Austerlitz and the Jardin des Plantes at one stroke. Louis XVIII., uch preoccupied while annotating Horace with the corner of his finger-nail, eroes who have become emperors, and makers of wooden shoes who have become auphins, had two anxieties,—Napoleon and Mathurin Bruneau. The French Academy ad given for its prize subject, _The Happiness procured through Study_. M. ellart was officially eloquent. In his shadow could be seen germinating that uture advocate-general of Broë, dedicated to the sarcasms of Paul-Louis ourier. There was a false Chateaubriand, named Marchangy, in the interim, until here should be a false Marchangy, named d’Arlincourt. _Claire d’Albe_ and Malek-Adel_ were masterpieces; Madame Cottin was proclaimed the chief writer of he epoch. The Institute had the academician, Napoleon Bonaparte, stricken from ts list of members. A royal ordinance erected Angoulême into a naval school; or the Duc d’Angoulême, being lord high admiral, it was evident that the city f Angoulême had all the qualities of a seaport; otherwise the monarchical rinciple would have received a wound. In the Council of Ministers the question as agitated whether vignettes representing slack-rope performances, which dorned Franconi’s advertising posters, and which attracted throngs of street rchins, should be tolerated. M. Paër, the author of _Agnese_, a good sort of ellow, with a square face and a wart on his cheek, directed the little private oncerts of the Marquise de Sasenaye in the Rue Ville l‘Évêque. All the young irls were singing the _Hermit of Saint-Avelle_, with words by Edmond Géraud. The Yellow Dwarf_ was transferred into _Mirror_. The Café Lemblin stood up for he Emperor, against the Café Valois, which upheld the Bourbons. The Duc de erri, already surveyed from the shadow by Louvel, had just been married to a rincess of Sicily. Madame de Staël had died a year previously. The body-guard issed Mademoiselle Mars. The grand newspapers were all very small. Their form as restricted, but their liberty was great. The _Constitutionnel_ was onstitutional. _La Minerve_ called Chateaubriand _Chateaubriant_. That _t_ made he good middle-class people laugh heartily at the expense of the great writer. n journals which sold themselves, prostituted journalists, insulted the exiles f 1815. David had no longer any talent, Arnault had no longer any wit, Carnot as no longer honest, Soult had won no battles; it is true that Napoleon had no onger any genius. No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent to an exile y post very rarely reached him, as the police made it their religious duty to ntercept them. This is no new fact; Descartes complained of it in his exile. ow David, having, in a Belgian publication, shown some displeasure at not eceiving letters which had been written to him, it struck the royalist journals s amusing; and they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion. What eparated two men more than an abyss was to say, the _regicides_, or to say the voters_; to say the _enemies_, or to say the _allies_; to say _Napoleon_, or to ay _Buonaparte_. All sensible people were agreed that the era of revolution had een closed forever by King Louis XVIII., surnamed “The Immortal Author of the harter.” On the platform of the Pont-Neuf, the word _Redivivus_ was carved on he pedestal that awaited the statue of Henry IV. M. Piet, in the Rue Thérèse, o. 4, was making the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate the onarchy. The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures, “We must write to acot.” MM. Canuel, O’Mahoney, and De Chappedelaine were preparing the sketch, o some extent with Monsieur’s approval, of what was to become later on “The onspiracy of the Bord de l‘Eau”—of the waterside. L‘Épingle Noire was already lotting in his own quarter. Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff. M. ecazes, who was liberal to a degree, reigned. Chateaubriand stood every morning t his window at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique, clad in footed trousers, and lippers, with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair, with his eyes fixed n a mirror, a complete set of dentist’s instruments spread out before him, leaning his teeth, which were charming, while he dictated _The Monarchy ccording to the Charter_ to M. Pilorge, his secretary. Criticism, assuming an uthoritative tone, preferred Lafon to Talma. M. de Féletez signed himself A.; . Hoffmann signed himself Z. Charles Nodier wrote _Thérèse Aubert_. Divorce was bolished. Lyceums called themselves colleges. The collegians, decorated on the ollar with a golden fleur-de-lys, fought each other _apropos_ of the King of ome. The counter-police of the château had denounced to her Royal Highness adame, the portrait, everywhere exhibited, of M. the Duc d’Orléans, who made a etter appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of hussars than M. the Duc e Berri, in his uniform of colonel-general of dragoons—a serious inconvenience. he city of Paris was having the dome of the Invalides regilded at its own xpense. Serious men asked themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such r such an occasion; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M. lausel de Coussergues; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied. The comedian Picard, ho belonged to the Academy, which the comedian Molière had not been able to do, ad _The Two Philiberts_ played at the Odéon, upon whose pediment the removal of he letters still allowed THEATRE OF THE EMPRESS to be plainly read. People took art for or against Cugnet de Montarlot. Fabvier was factious; Bavoux was evolutionary. The Liberal, Pélicier, published an edition of Voltaire, with the ollowing title: _Works of Voltaire_, of the French Academy. “That will attract urchasers,” said the ingenious editor. The general opinion was that M. Charles oyson would be the genius of the century; envy was beginning to gnaw at him—a ign of glory; and this verse was composed on him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.1.3#“Even when Loyson steals, one feels that he has paws.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.1.4#As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign, M. de Pins, Archbishop of Amasie, dministered the diocese of Lyons. The quarrel over the valley of Dappes was egun between Switzerland and France by a memoir from Captain, afterwards eneral Dufour. Saint-Simon, ignored, was erecting his sublime dream. There was celebrated Fourier at the Academy of Science, whom posterity has forgotten; nd in some garret an obscure Fourier, whom the future will recall. Lord Byron as beginning to make his mark; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to rance in these terms: _a certain Lord Baron_. David d’Angers was trying to work n marble. The Abbé Caron was speaking, in terms of praise, to a private athering of seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines, of an unknown riest, named Félicité-Robert, who, at a latter date, became Lamennais. A thing hich smoked and clattered on the Seine with the noise of a swimming dog went nd came beneath the windows of the Tuileries, from the Pont Royal to the Pont ouis XV.; it was a piece of mechanism which was not good for much; a sort of laything, the idle dream of a dream-ridden inventor; an utopia—a steamboat. The arisians stared indifferently at this useless thing. M. de Vaublanc, the eformer of the Institute by a coup d‘état, the distinguished author of numerous cademicians, ordinances, and batches of members, after having created them, ould not succeed in becoming one himself. The Faubourg Saint-Germain and the avilion de Marsan wished to have M. Delaveau for prefect of police, on account f his piety. Dupuytren and Récamier entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre f the School of Medicine, and threatened each other with their fists on the ubject of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Cuvier, with one eye on Genesis and the ther on nature, tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils with exts and by making mastodons flatter Moses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.1.5#M. François de Neufchâteau, the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory of armentier, made a thousand efforts to have _pomme de terre_ [potato] pronounced parmentière_, and succeeded therein not at all. The Abbé Grégoire, ex-bishop, x-conventionary, ex-senator, had passed, in the royalist polemics, to the state f “Infamous Grégoire.” The locution of which we have made use—_passed to the tate of_—has been condemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard. Under the third rch of the Pont de Jéna, the new stone with which, the two years previously, he mining aperture made by Blücher to blow up the bridge had been stopped up, as still recognizable on account of its whiteness. Justice summoned to its bar man who, on seeing the Comte d’Artois enter Notre Dame, had said aloud: “Sapristi! I regret the time when I saw Bonaparte and Talma enter the Bel auvage, arm in arm.”_ A seditious utterance. Six months in prison. Traitors howed themselves unbuttoned; men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of attle made no secret of their recompense, and strutted immodestly in the light f day, in the cynicism of riches and dignities; deserters from Ligny and uatre-Bras, in the brazenness of their well-paid turpitude, exhibited their evotion to the monarchy in the most barefaced manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.1.6#This is what floats up confusedly, pell-mell, for the year 1817, and is now orgotten. History neglects nearly all these particulars, and cannot do therwise; the infinity would overwhelm it. Nevertheless, these details, which re wrongly called trivial,—there are no trivial facts in humanity, nor little eaves in vegetation,—are useful. It is of the physiognomy of the years that the hysiognomy of the centuries is composed. In this year of 1817 four young arisians arranged “a fine farce.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.head#CHAPTER II—A DOUBLE QUARTETTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.1#These Parisians came, one from Toulouse, another from Limoges, the third rom Cahors, and the fourth from Montauban; but they were students; and when one ays student, one says Parisian: to study in Paris is to be born in Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.2#These young men were insignificant; every one has seen such faces; four pecimens of humanity taken at random; neither good nor bad, neither wise nor gnorant, neither geniuses nor fools; handsome, with that charming April which s called twenty years. They were four Oscars; for, at that epoch, Arthurs did ot yet exist. _Burn for him the perfumes of Araby!_ exclaimed romance. _Oscar dvances. Oscar, I shall behold him!_ People had just emerged from Ossian; legance was Scandinavian and Caledonian; the pure English style was only to revail later, and the first of the Arthurs, Wellington, had but just won the attle of Waterloo.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.3#These Oscars bore the names, one of Félix Tholomyès, of Toulouse; the econd, Listolier, of Cahors; the next, Fameuil, of Limoges; the last, lachevelle, of Montauban. Naturally, each of them had his mistress. Blachevelle oved Favourite, so named because she had been in England; Listolier adored ahlia, who had taken for her nickname the name of a flower; Fameuil idolized éphine, an abridgment of Joséphine; Tholomyès had Fantine, called the Blonde, ecause of her beautiful, sunny hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.4#Favourite, Dahlia, Zéphine, and Fantine were four ravishing young women, erfumed and radiant, still a little like working-women, and not yet entirely ivorced from their needles; somewhat disturbed by intrigues, but still etaining on their faces something of the serenity of toil, and in their souls hat flower of honesty which survives the first fall in woman. One of the four as called the young, because she was the youngest of them, and one was called he old; the old one was twenty-three. Not to conceal anything, the three first ere more experienced, more heedless, and more emancipated into the tumult of ife than Fantine the Blonde, who was still in her first illusions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.5#Dahlia, Zéphine, and especially Favourite, could not have said as much. here had already been more than one episode in their romance, though hardly egun; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in the first chapter had urned out to be Alphonse in the second, and Gustave in the third. Poverty and oquetry are two fatal counsellors; one scolds and the other flatters, and the eautiful daughters of the people have both of them whispering in their ear, ach on its own side. These badly guarded souls listen. Hence the falls which hey accomplish, and the stones which are thrown at them. They are overwhelmed ith splendor of all that is immaculate and inaccessible. Alas! what if the ungfrau were hungry?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.6#Favourite having been in England, was admired by Dahlia and Zéphine. She ad had an establishment of her own very early in life. Her father was an old nmarried professor of mathematics, a brutal man and a braggart, who went out to ive lessons in spite of his age. This professor, when he was a young man, had ne day seen a chambermaid’s gown catch on a fender; he had fallen in love in onsequence of this accident. The result had been Favourite. She met her father rom time to time, and he bowed to her. One morning an old woman with the air of devotee, had entered her apartments, and had said to her, “You do not know me, amemoiselle?” “No.” “I am your mother.” Then the old woman opened the ideboard, and ate and drank, had a mattress which she owned brought in, and nstalled herself. This cross and pious old mother never spoke to Favourite, emained hours without uttering a word, breakfasted, dined, and supped for four, nd went down to the porter’s quarters for company, where she spoke ill of her aughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.7#It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn Dahlia to istolier, to others perhaps, to idleness. How could she make such nails work? he who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on her hands. As for éphine, she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and caressing little way of aying “Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.8#The young men were comrades; the young girls were friends. Such loves are lways accompanied by such friendships.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.9#Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things; the proof of this is that, fter making all due allowances for these little irregular households, avourite, Zéphine, and Dahlia were philosophical young women, while Fantine was good girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.10#Good! some one will exclaim; and Tholomyès? Solomon would reply that love orms a part of wisdom. We will confine ourselves to saying that the love of antine was a first love, a sole love, a faithful love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.11#She alone, of all the four, was not called “thou” by a single one of hem.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.12#Fantine was one of those beings who blossom, so to speak, from the dregs f the people. Though she had emerged from the most unfathomable depths of ocial shadow, she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymous and the unknown. he was born at M. sur M. Of what parents? Who can say? She had never known ather or mother. She was called Fantine. Why Fantine? She had never borne any ther name. At the epoch of her birth the Directory still existed. She had no amily name; she had no family; no baptismal name; the Church no longer existed. he bore the name which pleased the first random passer-by, who had encountered er, when a very small child, running bare-legged in the street. She received he name as she received the water from the clouds upon her brow when it rained. he was called little Fantine. No one knew more than that. This human creature ad entered life in just this way. At the age of ten, Fantine quitted the town nd went to service with some farmers in the neighborhood. At fifteen she came o Paris “to seek her fortune.” Fantine was beautiful, and remained pure as long s she could. She was a lovely blonde, with fine teeth. She had gold and pearls or her dowry; but her gold was on her head, and her pearls were in her outh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.13#She worked for her living; then, still for the sake of her living,—for the eart, also, has its hunger,—she loved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.14#She loved Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.15#An amour for him; passion for her. The streets of the Latin quarter, illed with throngs of students and grisettes, saw the beginning of their dream. antine had long evaded Tholomyès in the mazes of the hill of the Pantheon, here so many adventurers twine and untwine, but in such a way as constantly to ncounter him again. There is a way of avoiding which resembles seeking. In hort, the eclogue took place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.16#Blachevelle, Listolier, and Fameuil formed a sort of group of which holomyès was the head. It was he who possessed the wit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.17#Tholomyès was the antique old student; he was rich; he had an income of our thousand francs; four thousand francs! a splendid scandal on Mount ainte-Geneviève. Tholomyès was a fast man of thirty, and badly preserved. He as wrinkled and toothless, and he had the beginning of a bald spot, of which he imself said with sadness, _the skull at thirty, the knee at forty_. His igestion was mediocre, and he had been attacked by a watering in one eye. But n proportion as his youth disappeared, gayety was kindled; he replaced his eeth with buffooneries, his hair with mirth, his health with irony, his weeping ye laughed incessantly. He was dilapidated but still in flower. His youth, hich was packing up for departure long before its time, beat a retreat in good rder, bursting with laughter, and no one saw anything but fire. He had had a iece rejected at the Vaudeville. He made a few verses now and then. In addition o this he doubted everything to the last degree, which is a vast force in the yes of the weak. Being thus ironical and bald, he was the leader. _Iron_ is an nglish word. Is it possible that irony is derived from it?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.18#One day Tholomyès took the three others aside, with the gesture of an racle, and said to them:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.19#“Fantine, Dahlia, Zéphine, and Favourite have been teasing us for nearly a ear to give them a surprise. We have promised them solemnly that we would. They re forever talking about it to us, to me in particular, just as the old women n Naples cry to Saint Januarius, ‘_Faccia gialluta, fa o miracolo_, Yellow ace, perform thy miracle,’ so our beauties say to me incessantly, ‘Tholomyès, hen will you bring forth your surprise?’ At the same time our parents keep riting to us. Pressure on both sides. The moment has arrived, it seems to me; et us discuss the question.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.20#Thereupon, Tholomyès lowered his voice and articulated something so irthful, that a vast and enthusiastic grin broke out upon the four mouths imultaneously, and Blachevelle exclaimed, “That is an idea.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.21#A smoky tap-room presented itself; they entered, and the remainder of heir confidential colloquy was lost in shadow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.2.22#The result of these shades was a dazzling pleasure party which took place n the following Sunday, the four young men inviting the four young girls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.head#CHAPTER III—FOUR AND FOUR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.1#It is hard nowadays to picture to one’s self what a pleasure-trip of tudents and grisettes to the country was like, forty-five years ago. The uburbs of Paris are no longer the same; the physiognomy of what may be called ircumparisian life has changed completely in the last half-century; where there as the cuckoo, there is the railway car; where there was a tender-boat, there s now the steamboat; people speak of Fécamp nowadays as they spoke of aint-Cloud in those days. The Paris of 1862 is a city which has France for its utskirts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.2#The four couples conscientiously went through with all the country follies ossible at that time. The vacation was beginning, and it was a warm, bright, ummer day. On the preceding day, Favourite, the only one who knew how to write, ad written the following to Tholomyès in the name of the four: “It is a good our to emerge from happiness.” That is why they rose at five o’clock in the orning. Then they went to Saint-Cloud by the coach, looked at the dry cascade nd exclaimed, “This must be very beautiful when there is water!” They reakfasted at the _Tête-Noir_, where Castaing had not yet been; they treated hemselves to a game of ring-throwing under the quincunx of trees of the grand ountain; they ascended Diogenes’ lantern, they gambled for macaroons at the oulette establishment of the Pont de Sèvres, picked bouquets at Pateaux, bought eed-pipes at Neuilly, ate apple tarts everywhere, and were perfectly happy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.3#The young girls rustled and chatted like warblers escaped from their cage. t was a perfect delirium. From time to time they bestowed little taps on the oung men. Matutinal intoxication of life! adorable years! the wings of the ragonfly quiver. Oh, whoever you may be, do you not remember? Have you rambled hrough the brushwood, holding aside the branches, on account of the charming ead which is coming on behind you? Have you slid, laughing, down a slope all et with rain, with a beloved woman holding your hand, and crying, “Ah, my new oots! what a state they are in!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.4#Let us say at once that that merry obstacle, a shower, was lacking in the ase of this good-humored party, although Favourite had said as they set out, ith a magisterial and maternal tone, _“The slugs are crawling in the paths,—a ign of rain, children.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.5#All four were madly pretty. A good old classic poet, then famous, a good ellow who had an Éléonore, M. le Chevalier de Labouisse, as he strolled that ay beneath the chestnut-trees of Saint-Cloud, saw them pass about ten o’clock n the morning, and exclaimed, “There is one too many of them,” as he thought of he Graces. Favourite, Blachevelle’s friend, the one aged three and twenty, the ld one, ran on in front under the great green boughs, jumped the ditches, talked distractedly over bushes, and presided over this merry-making with the pirit of a young female faun. Zéphine and Dahlia, whom chance had made eautiful in such a way that they set each off when they were together, and ompleted each other, never left each other, more from an instinct of coquetry han from friendship, and clinging to each other, they assumed English poses; he first _keepsakes_ had just made their appearance, melancholy was dawning for omen, as later on, Byronism dawned for men; and the hair of the tender sex egan to droop dolefully. Zéphine and Dahlia had their hair dressed in rolls. istolier and Fameuil, who were engaged in discussing their professors, xplained to Fantine the difference that existed between M. Delvincourt and M. londeau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.6#Blachevelle seemed to have been created expressly to carry Favourite’s ingle-bordered, imitation India shawl of Ternaux’s manufacture, on his arm on undays.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.7#Tholomyès followed, dominating the group. He was very gay, but one felt the orce of government in him; there was dictation in his joviality; his principal rnament was a pair of trousers of elephant-leg pattern of nankeen, with straps f braided copper wire; he carried a stout rattan worth two hundred francs in is hand, and, as he treated himself to everything, a strange thing called a igar in his mouth. Nothing was sacred to him; he smoked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.8#“That Tholomyès is astounding!” said the others, with veneration. “What rousers! What energy!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.9#As for Fantine, she was a joy to behold. Her splendid teeth had evidently eceived an office from God,—laughter. She preferred to carry her little hat of ewed straw, with its long white strings, in her hand rather than on her head. er thick blond hair, which was inclined to wave, and which easily uncoiled, and hich it was necessary to fasten up incessantly, seemed made for the flight of alatea under the willows. Her rosy lips babbled enchantingly. The corners of er mouth voluptuously turned up, as in the antique masks of Erigone, had an air f encouraging the audacious; but her long, shadowy lashes drooped discreetly ver the jollity of the lower part of the face as though to call a halt. There as something indescribably harmonious and striking about her entire dress. She ore a gown of mauve barège, little reddish brown buskins, whose ribbons traced n X on her fine, white, open-worked stockings, and that sort of muslin spencer, Marseilles invention, whose name, _canezou_, a corruption of the words _quinze oût_, pronounced after the fashion of the Canebière, signifies fine weather, eat, and midday. The three others, less timid, as we have already said, wore ow-necked dresses without disguise, which in summer, beneath flower-adorned ats, are very graceful and enticing; but by the side of these audacious utfits, blond Fantine’s _canezou_, with its transparencies, its indiscretion, nd its reticence, concealing and displaying at one and the same time, seemed an lluring godsend of decency, and the famous Court of Love, presided over by the icomtesse de Cette, with the sea-green eyes, would, perhaps, have awarded the rize for coquetry to this _canezou_, in the contest for the prize of modesty. he most ingenious is, at times, the wisest. This does happen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.10#Brilliant of face, delicate of profile, with eyes of a deep blue, heavy ids, feet arched and small, wrists and ankles admirably formed, a white skin hich, here and there allowed the azure branching of the veins to be seen, joy, cheek that was young and fresh, the robust throat of the Juno of Ægina, a trong and supple nape of the neck, shoulders modelled as though by Coustou, ith a voluptuous dimple in the middle, visible through the muslin; a gayety ooled by dreaminess; sculptural and exquisite—such was Fantine; and beneath hese feminine adornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue, and in hat statue a soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.11#Fantine was beautiful, without being too conscious of it. Those rare reamers, mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confront everything ith perfection, would have caught a glimpse in this little working-woman, hrough the transparency of her Parisian grace, of the ancient sacred euphony. his daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred. She was beautiful in the two ays—style and rhythm. Style is the form of the ideal; rhythm is its ovement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.12#We have said that Fantine was joy; she was also modesty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.13#To an observer who studied her attentively, that which breathed from her thwart all the intoxication of her age, the season, and her love affair, was an nvincible expression of reserve and modesty. She remained a little astonished. his chaste astonishment is the shade of difference which separates Psyche from enus. Fantine had the long, white, fine fingers of the vestal virgin who stirs he ashes of the sacred fire with a golden pin. Although she would have refused othing to Tholomyès, as we shall have more than ample opportunity to see, her ace in repose was supremely virginal; a sort of serious and almost austere ignity suddenly overwhelmed her at certain times, and there was nothing more ingular and disturbing than to see gayety become so suddenly extinct there, and editation succeed to cheerfulness without any transition state. This sudden and ometimes severely accentuated gravity resembled the disdain of a goddess. Her row, her nose, her chin, presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite istinct from equilibrium of proportion, and from which harmony of countenance esults; in the very characteristic interval which separates the base of the ose from the upper lip, she had that imperceptible and charming fold, a ysterious sign of chastity, which makes Barberousse fall in love with a Diana ound in the treasures of Iconia.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.3.14#Love is a fault; so be it. Fantine was innocence floating high over ault.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THOLOMYÈS IS SO MERRY THAT HE SINGS A SPANISH DITTY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.1#That day was composed of dawn, from one end to the other. All nature seemed o be having a holiday, and to be laughing. The flower-beds of Saint-Cloud erfumed the air; the breath of the Seine rustled the leaves vaguely; the ranches gesticulated in the wind, bees pillaged the jasmines; a whole bohemia f butterflies swooped down upon the yarrow, the clover, and the sterile oats; n the august park of the King of France there was a pack of vagabonds, the irds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.2#The four merry couples, mingled with the sun, the fields, the flowers, the rees, were resplendent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.3#And in this community of Paradise, talking, singing, running, dancing, hasing butterflies, plucking convolvulus, wetting their pink, open-work tockings in the tall grass, fresh, wild, without malice, all received, to some xtent, the kisses of all, with the exception of Fantine, who was hedged about ith that vague resistance of hers composed of dreaminess and wildness, and who as in love. “You always have a queer look about you,” said Favourite to er.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.4#Such things are joys. These passages of happy couples are a profound appeal o life and nature, and make a caress and light spring forth from everything. here was once a fairy who created the fields and forests expressly for those in ove,—in that eternal hedge-school of lovers, which is forever beginning anew, nd which will last as long as there are hedges and scholars. Hence the opularity of spring among thinkers. The patrician and the knife-grinder, the uke and the peer, the limb of the law, the courtiers and townspeople, as they sed to say in olden times, all are subjects of this fairy. They laugh and hunt, nd there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis—what a transfiguration ffected by love! Notaries’ clerks are gods. And the little cries, the pursuits hrough the grass, the waists embraced on the fly, those jargons which are elodies, those adorations which burst forth in the manner of pronouncing a yllable, those cherries torn from one mouth by another,—all this blazes forth nd takes its place among the celestial glories. Beautiful women waste hemselves sweetly. They think that this will never come to an end. hilosophers, poets, painters, observe these ecstasies and know not what to make f it, so greatly are they dazzled by it. The departure for Cythera! exclaims atteau; Lancret, the painter of plebeians, contemplates his bourgeois, who have litted away into the azure sky; Diderot stretches out his arms to all these ove idyls, and d’Urfé mingles druids with them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.5#After breakfast the four couples went to what was then called the King’s quare to see a newly arrived plant from India, whose name escapes our memory at his moment, and which, at that epoch, was attracting all Paris to Saint-Cloud. t was an odd and charming shrub with a long stem, whose numerous branches, ristling and leafless and as fine as threads, were covered with a million tiny hite rosettes; this gave the shrub the air of a head of hair studded with lowers. There was always an admiring crowd about it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.6#After viewing the shrub, Tholomyès exclaimed, “I offer you asses!” and aving agreed upon a price with the owner of the asses, they returned by way of anvres and Issy. At Issy an incident occurred. The truly national park, at that ime owned by Bourguin the contractor, happened to be wide open. They passed the ates, visited the manikin anchorite in his grotto, tried the mysterious little ffects of the famous cabinet of mirrors, the wanton trap worthy of a satyr ecome a millionaire or of Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus. They had toutly shaken the swing attached to the two chestnut-trees celebrated by the bbé de Bernis. As he swung these beauties, one after the other, producing folds n the fluttering skirts which Greuze would have found to his taste, amid peals f laughter, the Toulousan Tholomyès, who was somewhat of a Spaniard, Toulouse eing the cousin of Tolosa, sang, to a melancholy chant, the old ballad gallega_, probably inspired by some lovely maid dashing in full flight upon a ope between two trees:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.7#“Soy de Badajoz, “Badajoz is my home, Amor me llama, And Love is my name; oda mi alma, To my eyes in flame, Es en mi ojos, All my soul doth come; Porque nseñas, For instruction meet A tuas piernas. I receive at thy feet”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.8#Fantine alone refused to swing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.9#“I don’t like to have people put on airs like that,” muttered Favourite, ith a good deal of acrimony.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.10#After leaving the asses there was a fresh delight; they crossed the Seine n a boat, and proceeding from Passy on foot they reached the barrier of ‘Étoile. They had been up since five o’clock that morning, as the reader will emember; but _bah! there is no such thing as fatigue on Sunday_, said avourite; _on Sunday fatigue does not work_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.11#About three o’clock the four couples, frightened at their happiness, were liding down the Russian mountains, a singular edifice which then occupied the eights of Beaujon, and whose undulating line was visible above the trees of the hamps-Élysées.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.12#From time to time Favourite exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.13#“And the surprise? I claim the surprise.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.4.14#“Patience,” replied Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.head#CHAPTER V—AT BOMBARDA’S
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.1#The Russian mountains having been exhausted, they began to think about inner; and the radiant party of eight, somewhat weary at last, became stranded n Bombarda’s public house, a branch establishment which had been set up in the hamps-Élysées by that famous restaurant-keeper, Bombarda, whose sign could then e seen in the Rue de Rivoli, near Delorme Alley.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.2#A large but ugly room, with an alcove and a bed at the end (they had been bliged to put up with this accommodation in view of the Sunday crowd); two indows whence they could survey beyond the elms, the quay and the river; a agnificent August sunlight lightly touching the panes; two tables; upon one of hem a triumphant mountain of bouquets, mingled with the hats of men and women; t the other the four couples seated round a merry confusion of platters, ishes, glasses, and bottles; jugs of beer mingled with flasks of wine; very ittle order on the table, some disorder beneath it;
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.3#“They made beneath the table A noise, a clatter of the feet that was bominable,”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.4#says Molière.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.5#This was the state which the shepherd idyl, begun at five o’clock in the orning, had reached at half-past four in the afternoon. The sun was setting; heir appetites were satisfied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.6#The Champs-Élysées, filled with sunshine and with people, were nothing but ight and dust, the two things of which glory is composed. The horses of Marly, hose neighing marbles, were prancing in a cloud of gold. Carriages were going nd coming. A squadron of magnificent body-guards, with their clarions at their ead, were descending the Avenue de Neuilly; the white flag, showing faintly osy in the setting sun, floated over the dome of the Tuileries. The Place de la oncorde, which had become the Place Louis XV. once more, was choked with happy romenaders. Many wore the silver fleur-de-lys suspended from the white-watered ibbon, which had not yet wholly disappeared from button-holes in the year 1817. ere and there choruses of little girls threw to the winds, amid the passers-by, ho formed into circles and applauded, the then celebrated Bourbon air, which as destined to strike the Hundred Days with lightning, and which had for its efrain:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.7#“Rendez-nous notre père de Gand, Rendez-nous notre père.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.8#“Give us back our father from Ghent, Give us back our father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.9#Groups of dwellers in the suburbs, in Sunday array, sometimes even ecorated with the fleur-de-lys, like the bourgeois, scattered over the large quare and the Marigny square, were playing at rings and revolving on the wooden orses; others were engaged in drinking; some journeyman printers had on paper aps; their laughter was audible. Everything was radiant. It was a time of ndisputed peace and profound royalist security; it was the epoch when a special nd private report of Chief of Police Anglès to the King, on the subject of the uburbs of Paris, terminated with these lines:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.10#“Taking all things into consideration, Sire, there is nothing to be feared rom these people. They are as heedless and as indolent as cats. The populace is estless in the provinces; it is not in Paris. These are very pretty men, Sire. t would take all of two of them to make one of your grenadiers. There is othing to be feared on the part of the populace of Paris the capital. It is emarkable that the stature of this population should have diminished in the ast fifty years; and the populace of the suburbs is still more puny than at the ime of the Revolution. It is not dangerous. In short, it is an amiable abble.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.11#Prefects of the police do not deem it possible that a cat can transform tself into a lion; that does happen, however, and in that lies the miracle rought by the populace of Paris. Moreover, the cat so despised by Count Anglès ossessed the esteem of the republics of old. In their eyes it was liberty ncarnate; and as though to serve as pendant to the Minerva Aptera of the iræus, there stood on the public square in Corinth the colossal bronze figure f a cat. The ingenuous police of the Restoration beheld the populace of Paris n too “rose-colored” a light; it is not so much of “an amiable rabble” as it is hought. The Parisian is to the Frenchman what the Athenian was to the Greek: no ne sleeps more soundly than he, no one is more frankly frivolous and lazy than e, no one can better assume the air of forgetfulness; let him not be trusted evertheless; he is ready for any sort of cool deed; but when there is glory at he end of it, he is worthy of admiration in every sort of fury. Give him a ike, he will produce the 10th of August; give him a gun, you will have usterlitz. He is Napoleon’s stay and Danton’s resource. Is it a question of ountry, he enlists; is it a question of liberty, he tears up the pavements. eware! his hair filled with wrath, is epic; his blouse drapes itself like the olds of a chlamys. Take care! he will make of the first Rue Grenétat which omes to hand Caudine Forks. When the hour strikes, this man of the faubourgs ill grow in stature; this little man will arise, and his gaze will be terrible, nd his breath will become a tempest, and there will issue forth from that lender chest enough wind to disarrange the folds of the Alps. It is, thanks to he suburban man of Paris, that the Revolution, mixed with arms, conquers urope. He sings; it is his delight. Proportion his song to his nature, and you ill see! As long as he has for refrain nothing but _la Carmagnole_, he only verthrows Louis XVI.; make him sing the _Marseillaise_, and he will free the orld.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.5.12#This note jotted down on the margin of Anglès’ report, we will return to ur four couples. The dinner, as we have said, was drawing to its close.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.head#CHAPTER VI—A CHAPTER IN WHICH THEY ADORE EACH OTHER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.1#Chat at table, the chat of love; it is as impossible to reproduce one as he other; the chat of love is a cloud; the chat at table is smoke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.2#Fameuil and Dahlia were humming. Tholomyès was drinking. Zéphine was aughing, Fantine smiling, Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he had urchased at Saint-Cloud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.3#Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.4#“Blachevelle, I adore you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.5#This called forth a question from Blachevelle:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.6#“What would you do, Favourite, if I were to cease to love you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.7#“I!” cried Favourite. “Ah! Do not say that even in jest! If you were to ease to love me, I would spring after you, I would scratch you, I should rend ou, I would throw you into the water, I would have you arrested.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.8#Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is tickled n his self-love. Favourite resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.9#“Yes, I would scream to the police! Ah! I should not restrain myself, not t all! Rabble!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.10#Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair, in an ecstasy, and closed oth eyes proudly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.11#Dahlia, as she ate, said in a low voice to Favourite, amid the proar:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.12#“So you really idolize him deeply, that Blachevelle of yours?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.13#“I? I detest him,” replied Favourite in the same tone, seizing her fork gain. “He is avaricious. I love the little fellow opposite me in my house. He s very nice, that young man; do you know him? One can see that he is an actor y profession. I love actors. As soon as he comes in, his mother says to him: Ah! mon Dieu! my peace of mind is gone. There he goes with his shouting. But, y dear, you are splitting my head!’ So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets, to lack holes, as high as he can mount, and there he sets to singing, declaiming, ow do I know what? so that he can be heard downstairs! He earns twenty sous a ay at an attorney’s by penning quibbles. He is the son of a former precentor of aint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas. Ah! he is very nice. He idolizes me so, that one day hen he saw me making batter for some pancakes, he said to me: _‘Mamselle, make our gloves into fritters, and I will eat them.’_ It is only artists who can say uch things as that. Ah! he is very nice. I am in a fair way to go out of my ead over that little fellow. Never mind; I tell Blachevelle that I adore im—how I lie! Hey! How I do lie!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.14#Favourite paused, and then went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.6.15#“I am sad, you see, Dahlia. It has done nothing but rain all summer; the ind irritates me; the wind does not abate. Blachevelle is very stingy; there re hardly any green peas in the market; one does not know what to eat. I have he spleen, as the English say, butter is so dear! and then you see it is orrible, here we are dining in a room with a bed in it, and that disgusts me ith life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE WISDOM OF THOLOMYÈS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.1#In the meantime, while some sang, the rest talked together tumultuously all t once; it was no longer anything but noise. Tholomyès intervened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.2#“Let us not talk at random nor too fast,” he exclaimed. “Let us reflect, if e wish to be brilliant. Too much improvisation empties the mind in a stupid ay. Running beer gathers no froth. No haste, gentlemen. Let us mingle majesty ith the feast. Let us eat with meditation; let us make haste slowly. Let us not urry. Consider the springtime; if it makes haste, it is done for; that is to ay, it gets frozen. Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees. Excess f zeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners. No zeal, gentlemen! rimod de la Reynière agrees with Talleyrand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.3#A hollow sound of rebellion rumbled through the group.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.4#“Leave us in peace, Tholomyès,” said Blachevelle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.5#“Down with the tyrant!” said Fameuil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.6#“Bombarda, Bombance, and Bambochel!” cried Listolier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.7#“Sunday exists,” resumed Fameuil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.8#“We are sober,” added Listolier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.9#“Tholomyès,” remarked Blachevelle, “contemplate my calmness [_mon alme_].”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.10#“You are the Marquis of that,” retorted Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.11#This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool. he Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist. All the frogs eld their peace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.12#“Friends,” cried Tholomyès, with the accent of a man who had recovered his mpire, “Come to yourselves. This pun which has fallen from the skies must not e received with too much stupor. Everything which falls in that way is not ecessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect. The pun is the dung of the mind hich soars. The jest falls, no matter where; and the mind after producing a iece of stupidity plunges into the azure depths. A whitish speck flattened gainst the rock does not prevent the condor from soaring aloft. Far be it from e to insult the pun! I honor it in proportion to its merits; nothing more. All he most august, the most sublime, the most charming of humanity, and perhaps utside of humanity, have made puns. Jesus Christ made a pun on St. Peter, Moses n Isaac, Æschylus on Polynices, Cleopatra on Octavius. And observe that leopatra’s pun preceded the battle of Actium, and that had it not been for it, o one would have remembered the city of Toryne, a Greek name which signifies a adle. That once conceded, I return to my exhortation. I repeat, brothers, I epeat, no zeal, no hubbub, no excess; even in witticisms, gayety, jollities, or lays on words. Listen to me. I have the prudence of Amphiaraüs and the baldness f Cæsar. There must be a limit, even to rebuses. _Est modus in rebus_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.13#“There must be a limit, even to dinners. You are fond of apple turnovers, adies; do not indulge in them to excess. Even in the matter of turnovers, good ense and art are requisite. Gluttony chastises the glutton, _Gula punit Gulax_. ndigestion is charged by the good God with preaching morality to stomachs. And emember this: each one of our passions, even love, has a stomach which must not e filled too full. In all things the word _finis_ must be written in good eason; self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent; the bolt ust be drawn on appetite; one must set one’s own fantasy to the violin, and arry one’s self to the post. The sage is the man who knows how, at a given oment, to effect his own arrest. Have some confidence in me, for I have ucceeded to some extent in my study of the law, according to the verdict of my xaminations, for I know the difference between the question put and the uestion pending, for I have sustained a thesis in Latin upon the manner in hich torture was administered at Rome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was uæstor of the Parricide; because I am going to be a doctor, apparently it does ot follow that it is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile. I ecommend you to moderation in your desires. It is true that my name is Félix holomyès; I speak well. Happy is he who, when the hour strikes, takes a heroic esolve, and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.14#Favourite listened with profound attention.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.15#“Félix,” said she, “what a pretty word! I love that name. It is Latin; it eans prosper.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.16#Tholomyès went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.17#“Quirites, gentlemen, caballeros, my friends. Do you wish never to feel he prick, to do without the nuptial bed, and to brave love? Nothing more imple. Here is the receipt: lemonade, excessive exercise, hard labor; work ourself to death, drag blocks, sleep not, hold vigil, gorge yourself with itrous beverages, and potions of nymphæas; drink emulsions of poppies and agnus astus; season this with a strict diet, starve yourself, and add thereto cold aths, girdles of herbs, the application of a plate of lead, lotions made with he subacetate of lead, and fomentations of oxycrat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.18#“I prefer a woman,” said Listolier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.19#“Woman,” resumed Tholomyès; “distrust her. Woe to him who yields himself o the unstable heart of woman! Woman is perfidious and disingenuous. She etests the serpent from professional jealousy. The serpent is the shop over the ay.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.20#“Tholomyès!” cried Blachevelle, “you are drunk!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.21#“Pardieu,” said Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.22#“Then be gay,” resumed Blachevelle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.23#“I agree to that,” responded Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.24#And, refilling his glass, he rose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.25#“Glory to wine! _Nunc te, Bacche, canam!_ Pardon me ladies; that is panish. And the proof of it, señoras, is this: like people, like cask. The rrobe of Castille contains sixteen litres; the cantaro of Alicante, twelve; the lmude of the Canaries, twenty-five; the cuartin of the Balearic Isles, wenty-six; the boot of Tzar Peter, thirty. Long live that Tzar who was great, nd long live his boot, which was still greater! Ladies, take the advice of a riend; make a mistake in your neighbor if you see fit. The property of love is o err. A love affair is not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an nglish serving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing. It is not ade for that; it errs gayly, our gentle love. It has been said, error is human; say, error is love. Ladies, I idolize you all. O Zéphine, O Joséphine, face ore than irregular, you would be charming were you not all askew. You have the ir of a pretty face upon which some one has sat down by mistake. As for avourite, O nymphs and muses! one day when Blachevelle was crossing the gutter n the Rue Guérin-Boisseau, he espied a beautiful girl with white stockings well rawn up, which displayed her legs. This prologue pleased him, and Blachevelle ell in love. The one he loved was Favourite. O Favourite, thou hast Ionian ips. There was a Greek painter named Euphorion, who was surnamed the painter of he lips. That Greek alone would have been worthy to paint thy mouth. Listen! efore thee, there was never a creature worthy of the name. Thou wert made to eceive the apple like Venus, or to eat it like Eve; beauty begins with thee. I ave just referred to Eve; it is thou who hast created her. Thou deservest the etters-patent of the beautiful woman. O Favourite, I cease to address you as thou,’ because I pass from poetry to prose. You were speaking of my name a ittle while ago. That touched me; but let us, whoever we may be, distrust ames. They may delude us. I am called Félix, and I am not happy. Words are iars. Let us not blindly accept the indications which they afford us. It would e a mistake to write to Liège 2 for corks, and to Pau for gloves. Miss Dahlia, ere I in your place, I would call myself Rosa. A flower should smell sweet, and oman should have wit. I say nothing of Fantine; she is a dreamer, a musing, houghtful, pensive person; she is a phantom possessed of the form of a nymph nd the modesty of a nun, who has strayed into the life of a grisette, but who akes refuge in illusions, and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure ithout very well knowing what she sees or what she is doing, and who, with her yes fixed on heaven, wanders in a garden where there are more birds than are in xistence. O Fantine, know this: I, Tholomyès, I am an illusion; but she does ot even hear me, that blond maid of Chimeras! as for the rest, everything about er is freshness, suavity, youth, sweet morning light. O Fantine, maid worthy of eing called Marguerite or Pearl, you are a woman from the beauteous Orient. adies, a second piece of advice: do not marry; marriage is a graft; it takes ell or ill; avoid that risk. But bah! what am I saying? I am wasting my words. irls are incurable on the subject of marriage, and all that we wise men can say ill not prevent the waistcoat-makers and the shoe-stitchers from dreaming of usbands studded with diamonds. Well, so be it; but, my beauties, remember this, ou eat too much sugar. You have but one fault, O woman, and that is nibbling ugar. O nibbling sex, your pretty little white teeth adore sugar. Now, heed me ell, sugar is a salt. All salts are withering. Sugar is the most desiccating of ll salts; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins; hence the oagulation, and then the solidification of the blood; hence tubercles in the ungs, hence death. That is why diabetes borders on consumption. Then, do not runch sugar, and you will live. I turn to the men: gentlemen, make conquest, ob each other of your well-beloved without remorse. Chassez across. In love here are no friends. Everywhere where there is a pretty woman hostility is pen. No quarter, war to the death! a pretty woman is a _casus belli_; a pretty oman is flagrant misdemeanor. All the invasions of history have been determined y petticoats. Woman is man’s right. Romulus carried off the Sabines; William arried off the Saxon women; Cæsar carried off the Roman women. The man who is ot loved soars like a vulture over the mistresses of other men; and for my own art, to all those unfortunate men who are widowers, I throw the sublime roclamation of Bonaparte to the army of Italy: “Soldiers, you are in need of verything; the enemy has it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.26#Tholomyès paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.27#“Take breath, Tholomyès,” said Blachevelle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.28#At the same moment Blachevelle, supported by Listolier and Fameuil, struck p to a plaintive air, one of those studio songs composed of the first words hich come to hand, rhymed richly and not at all, as destitute of sense as the esture of the tree and the sound of the wind, which have their birth in the apor of pipes, and are dissipated and take their flight with them. This is the ouplet by which the group replied to Tholomyès’ harangue:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.29#“The father turkey-cocks so grave Some money to an agent gave, That master ood Clermont-Tonnerre Might be made pope on Saint Johns’ day fair. But this ood Clermont could not be Made pope, because no priest was he; And then their gent, whose wrath burned, With all their money back returned.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.30#This was not calculated to calm Tholomyès’ improvisation; he emptied his lass, filled, refilled it, and began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.31#“Down with wisdom! Forget all that I have said. Let us be neither prudes or prudent men nor prudhommes. I propose a toast to mirth; be merry. Let us omplete our course of law by folly and eating! Indigestion and the digest. Let ustinian be the male, and Feasting, the female! Joy in the depths! Live, O reation! The world is a great diamond. I am happy. The birds are astonishing. hat a festival everywhere! The nightingale is a gratuitous Elleviou. Summer, I alute thee! O Luxembourg! O Georgics of the Rue Madame, and of the Allée de ’Observatoire! O pensive infantry soldiers! O all those charming nurses who, hile they guard the children, amuse themselves! The pampas of America would lease me if I had not the arcades of the Odéon. My soul flits away into the irgin forests and to the savannas. All is beautiful. The flies buzz in the sun. he sun has sneezed out the humming bird. Embrace me, Fantine!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.7.32#He made a mistake and embraced Favourite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE DEATH OF A HORSE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.1#“The dinners are better at Édon’s than at Bombarda’s,” exclaimed éphine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.2#“I prefer Bombarda to Édon,” declared Blachevelle. “There is more luxury. t is more Asiatic. Look at the room downstairs; there are mirrors [_glaces_] on he walls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.3#“I prefer them [_glaces_, ices] on my plate,” said Favourite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.4#Blachevelle persisted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.5#“Look at the knives. The handles are of silver at Bombarda’s and of bone at don’s. Now, silver is more valuable than bone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.6#“Except for those who have a silver chin,” observed Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.7#He was looking at the dome of the Invalides, which was visible from ombarda’s windows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.8#A pause ensued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.9#“Tholomyès,” exclaimed Fameuil, “Listolier and I were having a discussion ust now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.10#“A discussion is a good thing,” replied Tholomyès; “a quarrel is etter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.11#“We were disputing about philosophy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.12#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.13#“Which do you prefer, Descartes or Spinoza?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.14#“Désaugiers,” said Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.15#This decree pronounced, he took a drink, and went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.16#“I consent to live. All is not at an end on earth since we can still talk onsense. For that I return thanks to the immortal gods. We lie. One lies, but ne laughs. One affirms, but one doubts. The unexpected bursts forth from the yllogism. That is fine. There are still human beings here below who know how to pen and close the surprise box of the paradox merrily. This, ladies, which you re drinking with so tranquil an air is Madeira wine, you must know, from the ineyard of Coural das Freiras, which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms bove the level of the sea. Attention while you drink! three hundred and eventeen fathoms! and Monsieur Bombarda, the magnificent eating-house keeper, ives you those three hundred and seventeen fathoms for four francs and fifty entimes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.17#Again Fameuil interrupted him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.18#“Tholomyès, your opinions fix the law. Who is your favorite author?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.19#“Ber—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.20#“Quin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.21#“No; Choux.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.22#And Tholomyès continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.23#“Honor to Bombarda! He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he could but et me an Indian dancing-girl, and Thygelion of Chæronea if he could bring me a reek courtesan; for, oh, ladies! there were Bombardas in Greece and in Egypt. puleius tells us of them. Alas! always the same, and nothing new; nothing more npublished by the creator in creation! _Nil sub sole novum_, says Solomon; amor omnibus idem_, says Virgil; and Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark t Saint-Cloud, as Aspasia embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos. One ast word. Do you know what Aspasia was, ladies? Although she lived at an epoch hen women had, as yet, no soul, she was a soul; a soul of a rosy and purple ue, more ardent hued than fire, fresher than the dawn. Aspasia was a creature n whom two extremes of womanhood met; she was the goddess prostitute; Socrates lus Manon Lescaut. Aspasia was created in case a mistress should be needed for rometheus.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.24#Tholomyès, once started, would have found some difficulty in stopping, had ot a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment. The shock caused the art and the orator to come to a dead halt. It was a Beauceron mare, old and hin, and one fit for the knacker, which was dragging a very heavy cart. On rriving in front of Bombarda’s, the worn-out, exhausted beast had refused to roceed any further. This incident attracted a crowd. Hardly had the cursing and ndignant carter had time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word, Mâtin_ (the jade), backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip, when the jade ell, never to rise again. On hearing the hubbub made by the passers-by, holomyès’ merry auditors turned their heads, and Tholomyès took advantage of he opportunity to bring his allocution to a close with this melancholy trophe:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.25#“Elle était de ce monde ou coucous et carrosses Ont le même destin; Et, osse, elle a vécu ce que vivant les rosses, L’espace d’un mâtin!” 3
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.26#“Poor horse!” sighed Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.27#And Dahlia exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.28#“There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses. How can one be such pitiful fool as that!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.29#At that moment Favourite, folding her arms and throwing her head back, ooked resolutely at Tholomyès and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.30#“Come, now! the surprise?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.31#“Exactly. The moment has arrived,” replied Tholomyès. “Gentlemen, the hour or giving these ladies a surprise has struck. Wait for us a moment, adies.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.32#“It begins with a kiss,” said Blachevelle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.33#“On the brow,” added Tholomyès.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.34#Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress’s brow; then all four filed ut through the door, with their fingers on their lips.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.35#Favourite clapped her hands on their departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.36#“It is beginning to be amusing already,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.8.37#“Don’t be too long,” murmured Fantine; “we are waiting for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.head#CHAPTER IX—A MERRY END TO MIRTH
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.1#When the young girls were left alone, they leaned two by two on the indow-sills, chatting, craning out their heads, and talking from one window to he other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.2#They saw the young men emerge from the Café Bombarda arm in arm. The latter urned round, made signs to them, smiled, and disappeared in that dusty Sunday hrong which makes a weekly invasion into the Champs-Élysées.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.3#“Don’t be long!” cried Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.4#“What are they going to bring us?” said Zéphine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.5#“It will certainly be something pretty,” said Dahlia.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.6#“For my part,” said Favourite, “I want it to be of gold.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.7#Their attention was soon distracted by the movements on the shore of the ake, which they could see through the branches of the large trees, and which iverted them greatly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.8#It was the hour for the departure of the mail-coaches and diligences. early all the stage-coaches for the south and west passed through the hamps-Élysées. The majority followed the quay and went through the Passy arrier. From moment to moment, some huge vehicle, painted yellow and black, eavily loaded, noisily harnessed, rendered shapeless by trunks, tarpaulins, and alises, full of heads which immediately disappeared, rushed through the crowd ith all the sparks of a forge, with dust for smoke, and an air of fury, rinding the pavements, changing all the paving-stones into steels. This uproar elighted the young girls. Favourite exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.9#“What a row! One would say that it was a pile of chains flying away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.10#It chanced that one of these vehicles, which they could only see with ifficulty through the thick elms, halted for a moment, then set out again at a allop. This surprised Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.11#“That’s odd!” said she. “I thought the diligence never stopped.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.12#Favourite shrugged her shoulders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.13#“This Fantine is surprising. I am coming to take a look at her out of uriosity. She is dazzled by the simplest things. Suppose a case: I am a raveller; I say to the diligence, ‘I will go on in advance; you shall pick me p on the quay as you pass.’ The diligence passes, sees me, halts, and takes me. hat is done every day. You do not know life, my dear.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.14#In this manner a certain time elapsed. All at once Favourite made a ovement, like a person who is just waking up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.15#“Well,” said she, “and the surprise?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.16#“Yes, by the way,” joined in Dahlia, “the famous surprise?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.17#“They are a very long time about it!” said Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.18#As Fantine concluded this sigh, the waiter who had served them at dinner ntered. He held in his hand something which resembled a letter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.19#“What is that?” demanded Favourite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.20#The waiter replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.21#“It is a paper that those gentlemen left for these ladies.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.22#“Why did you not bring it at once?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.23#“Because,” said the waiter, “the gentlemen ordered me not to deliver it to he ladies for an hour.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.24#Favourite snatched the paper from the waiter’s hand. It was, in fact, a etter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.25#“Stop!” said she; “there is no address; but this is what is written on t—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.26#“THIS IS THE SURPRISE.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.27#She tore the letter open hastily, opened it, and read [she knew how to ead]:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.28#“OUR BELOVED:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.29#“You must know that we have parents. Parents—you do not know much about uch things. They are called fathers and mothers by the civil code, which is uerile and honest. Now, these parents groan, these old folks implore us, these ood men and these good women call us prodigal sons; they desire our return, and ffer to kill calves for us. Being virtuous, we obey them. At the hour when you ead this, five fiery horses will be bearing us to our papas and mammas. We are ulling up our stakes, as Bossuet says. We are going; we are gone. We flee in he arms of Laffitte and on the wings of Caillard. The Toulouse diligence tears s from the abyss, and the abyss is you, O our little beauties! We return to ociety, to duty, to respectability, at full trot, at the rate of three leagues n hour. It is necessary for the good of the country that we should be, like the est of the world, prefects, fathers of families, rural police, and councillors f state. Venerate us. We are sacrificing ourselves. Mourn for us in haste, and eplace us with speed. If this letter lacerates you, do the same by it. dieu.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.30#“For the space of nearly two years we have made you happy. We bear you no rudge for that. “Signed: BLACHEVELLE. FAMUEIL. LISTOLIER. FÉLIX THOLOMYÈS.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.31#“_Postscriptum_. The dinner is paid for.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.32#The four young women looked at each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.33#Favourite was the first to break the silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.34#“Well!” she exclaimed, “it’s a very pretty farce, all the same.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.35#“It is very droll,” said Zéphine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.36#“That must have been Blachevelle’s idea,” resumed Favourite. “It makes me n love with him. No sooner is he gone than he is loved. This is an adventure, ndeed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.37#“No,” said Dahlia; “it was one of Tholomyès’ ideas. That is evident.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.38#“In that case,” retorted Favourite, “death to Blachevelle, and long live holomyès!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.39#“Long live Tholomyès!” exclaimed Dahlia and Zéphine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.40#And they burst out laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.41#Fantine laughed with the rest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.3.9.42#An hour later, when she had returned to her room, she wept. It was her irst love affair, as we have said; she had given herself to this Tholomyès as o a husband, and the poor girl had a child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.head#BOOK FOURTH—TO CONFIDE IS SOMETIMES TO DELIVER INTO A PERSON’S OWER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.head#CHAPTER I—ONE MOTHER MEETS ANOTHER MOTHER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.1#There was, at Montfermeil, near Paris, during the first quarter of this entury, a sort of cook-shop which no longer exists. This cook-shop was kept by ome people named Thénardier, husband and wife. It was situated in Boulanger ane. Over the door there was a board nailed flat against the wall. Upon this oard was painted something which resembled a man carrying another man on his ack, the latter wearing the big gilt epaulettes of a general, with large silver tars; red spots represented blood; the rest of the picture consisted of smoke, nd probably represented a battle. Below ran this inscription: AT THE SIGN OF ERGEANT OF WATERLOO (_Au Sargent de Waterloo_).
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.2#Nothing is more common than a cart or a truck at the door of a hostelry. evertheless, the vehicle, or, to speak more accurately, the fragment of a ehicle, which encumbered the street in front of the cook-shop of the _Sergeant f Waterloo_, one evening in the spring of 1818, would certainly have attracted, y its mass, the attention of any painter who had passed that way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.3#It was the fore-carriage of one of those trucks which are used in wooded racts of country, and which serve to transport thick planks and the trunks of rees. This fore-carriage was composed of a massive iron axle-tree with a pivot, nto which was fitted a heavy shaft, and which was supported by two huge wheels. he whole thing was compact, overwhelming, and misshapen. It seemed like the un-carriage of an enormous cannon. The ruts of the road had bestowed on the heels, the fellies, the hub, the axle, and the shaft, a layer of mud, a hideous ellowish daubing hue, tolerably like that with which people are fond of rnamenting cathedrals. The wood was disappearing under mud, and the iron eneath rust. Under the axle-tree hung, like drapery, a huge chain, worthy of ome Goliath of a convict. This chain suggested, not the beams, which it was its ffice to transport, but the mastodons and mammoths which it might have served o harness; it had the air of the galleys, but of cyclopean and superhuman alleys, and it seemed to have been detached from some monster. Homer would have ound Polyphemus with it, and Shakespeare, Caliban.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.4#Why was that fore-carriage of a truck in that place in the street? In the irst place, to encumber the street; next, in order that it might finish the rocess of rusting. There is a throng of institutions in the old social order, hich one comes across in this fashion as one walks about outdoors, and which ave no other reasons for existence than the above.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.5#The centre of the chain swung very near the ground in the middle, and in he loop, as in the rope of a swing, there were seated and grouped, on that articular evening, in exquisite interlacement, two little girls; one about two ears and a half old, the other, eighteen months; the younger in the arms of the ther. A handkerchief, cleverly knotted about them, prevented their falling out. mother had caught sight of that frightful chain, and had said, “Come! there’s plaything for my children.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.6#The two children, who were dressed prettily and with some elegance, were adiant with pleasure; one would have said that they were two roses amid old ron; their eyes were a triumph; their fresh cheeks were full of laughter. One ad chestnut hair; the other, brown. Their innocent faces were two delighted urprises; a blossoming shrub which grew near wafted to the passers-by perfumes hich seemed to emanate from them; the child of eighteen months displayed her retty little bare stomach with the chaste indecency of childhood. Above and round these two delicate heads, all made of happiness and steeped in light, the igantic fore-carriage, black with rust, almost terrible, all entangled in urves and wild angles, rose in a vault, like the entrance of a cavern. A few aces apart, crouching down upon the threshold of the hostelry, the mother, not very prepossessing woman, by the way, though touching at that moment, was winging the two children by means of a long cord, watching them carefully, for ear of accidents, with that animal and celestial expression which is peculiar o maternity. At every backward and forward swing the hideous links emitted a trident sound, which resembled a cry of rage; the little girls were in cstasies; the setting sun mingled in this joy, and nothing could be more harming than this caprice of chance which had made of a chain of Titans the wing of cherubim.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.7#As she rocked her little ones, the mother hummed in a discordant voice a omance then celebrated:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.8#“It must be, said a warrior.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.9#Her song, and the contemplation of her daughters, prevented her hearing and eeing what was going on in the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.10#In the meantime, some one had approached her, as she was beginning the irst couplet of the romance, and suddenly she heard a voice saying very near er ear:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.11#“You have two beautiful children there, Madame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.12#“To the fair and tender Imogene—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.13#replied the mother, continuing her romance; then she turned her head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.14#A woman stood before her, a few paces distant. This woman also had a hild, which she carried in her arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.15#She was carrying, in addition, a large carpet-bag, which seemed very eavy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.16#This woman’s child was one of the most divine creatures that it is ossible to behold. It was a girl, two or three years of age. She could have ntered into competition with the two other little ones, so far as the coquetry f her dress was concerned; she wore a cap of fine linen, ribbons on her bodice, nd Valenciennes lace on her cap. The folds of her skirt were raised so as to ermit a view of her white, firm, and dimpled leg. She was admirably rosy and ealthy. The little beauty inspired a desire to take a bite from the apples of er cheeks. Of her eyes nothing could be known, except that they must be very arge, and that they had magnificent lashes. She was asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.17#She slept with that slumber of absolute confidence peculiar to her age. he arms of mothers are made of tenderness; in them children sleep rofoundly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.18#As for the mother, her appearance was sad and poverty-stricken. She was ressed like a working-woman who is inclined to turn into a peasant again. She as young. Was she handsome? Perhaps; but in that attire it was not apparent. er hair, a golden lock of which had escaped, seemed very thick, but was everely concealed beneath an ugly, tight, close, nun-like cap, tied under the hin. A smile displays beautiful teeth when one has them; but she did not smile. er eyes did not seem to have been dry for a very long time. She was pale; she ad a very weary and rather sickly appearance. She gazed upon her daughter sleep in her arms with the air peculiar to a mother who has nursed her own hild. A large blue handkerchief, such as the Invalides use, was folded into a ichu, and concealed her figure clumsily. Her hands were sunburnt and all dotted ith freckles, her forefinger was hardened and lacerated with the needle; she ore a cloak of coarse brown woollen stuff, a linen gown, and coarse shoes. It as Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.19#It was Fantine, but difficult to recognize. Nevertheless, on scrutinizing er attentively, it was evident that she still retained her beauty. A melancholy old, which resembled the beginning of irony, wrinkled her right cheek. As for er toilette, that aerial toilette of muslin and ribbons, which seemed made of irth, of folly, and of music, full of bells, and perfumed with lilacs had anished like that beautiful and dazzling hoar-frost which is mistaken for iamonds in the sunlight; it melts and leaves the branch quite black.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.20#Ten months had elapsed since the “pretty farce.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.21#What had taken place during those ten months? It can be divined.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.22#After abandonment, straightened circumstances. Fantine had immediately ost sight of Favourite, Zéphine and Dahlia; the bond once broken on the side of he men, it was loosed between the women; they would have been greatly stonished had any one told them a fortnight later, that they had been friends; here no longer existed any reason for such a thing. Fantine had remained alone. he father of her child gone,—alas! such ruptures are irrevocable,—she found erself absolutely isolated, minus the habit of work and plus the taste for leasure. Drawn away by her _liaison_ with Tholomyès to disdain the pretty trade hich she knew, she had neglected to keep her market open; it was now closed to er. She had no resource. Fantine barely knew how to read, and did not know how o write; in her childhood she had only been taught to sign her name; she had a ublic letter-writer indite an epistle to Tholomyès, then a second, then a hird. Tholomyès replied to none of them. Fantine heard the gossips say, as they ooked at her child: “Who takes those children seriously! One only shrugs one’s houlders over such children!” Then she thought of Tholomyès, who had shrugged is shoulders over his child, and who did not take that innocent being eriously; and her heart grew gloomy toward that man. But what was she to do? he no longer knew to whom to apply. She had committed a fault, but the oundation of her nature, as will be remembered, was modesty and virtue. She was aguely conscious that she was on the verge of falling into distress, and of liding into a worse state. Courage was necessary; she possessed it, and held erself firm. The idea of returning to her native town of M. sur M. occurred to er. There, some one might possibly know her and give her work; yes, but it ould be necessary to conceal her fault. In a confused way she perceived the ecessity of a separation which would be more painful than the first one. Her eart contracted, but she took her resolution. Fantine, as we shall see, had the ierce bravery of life. She had already valiantly renounced finery, had dressed erself in linen, and had put all her silks, all her ornaments, all her ribbons, nd all her laces on her daughter, the only vanity which was left to her, and a oly one it was. She sold all that she had, which produced for her two hundred rancs; her little debts paid, she had only about eighty francs left. At the age f twenty-two, on a beautiful spring morning, she quitted Paris, bearing her hild on her back. Any one who had seen these two pass would have had pity on hem. This woman had, in all the world, nothing but her child, and the child ad, in all the world, no one but this woman. Fantine had nursed her child, and his had tired her chest, and she coughed a little.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.23#We shall have no further occasion to speak of M. Félix Tholomyès. Let us onfine ourselves to saying, that, twenty years later, under King Louis hilippe, he was a great provincial lawyer, wealthy and influential, a wise lector, and a very severe juryman; he was still a man of pleasure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.24#Towards the middle of the day, after having, from time to time, for the ake of resting herself, travelled, for three or four sous a league, in what was hen known as the _Petites Voitures des Environs de Paris_, the “little suburban oach service,” Fantine found herself at Montfermeil, in the alley oulanger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.25#As she passed the Thénardier hostelry, the two little girls, blissful in he monster swing, had dazzled her in a manner, and she had halted in front of hat vision of joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.26#Charms exist. These two little girls were a charm to this mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.27#She gazed at them in much emotion. The presence of angels is an nnouncement of Paradise. She thought that, above this inn, she beheld the ysterious HERE of Providence. These two little creatures were evidently happy. he gazed at them, she admired them, in such emotion that at the moment when heir mother was recovering her breath between two couplets of her song, she ould not refrain from addressing to her the remark which we have just ead:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.28#“You have two pretty children, Madame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.29#The most ferocious creatures are disarmed by caresses bestowed on their oung.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.30#The mother raised her head and thanked her, and bade the wayfarer sit down n the bench at the door, she herself being seated on the threshold. The two omen began to chat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.31#“My name is Madame Thénardier,” said the mother of the two little girls. We keep this inn.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.32#Then, her mind still running on her romance, she resumed humming between er teeth:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.33#“It must be so; I am a knight, And I am off to Palestine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.34#This Madame Thénardier was a sandy-complexioned woman, thin and ngular—the type of the soldier’s wife in all its unpleasantness; and what was dd, with a languishing air, which she owed to her perusal of romances. She was simpering, but masculine creature. Old romances produce that effect when ubbed against the imagination of cook-shop woman. She was still young; she was arely thirty. If this crouching woman had stood upright, her lofty stature and er frame of a perambulating colossus suitable for fairs, might have frightened he traveller at the outset, troubled her confidence, and disturbed what caused hat we have to relate to vanish. A person who is seated instead of standing rect—destinies hang upon such a thing as that.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.35#The traveller told her story, with slight modifications.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.36#That she was a working-woman; that her husband was dead; that her work in aris had failed her, and that she was on her way to seek it elsewhere, in her wn native parts; that she had left Paris that morning on foot; that, as she was arrying her child, and felt fatigued, she had got into the Villemomble coach hen she met it; that from Villemomble she had come to Montfermeil on foot; that he little one had walked a little, but not much, because she was so young, and hat she had been obliged to take her up, and the jewel had fallen asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.37#At this word she bestowed on her daughter a passionate kiss, which woke er. The child opened her eyes, great blue eyes like her mother’s, and looked t—what? Nothing; with that serious and sometimes severe air of little children, hich is a mystery of their luminous innocence in the presence of our twilight f virtue. One would say that they feel themselves to be angels, and that they now us to be men. Then the child began to laugh; and although the mother held ast to her, she slipped to the ground with the unconquerable energy of a little eing which wished to run. All at once she caught sight of the two others in the wing, stopped short, and put out her tongue, in sign of admiration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.38#Mother Thénardier released her daughters, made them descend from the wing, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.39#“Now amuse yourselves, all three of you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.40#Children become acquainted quickly at that age, and at the expiration of a inute the little Thénardiers were playing with the newcomer at making holes in he ground, which was an immense pleasure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.41#The newcomer was very gay; the goodness of the mother is written in the ayety of the child; she had seized a scrap of wood which served her for a hovel, and energetically dug a cavity big enough for a fly. The grave-digger’s usiness becomes a subject for laughter when performed by a child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.42#The two women pursued their chat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.43#“What is your little one’s name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.44#“Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.45#For Cosette, read Euphrasie. The child’s name was Euphrasie. But out of uphrasie the mother had made Cosette by that sweet and graceful instinct of others and of the populace which changes Josepha into Pepita, and Françoise nto Sillette. It is a sort of derivative which disarranges and disconcerts the hole science of etymologists. We have known a grandmother who succeeded in urning Theodore into Gnon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.46#“How old is she?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.47#“She is going on three.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.48#“That is the age of my eldest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.49#In the meantime, the three little girls were grouped in an attitude of rofound anxiety and blissfulness; an event had happened; a big worm had emerged rom the ground, and they were afraid; and they were in ecstasies over it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.50#Their radiant brows touched each other; one would have said that there ere three heads in one aureole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.51#“How easily children get acquainted at once!” exclaimed Mother Thénardier; one would swear that they were three sisters!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.52#This remark was probably the spark which the other mother had been waiting or. She seized the Thénardier’s hand, looked at her fixedly, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.53#“Will you keep my child for me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.54#The Thénardier made one of those movements of surprise which signify either assent nor refusal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.55#Cosette’s mother continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.56#“You see, I cannot take my daughter to the country. My work will not ermit it. With a child one can find no situation. People are ridiculous in the ountry. It was the good God who caused me to pass your inn. When I caught sight f your little ones, so pretty, so clean, and so happy, it overwhelmed me. I aid: ‘Here is a good mother. That is just the thing; that will make three isters.’ And then, it will not be long before I return. Will you keep my child or me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.57#“I must see about it,” replied the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.58#“I will give you six francs a month.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.59#Here a man’s voice called from the depths of the cook-shop:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.60#“Not for less than seven francs. And six months paid in advance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.61#“Six times seven makes forty-two,” said the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.62#“I will give it,” said the mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.63#“And fifteen francs in addition for preliminary expenses,” added the man’s oice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.64#“Total, fifty-seven francs,” said Madame Thénardier. And she hummed aguely, with these figures:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.65#“It must be, said a warrior.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.66#“I will pay it,” said the mother. “I have eighty francs. I shall have nough left to reach the country, by travelling on foot. I shall earn money here, and as soon as I have a little I will return for my darling.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.67#The man’s voice resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.68#“The little one has an outfit?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.69#“That is my husband,” said the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.70#“Of course she has an outfit, the poor treasure.—I understood perfectly hat it was your husband.—And a beautiful outfit, too! a senseless outfit, verything by the dozen, and silk gowns like a lady. It is here, in my arpet-bag.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.71#“You must hand it over,” struck in the man’s voice again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.72#“Of course I shall give it to you,” said the mother. “It would be very ueer if I were to leave my daughter quite naked!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.73#The master’s face appeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.74#“That’s good,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.75#The bargain was concluded. The mother passed the night at the inn, gave up er money and left her child, fastened her carpet-bag once more, now reduced in olume by the removal of the outfit, and light henceforth and set out on the ollowing morning, intending to return soon. People arrange such departures ranquilly; but they are despairs!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.76#A neighbor of the Thénardiers met this mother as she was setting out, and ame back with the remark:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.77#“I have just seen a woman crying in the street so that it was enough to end your heart.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.78#When Cosette’s mother had taken her departure, the man said to the oman:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.79#“That will serve to pay my note for one hundred and ten francs which falls ue to-morrow; I lacked fifty francs. Do you know that I should have had a ailiff and a protest after me? You played the mouse-trap nicely with your young nes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.1.80#“Without suspecting it,” said the woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.head#CHAPTER II—FIRST SKETCH OF TWO UNPREPOSSESSING FIGURES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.1#The mouse which had been caught was a pitiful specimen; but the cat ejoices even over a lean mouse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.2#Who were these Thénardiers?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.3#Let us say a word or two of them now. We will complete the sketch later n.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.4#These beings belonged to that bastard class composed of coarse people who ave been successful, and of intelligent people who have descended in the scale, hich is between the class called “middle” and the class denominated as inferior,” and which combines some of the defects of the second with nearly all he vices of the first, without possessing the generous impulse of the orkingman nor the honest order of the bourgeois.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.5#They were of those dwarfed natures which, if a dull fire chances to warm hem up, easily become monstrous. There was in the woman a substratum of the rute, and in the man the material for a blackguard. Both were susceptible, in he highest degree, of the sort of hideous progress which is accomplished in the irection of evil. There exist crab-like souls which are continually retreating owards the darkness, retrograding in life rather than advancing, employing xperience to augment their deformity, growing incessantly worse, and becoming ore and more impregnated with an ever-augmenting blackness. This man and woman ossessed such souls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.6#Thénardier, in particular, was troublesome for a physiognomist. One can nly look at some men to distrust them; for one feels that they are dark in both irections. They are uneasy in the rear and threatening in front. There is omething of the unknown about them. One can no more answer for what they have one than for what they will do. The shadow which they bear in their glance enounces them. From merely hearing them utter a word or seeing them make a esture, one obtains a glimpse of sombre secrets in their past and of sombre ysteries in their future.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.7#This Thénardier, if he himself was to be believed, had been a soldier—a ergeant, he said. He had probably been through the campaign of 1815, and had ven conducted himself with tolerable valor, it would seem. We shall see later n how much truth there was in this. The sign of his hostelry was in allusion to ne of his feats of arms. He had painted it himself; for he knew how to do a ittle of everything, and badly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.8#It was at the epoch when the ancient classical romance which, after having een _Clélie_, was no longer anything but _Lodoïska_, still noble, but ever more nd more vulgar, having fallen from Mademoiselle de Scudéri to Madame ournon-Malarme, and from Madame de Lafayette to Madame Barthélemy-Hadot, was etting the loving hearts of the portresses of Paris aflame, and even ravaging he suburbs to some extent. Madame Thénardier was just intelligent enough to ead this sort of books. She lived on them. In them she drowned what brains she ossessed. This had given her, when very young, and even a little later, a sort f pensive attitude towards her husband, a scamp of a certain depth, a ruffian ettered to the extent of the grammar, coarse and fine at one and the same time, ut, so far as sentimentalism was concerned, given to the perusal of igault-Lebrun, and “in what concerns the sex,” as he said in his jargon—a ownright, unmitigated lout. His wife was twelve or fifteen years younger than e was. Later on, when her hair, arranged in a romantically drooping fashion, egan to grow gray, when the Megæra began to be developed from the Pamela, the emale Thénardier was nothing but a coarse, vicious woman, who had dabbled in tupid romances. Now, one cannot read nonsense with impunity. The result was hat her eldest daughter was named Éponine; as for the younger, the poor little hing came near being called Gulnare; I know not to what diversion, effected by romance of Ducray-Dumenil, she owed the fact that she merely bore the name of zelma.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.2.9#However, we will remark by the way, everything was not ridiculous and uperficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding, and which may be esignated as the anarchy of baptismal names. By the side of this romantic lement which we have just indicated there is the social symptom. It is not rare or the neatherd’s boy nowadays to bear the name of Arthur, Alfred, or Alphonse, nd for the vicomte—if there are still any vicomtes—to be called Thomas, Pierre, r Jacques. This displacement, which places the “elegant” name on the plebeian nd the rustic name on the aristocrat, is nothing else than an eddy of equality. he irresistible penetration of the new inspiration is there as everywhere else. eneath this apparent discord there is a great and a profound thing,—the French evolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE LARK
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.1#It is not all in all sufficient to be wicked in order to prosper. The ook-shop was in a bad way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.2#Thanks to the traveller’s fifty-seven francs, Thénardier had been able to void a protest and to honor his signature. On the following month they were gain in need of money. The woman took Cosette’s outfit to Paris, and pawned it t the pawnbroker’s for sixty francs. As soon as that sum was spent, the hénardiers grew accustomed to look on the little girl merely as a child whom hey were caring for out of charity; and they treated her accordingly. As she ad no longer any clothes, they dressed her in the cast-off petticoats and hemises of the Thénardier brats; that is to say, in rags. They fed her on what ll the rest had left—a little better than the dog, a little worse than the cat. oreover, the cat and the dog were her habitual table-companions; Cosette ate ith them under the table, from a wooden bowl similar to theirs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.3#The mother, who had established herself, as we shall see later on, at M. ur M., wrote, or, more correctly, caused to be written, a letter every month, hat she might have news of her child. The Thénardiers replied invariably, Cosette is doing wonderfully well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.4#At the expiration of the first six months the mother sent seven francs for he seventh month, and continued her remittances with tolerable regularity from onth to month. The year was not completed when Thénardier said: “A fine favor he is doing us, in sooth! What does she expect us to do with her seven francs?” nd he wrote to demand twelve francs. The mother, whom they had persuaded into he belief that her child was happy, “and was coming on well,” submitted, and orwarded the twelve francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.5#Certain natures cannot love on the one hand without hating on the other. other Thénardier loved her two daughters passionately, which caused her to hate he stranger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.6#It is sad to think that the love of a mother can possess villainous spects. Little as was the space occupied by Cosette, it seemed to her as though t were taken from her own, and that that little child diminished the air which er daughters breathed. This woman, like many women of her sort, had a load of aresses and a burden of blows and injuries to dispense each day. If she had not ad Cosette, it is certain that her daughters, idolized as they were, would have eceived the whole of it; but the stranger did them the service to divert the lows to herself. Her daughters received nothing but caresses. Cosette could not ake a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavy shower of violent lows and unmerited chastisement. The sweet, feeble being, who should not have nderstood anything of this world or of God, incessantly punished, scolded, ll-used, beaten, and seeing beside her two little creatures like herself, who ived in a ray of dawn!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.7#Madame Thénardier was vicious with Cosette. Éponine and Azelma were icious. Children at that age are only copies of their mother. The size is maller; that is all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.8#A year passed; then another.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.9#People in the village said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.10#“Those Thénardiers are good people. They are not rich, and yet they are ringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.11#They thought that Cosette’s mother had forgotten her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.12#In the meanwhile, Thénardier, having learned, it is impossible to say by hat obscure means, that the child was probably a bastard, and that the mother ould not acknowledge it, exacted fifteen francs a month, saying that “the reature” was growing and “eating,” and threatening to send her away. “Let her ot bother me,” he exclaimed, “or I’ll fire her brat right into the middle of er secrets. I must have an increase.” The mother paid the fifteen francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.13#From year to year the child grew, and so did her wretchedness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.14#As long as Cosette was little, she was the scape-goat of the two other hildren; as soon as she began to develop a little, that is to say, before she as even five years old, she became the servant of the household.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.15#Five years old! the reader will say; that is not probable. Alas! it is rue. Social suffering begins at all ages. Have we not recently seen the trial f a man named Dumollard, an orphan turned bandit, who, from the age of five, as he official documents state, being alone in the world, “worked for his living nd stole”?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.16#Cosette was made to run on errands, to sweep the rooms, the courtyard, the treet, to wash the dishes, to even carry burdens. The Thénardiers considered hemselves all the more authorized to behave in this manner, since the mother, ho was still at M. sur M., had become irregular in her payments. Some months he was in arrears.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.17#If this mother had returned to Montfermeil at the end of these three ears, she would not have recognized her child. Cosette, so pretty and rosy on er arrival in that house, was now thin and pale. She had an indescribably neasy look. “The sly creature,” said the Thénardiers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.18#Injustice had made her peevish, and misery had made her ugly. Nothing emained to her except her beautiful eyes, which inspired pain, because, large s they were, it seemed as though one beheld in them a still larger amount of adness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.19#It was a heart-breaking thing to see this poor child, not yet six years ld, shivering in the winter in her old rags of linen, full of holes, sweeping he street before daylight, with an enormous broom in her tiny red hands, and a ear in her great eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.20#She was called the _Lark_ in the neighborhood. The populace, who are fond f these figures of speech, had taken a fancy to bestow this name on this rembling, frightened, and shivering little creature, no bigger than a bird, who as awake every morning before any one else in the house or the village, and was lways in the street or the fields before daybreak.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.4.3.21#Only the little lark never sang.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.head#BOOK FIFTH—THE DESCENT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE HISTORY OF A PROGRESS IN BLACK GLASS TRINKETS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.1#And in the meantime, what had become of that mother who according to the eople at Montfermeil, seemed to have abandoned her child? Where was she? What as she doing?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.2#After leaving her little Cosette with the Thénardiers, she had continued er journey, and had reached M. sur M.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.3#This, it will be remembered, was in 1818.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.4#Fantine had quitted her province ten years before. M. sur M. had changed ts aspect. While Fantine had been slowly descending from wretchedness to retchedness, her native town had prospered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.5#About two years previously one of those industrial facts which are the rand events of small districts had taken place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.6#This detail is important, and we regard it as useful to develop it at ength; we should almost say, to underline it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.7#From time immemorial, M. sur M. had had for its special industry the mitation of English jet and the black glass trinkets of Germany. This industry ad always vegetated, on account of the high price of the raw material, which eacted on the manufacture. At the moment when Fantine returned to M. sur M., an nheard-of transformation had taken place in the production of “black goods.” owards the close of 1815 a man, a stranger, had established himself in the own, and had been inspired with the idea of substituting, in this manufacture, um-lac for resin, and, for bracelets in particular, slides of sheet-iron simply aid together, for slides of soldered sheet-iron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.8#This very small change had effected a revolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.9#This very small change had, in fact, prodigiously reduced the cost of the aw material, which had rendered it possible in the first place, to raise the rice of manufacture, a benefit to the country; in the second place, to improve he workmanship, an advantage to the consumer; in the third place, to sell at a ower price, while trebling the profit, which was a benefit to the anufacturer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.10#Thus three results ensued from one idea.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.11#In less than three years the inventor of this process had become rich, hich is good, and had made every one about him rich, which is better. He was a tranger in the Department. Of his origin, nothing was known; of the beginning f his career, very little. It was rumored that he had come to town with very ittle money, a few hundred francs at the most.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.12#It was from this slender capital, enlisted in the service of an ingenious dea, developed by method and thought, that he had drawn his own fortune, and he fortune of the whole countryside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.13#On his arrival at M. sur M. he had only the garments, the appearance, and he language of a workingman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.1.14#It appears that on the very day when he made his obscure entry into the ittle town of M. sur M., just at nightfall, on a December evening, knapsack on ack and thorn club in hand, a large fire had broken out in the town-hall. This an had rushed into the flames and saved, at the risk of his own life, two hildren who belonged to the captain of the gendarmerie; this is why they had orgotten to ask him for his passport. Afterwards they had learned his name. He as called Father Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.head#CHAPTER II—MADELEINE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.1#He was a man about fifty years of age, who had a preoccupied air, and who as good. That was all that could be said about him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.2#Thanks to the rapid progress of the industry which he had so admirably econstructed, M. sur M. had become a rather important centre of trade. Spain, hich consumes a good deal of black jet, made enormous purchases there each ear. M. sur M. almost rivalled London and Berlin in this branch of commerce. ather Madeleine’s profits were such, that at the end of the second year he was ble to erect a large factory, in which there were two vast workrooms, one for he men, and the other for women. Any one who was hungry could present himself here, and was sure of finding employment and bread. Father Madeleine required f the men good will, of the women pure morals, and of all, probity. He had eparated the work-rooms in order to separate the sexes, and so that the women nd girls might remain discreet. On this point he was inflexible. It was the nly thing in which he was in a manner intolerant. He was all the more firmly et on this severity, since M. sur M., being a garrison town, opportunities for orruption abounded. However, his coming had been a boon, and his presence was a odsend. Before Father Madeleine’s arrival, everything had languished in the ountry; now everything lived with a healthy life of toil. A strong circulation armed everything and penetrated everywhere. Slack seasons and wretchedness were nknown. There was no pocket so obscure that it had not a little money in it; no welling so lowly that there was not some little joy within it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.3#Father Madeleine gave employment to every one. He exacted but one thing: Be n honest man. Be an honest woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.4#As we have said, in the midst of this activity of which he was the cause nd the pivot, Father Madeleine made his fortune; but a singular thing in a imple man of business, it did not seem as though that were his chief care. He ppeared to be thinking much of others, and little of himself. In 1820 he was nown to have a sum of six hundred and thirty thousand francs lodged in his name ith Laffitte; but before reserving these six hundred and thirty thousand rancs, he had spent more than a million for the town and its poor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.5#The hospital was badly endowed; he founded six beds there. M. sur M. is ivided into the upper and the lower town. The lower town, in which he lived, ad but one school, a miserable hovel, which was falling to ruin: he constructed wo, one for girls, the other for boys. He allotted a salary from his own funds o the two instructors, a salary twice as large as their meagre official salary, nd one day he said to some one who expressed surprise, “The two prime unctionaries of the state are the nurse and the schoolmaster.” He created at is own expense an infant school, a thing then almost unknown in France, and a und for aiding old and infirm workmen. As his factory was a centre, a new uarter, in which there were a good many indigent families, rose rapidly around im; he established there a free dispensary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.6#At first, when they watched his beginnings, the good souls said, “He’s a olly fellow who means to get rich.” When they saw him enriching the country efore he enriched himself, the good souls said, “He is an ambitious man.” This eemed all the more probable since the man was religious, and even practised his eligion to a certain degree, a thing which was very favorably viewed at that poch. He went regularly to low mass every Sunday. The local deputy, who nosed ut all rivalry everywhere, soon began to grow uneasy over this religion. This eputy had been a member of the legislative body of the Empire, and shared the eligious ideas of a father of the Oratoire, known under the name of Fouché, Duc ’Otrante, whose creature and friend he had been. He indulged in gentle raillery t God with closed doors. But when he beheld the wealthy manufacturer Madeleine oing to low mass at seven o’clock, he perceived in him a possible candidate, nd resolved to outdo him; he took a Jesuit confessor, and went to high mass and o vespers. Ambition was at that time, in the direct acceptation of the word, a ace to the steeple. The poor profited by this terror as well as the good God, or the honorable deputy also founded two beds in the hospital, which made welve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.7#Nevertheless, in 1819 a rumor one morning circulated through the town to he effect that, on the representations of the prefect and in consideration of he services rendered by him to the country, Father Madeleine was to be ppointed by the King, mayor of M. sur M. Those who had pronounced this newcomer o be “an ambitious fellow,” seized with delight on this opportunity which all en desire, to exclaim, “There! what did we say!” All M. sur M. was in an proar. The rumor was well founded. Several days later the appointment appeared n the _Moniteur_. On the following day Father Madeleine refused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.8#In this same year of 1819 the products of the new process invented by adeleine figured in the industrial exhibition; when the jury made their report, he King appointed the inventor a chevalier of the Legion of Honor. A fresh xcitement in the little town. Well, so it was the cross that he wanted! Father adeleine refused the cross.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.9#Decidedly this man was an enigma. The good souls got out of their redicament by saying, “After all, he is some sort of an adventurer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.10#We have seen that the country owed much to him; the poor owed him verything; he was so useful and he was so gentle that people had been obliged o honor and respect him. His workmen, in particular, adored him, and he endured his adoration with a sort of melancholy gravity. When he was known to be rich, people in society” bowed to him, and he received invitations in the town; he as called, in town, Monsieur Madeleine; his workmen and the children continued o call him Father Madeleine, and that was what was most adapted to make him mile. In proportion as he mounted, throve, invitations rained down upon him. Society” claimed him for its own. The prim little drawing-rooms on M. sur M., hich, of course, had at first been closed to the artisan, opened both leaves of heir folding-doors to the millionnaire. They made a thousand advances to him. e refused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.11#This time the good gossips had no trouble. “He is an ignorant man, of no ducation. No one knows where he came from. He would not know how to behave in ociety. It has not been absolutely proved that he knows how to read.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.12#When they saw him making money, they said, “He is a man of business.” When hey saw him scattering his money about, they said, “He is an ambitious man.” hen he was seen to decline honors, they said, “He is an adventurer.” When they aw him repulse society, they said, “He is a brute.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.13#In 1820, five years after his arrival in M. sur M., the services which he ad rendered to the district were so dazzling, the opinion of the whole country ound about was so unanimous, that the King again appointed him mayor of the own. He again declined; but the prefect resisted his refusal, all the otabilities of the place came to implore him, the people in the street besought im; the urging was so vigorous that he ended by accepting. It was noticed that he thing which seemed chiefly to bring him to a decision was the almost rritated apostrophe addressed to him by an old woman of the people, who called o him from her threshold, in an angry way: _“A good mayor is a useful thing. Is e drawing back before the good which he can do?”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.2.14#This was the third phase of his ascent. Father Madeleine had become onsieur Madeleine. Monsieur Madeleine became Monsieur le Maire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.head#CHAPTER III—SUMS DEPOSITED WITH LAFFITTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.1#On the other hand, he remained as simple as on the first day. He had gray air, a serious eye, the sunburned complexion of a laborer, the thoughtful isage of a philosopher. He habitually wore a hat with a wide brim, and a long oat of coarse cloth, buttoned to the chin. He fulfilled his duties as mayor; ut, with that exception, he lived in solitude. He spoke to but few people. He voided polite attentions; he escaped quickly; he smiled to relieve himself of he necessity of talking; he gave, in order to get rid of the necessity for miling. The women said of him, “What a good-natured bear!” His pleasure onsisted in strolling in the fields.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.2#He always took his meals alone, with an open book before him, which he ead. He had a well-selected little library. He loved books; books are cold but afe friends. In proportion as leisure came to him with fortune, he seemed to ake advantage of it to cultivate his mind. It had been observed that, ever ince his arrival at M. sur M., his language had grown more polished, more hoice, and more gentle with every passing year. He liked to carry a gun with im on his strolls, but he rarely made use of it. When he did happen to do so, is shooting was something so infallible as to inspire terror. He never killed n inoffensive animal. He never shot at a little bird.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.3#Although he was no longer young, it was thought that he was still rodigiously strong. He offered his assistance to any one who was in need of it, ifted a horse, released a wheel clogged in the mud, or stopped a runaway bull y the horns. He always had his pockets full of money when he went out; but they ere empty on his return. When he passed through a village, the ragged brats ran oyously after him, and surrounded him like a swarm of gnats.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.4#It was thought that he must, in the past, have lived a country life, since e knew all sorts of useful secrets, which he taught to the peasants. He taught hem how to destroy scurf on wheat, by sprinkling it and the granary and nundating the cracks in the floor with a solution of common salt; and how to hase away weevils by hanging up orviot in bloom everywhere, on the walls and he ceilings, among the grass and in the houses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.5#He had “recipes” for exterminating from a field, blight, tares, foxtail, nd all parasitic growths which destroy the wheat. He defended a rabbit warren gainst rats, simply by the odor of a guinea-pig which he placed in it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.6#One day he saw some country people busily engaged in pulling up nettles; he xamined the plants, which were uprooted and already dried, and said: “They are ead. Nevertheless, it would be a good thing to know how to make use of them. hen the nettle is young, the leaf makes an excellent vegetable; when it is lder, it has filaments and fibres like hemp and flax. Nettle cloth is as good s linen cloth. Chopped up, nettles are good for poultry; pounded, they are good or horned cattle. The seed of the nettle, mixed with fodder, gives gloss to the air of animals; the root, mixed with salt, produces a beautiful yellow oloring-matter. Moreover, it is an excellent hay, which can be cut twice. And hat is required for the nettle? A little soil, no care, no culture. Only the eed falls as it is ripe, and it is difficult to collect it. That is all. With he exercise of a little care, the nettle could be made useful; it is neglected nd it becomes hurtful. It is exterminated. How many men resemble the nettle!” e added, after a pause: “Remember this, my friends: there are no such things as ad plants or bad men. There are only bad cultivators.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.7#The children loved him because he knew how to make charming little trifles f straw and cocoanuts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.8#When he saw the door of a church hung in black, he entered: he sought out unerals as other men seek christenings. Widowhood and the grief of others ttracted him, because of his great gentleness; he mingled with the friends clad n mourning, with families dressed in black, with the priests groaning around a offin. He seemed to like to give to his thoughts for text these funereal salmodies filled with the vision of the other world. With his eyes fixed on eaven, he listened with a sort of aspiration towards all the mysteries of the nfinite, those sad voices which sing on the verge of the obscure abyss of eath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.9#He performed a multitude of good actions, concealing his agency in them as man conceals himself because of evil actions. He penetrated houses privately, t night; he ascended staircases furtively. A poor wretch on returning to his ttic would find that his door had been opened, sometimes even forced, during is absence. The poor man made a clamor over it: some malefactor had been there! e entered, and the first thing he beheld was a piece of gold lying forgotten on ome piece of furniture. The “malefactor” who had been there was Father adeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.10#He was affable and sad. The people said: “There is a rich man who has not haughty air. There is a happy man who has not a contented air.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.11#Some people maintained that he was a mysterious person, and that no one ver entered his chamber, which was a regular anchorite’s cell, furnished with inged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones and skulls of dead men! This as much talked of, so that one of the elegant and malicious young women of M. ur M. came to him one day, and asked: “Monsieur le Maire, pray show us your hamber. It is said to be a grotto.” He smiled, and introduced them instantly nto this “grotto.” They were well punished for their curiosity. The room was ery simply furnished in mahogany, which was rather ugly, like all furniture of hat sort, and hung with paper worth twelve sous. They could see nothing emarkable about it, except two candlesticks of antique pattern which stood on he chimney-piece and appeared to be silver, “for they were hall-marked,” an bservation full of the type of wit of petty towns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.12#Nevertheless, people continued to say that no one ever got into the room, nd that it was a hermit’s cave, a mysterious retreat, a hole, a tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.3.13#It was also whispered about that he had “immense” sums deposited with affitte, with this peculiar feature, that they were always at his immediate isposal, so that, it was added, M. Madeleine could make his appearance at affitte’s any morning, sign a receipt, and carry off his two or three millions n ten minutes. In reality, “these two or three millions” were reducible, as we ave said, to six hundred and thirty or forty thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.head#CHAPTER IV—M. MADELEINE IN MOURNING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.1#At the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of M. Myriel, ishop of D——, surnamed “Monseigneur Bienvenu,” who had died in the odor of anctity at the age of eighty-two.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.2#The Bishop of D—— to supply here a detail which the papers omitted—had been lind for many years before his death, and content to be blind, as his sister as beside him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.3#Let us remark by the way, that to be blind and to be loved, is, in fact, ne of the most strangely exquisite forms of happiness upon this earth, where othing is complete. To have continually at one’s side a woman, a daughter, a ister, a charming being, who is there because you need her and because she annot do without you; to know that we are indispensable to a person who is ecessary to us; to be able to incessantly measure one’s affection by the amount f her presence which she bestows on us, and to say to ourselves, “Since she onsecrates the whole of her time to me, it is because I possess the whole of er heart”; to behold her thought in lieu of her face; to be able to verify the idelity of one being amid the eclipse of the world; to regard the rustle of a own as the sound of wings; to hear her come and go, retire, speak, return, ing, and to think that one is the centre of these steps, of this speech; to anifest at each instant one’s personal attraction; to feel one’s self all the ore powerful because of one’s infirmity; to become in one’s obscurity, and hrough one’s obscurity, the star around which this angel gravitates,—few elicities equal this. The supreme happiness of life consists in the conviction hat one is loved; loved for one’s own sake—let us say rather, loved in spite of ne’s self; this conviction the blind man possesses. To be served in distress is o be caressed. Does he lack anything? No. One does not lose the sight when one as love. And what love! A love wholly constituted of virtue! There is no lindness where there is certainty. Soul seeks soul, gropingly, and finds it. nd this soul, found and tested, is a woman. A hand sustains you; it is hers: a outh lightly touches your brow; it is her mouth: you hear a breath very near ou; it is hers. To have everything of her, from her worship to her pity, never o be left, to have that sweet weakness aiding you, to lean upon that immovable eed, to touch Providence with one’s hands, and to be able to take it in one’s rms,—God made tangible,—what bliss! The heart, that obscure, celestial flower, ndergoes a mysterious blossoming. One would not exchange that shadow for all rightness! The angel soul is there, uninterruptedly there; if she departs, it s but to return again; she vanishes like a dream, and reappears like reality. ne feels warmth approaching, and behold! she is there. One overflows with erenity, with gayety, with ecstasy; one is a radiance amid the night. And there re a thousand little cares. Nothings, which are enormous in that void. The most neffable accents of the feminine voice employed to lull you, and supplying the anished universe to you. One is caressed with the soul. One sees nothing, but ne feels that one is adored. It is a paradise of shadows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.4#It was from this paradise that Monseigneur Welcome had passed to the ther.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.5#The announcement of his death was reprinted by the local journal of M. sur . On the following day, M. Madeleine appeared clad wholly in black, and with rape on his hat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.6#This mourning was noticed in the town, and commented on. It seemed to throw light on M. Madeleine’s origin. It was concluded that some relationship xisted between him and the venerable Bishop. _“He has gone into mourning for he Bishop of D——”_ said the drawing-rooms; this raised M. Madeleine’s credit reatly, and procured for him, instantly and at one blow, a certain onsideration in the noble world of M. sur M. The microscopic Faubourg aint-Germain of the place meditated raising the quarantine against M. adeleine, the probable relative of a bishop. M. Madeleine perceived the dvancement which he had obtained, by the more numerous courtesies of the old omen and the more plentiful smiles of the young ones. One evening, a ruler in hat petty great world, who was curious by right of seniority, ventured to ask im, “M. le Maire is doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of D——?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.7#He said, “No, Madame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.8#“But,” resumed the dowager, “you are wearing mourning for him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.9#He replied, “It is because I was a servant in his family in my youth.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.4.10#Another thing which was remarked, was, that every time that he encountered n the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about the country and seeking himneys to sweep, the mayor had him summoned, inquired his name, and gave him oney. The little Savoyards told each other about it: a great many of them assed that way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.head#CHAPTER V—VAGUE FLASHES ON THE HORIZON
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.1#Little by little, and in the course of time, all this opposition subsided. here had at first been exercised against M. Madeleine, in virtue of a sort of aw which all those who rise must submit to, blackening and calumnies; then they rew to be nothing more than ill-nature, then merely malicious remarks, then ven this entirely disappeared; respect became complete, unanimous, cordial, and owards 1821 the moment arrived when the word “Monsieur le Maire” was pronounced t M. sur M. with almost the same accent as “Monseigneur the Bishop” had been ronounced in D—— in 1815. People came from a distance of ten leagues around to onsult M. Madeleine. He put an end to differences, he prevented lawsuits, he econciled enemies. Every one took him for the judge, and with good reason. It eemed as though he had for a soul the book of the natural law. It was like an pidemic of veneration, which in the course of six or seven years gradually took ossession of the whole district.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.2#One single man in the town, in the arrondissement, absolutely escaped this ontagion, and, whatever Father Madeleine did, remained his opponent as though a ort of incorruptible and imperturbable instinct kept him on the alert and neasy. It seems, in fact, as though there existed in certain men a veritable estial instinct, though pure and upright, like all instincts, which creates ntipathies and sympathies, which fatally separates one nature from another ature, which does not hesitate, which feels no disquiet, which does not hold ts peace, and which never belies itself, clear in its obscurity, infallible, mperious, intractable, stubborn to all counsels of the intelligence and to all he dissolvents of reason, and which, in whatever manner destinies are arranged, ecretly warns the man-dog of the presence of the man-cat, and the man-fox of he presence of the man-lion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.3#It frequently happened that when M. Madeleine was passing along a street, alm, affectionate, surrounded by the blessings of all, a man of lofty stature, lad in an iron-gray frock-coat, armed with a heavy cane, and wearing a battered at, turned round abruptly behind him, and followed him with his eyes until he isappeared, with folded arms and a slow shake of the head, and his upper lip aised in company with his lower to his nose, a sort of significant grimace hich might be translated by: “What is that man, after all? I certainly have een him somewhere. In any case, I am not his dupe.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.4#This person, grave with a gravity which was almost menacing, was one of hose men who, even when only seen by a rapid glimpse, arrest the spectator’s ttention.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.5#His name was Javert, and he belonged to the police.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.6#At M. sur M. he exercised the unpleasant but useful functions of an nspector. He had not seen Madeleine’s beginnings. Javert owed the post which he ccupied to the protection of M. Chabouillet, the secretary of the Minister of tate, Comte Anglès, then prefect of police at Paris. When Javert arrived at M. ur M. the fortune of the great manufacturer was already made, and Father adeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.7#Certain police officers have a peculiar physiognomy, which is complicated ith an air of baseness mingled with an air of authority. Javert possessed this hysiognomy minus the baseness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.8#It is our conviction that if souls were visible to the eyes, we should be ble to see distinctly that strange thing that each one individual of the human ace corresponds to some one of the species of the animal creation; and we could asily recognize this truth, hardly perceived by the thinker, that from the yster to the eagle, from the pig to the tiger, all animals exist in man, and hat each one of them is in a man. Sometimes even several of them at a time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.9#Animals are nothing else than the figures of our virtues and our vices, traying before our eyes, the visible phantoms of our souls. God shows them to s in order to induce us to reflect. Only since animals are mere shadows, God as not made them capable of education in the full sense of the word; what is he use? On the contrary, our souls being realities and having a goal which is ppropriate to them, God has bestowed on them intelligence; that is to say, the ossibility of education. Social education, when well done, can always draw from soul, of whatever sort it may be, the utility which it contains.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.10#This, be it said, is of course from the restricted point of view of the errestrial life which is apparent, and without prejudging the profound question f the anterior or ulterior personality of the beings which are not man. The isible _I_ in nowise authorizes the thinker to deny the latent _I_. Having made his reservation, let us pass on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.11#Now, if the reader will admit, for a moment, with us, that in every man here is one of the animal species of creation, it will be easy for us to say hat there was in Police Officer Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.12#The peasants of Asturias are convinced that in every litter of wolves here is one dog, which is killed by the mother because, otherwise, as he grew p, he would devour the other little ones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.13#Give to this dog-son of a wolf a human face, and the result will be avert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.14#Javert had been born in prison, of a fortune-teller, whose husband was in he galleys. As he grew up, he thought that he was outside the pale of society, nd he despaired of ever re-entering it. He observed that society unpardoningly xcludes two classes of men,—those who attack it and those who guard it; he had o choice except between these two classes; at the same time, he was conscious f an indescribable foundation of rigidity, regularity, and probity, complicated ith an inexpressible hatred for the race of bohemians whence he was sprung. He ntered the police; he succeeded there. At forty years of age he was an nspector.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.15#During his youth he had been employed in the convict establishments of the outh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.16#Before proceeding further, let us come to an understanding as to the ords, “human face,” which we have just applied to Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.17#The human face of Javert consisted of a flat nose, with two deep nostrils, owards which enormous whiskers ascended on his cheeks. One felt ill at ease hen he saw these two forests and these two caverns for the first time. When avert laughed,—and his laugh was rare and terrible,—his thin lips parted and evealed to view not only his teeth, but his gums, and around his nose there ormed a flattened and savage fold, as on the muzzle of a wild beast. Javert, erious, was a watchdog; when he laughed, he was a tiger. As for the rest, he ad very little skull and a great deal of jaw; his hair concealed his forehead nd fell over his eyebrows; between his eyes there was a permanent, central rown, like an imprint of wrath; his gaze was obscure; his mouth pursed up and errible; his air that of ferocious command.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.18#This man was composed of two very simple and two very good sentiments, omparatively; but he rendered them almost bad, by dint of exaggerating hem,—respect for authority, hatred of rebellion; and in his eyes, murder, obbery, all crimes, are only forms of rebellion. He enveloped in a blind and rofound faith every one who had a function in the state, from the prime inister to the rural policeman. He covered with scorn, aversion, and disgust very one who had once crossed the legal threshold of evil. He was absolute, and dmitted no exceptions. On the one hand, he said, “The functionary can make no istake; the magistrate is never the wrong.” On the other hand, he said, “These en are irremediably lost. Nothing good can come from them.” He fully shared the pinion of those extreme minds which attribute to human law I know not what ower of making, or, if the reader will have it so, of authenticating, demons, nd who place a Styx at the base of society. He was stoical, serious, austere; a elancholy dreamer, humble and haughty, like fanatics. His glance was like a imlet, cold and piercing. His whole life hung on these two words: watchfulness nd supervision. He had introduced a straight line into what is the most crooked hing in the world; he possessed the conscience of his usefulness, the religion f his functions, and he was a spy as other men are priests. Woe to the man who ell into his hands! He would have arrested his own father, if the latter had scaped from the galleys, and would have denounced his mother, if she had broken er ban. And he would have done it with that sort of inward satisfaction which s conferred by virtue. And, withal, a life of privation, isolation, abnegation, hastity, with never a diversion. It was implacable duty; the police understood, s the Spartans understood Sparta, a pitiless lying in wait, a ferocious onesty, a marble informer, Brutus in Vidocq.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.19#Javert’s whole person was expressive of the man who spies and who ithdraws himself from observation. The mystical school of Joseph de Maistre, hich at that epoch seasoned with lofty cosmogony those things which were called he ultra newspapers, would not have failed to declare that Javert was a symbol. is brow was not visible; it disappeared beneath his hat: his eyes were not isible, since they were lost under his eyebrows: his chin was not visible, for t was plunged in his cravat: his hands were not visible; they were drawn up in is sleeves: and his cane was not visible; he carried it under his coat. But hen the occasion presented itself, there was suddenly seen to emerge from all his shadow, as from an ambuscade, a narrow and angular forehead, a baleful lance, a threatening chin, enormous hands, and a monstrous cudgel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.20#In his leisure moments, which were far from frequent, he read, although he ated books; this caused him to be not wholly illiterate. This could be ecognized by some emphasis in his speech.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.21#As we have said, he had no vices. When he was pleased with himself, he ermitted himself a pinch of snuff. Therein lay his connection with umanity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.22#The reader will have no difficulty in understanding that Javert was the error of that whole class which the annual statistics of the Ministry of ustice designates under the rubric, Vagrants. The name of Javert routed them by ts mere utterance; the face of Javert petrified them at sight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.23#Such was this formidable man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.24#Javert was like an eye constantly fixed on M. Madeleine. An eye full of uspicion and conjecture. M. Madeleine had finally perceived the fact; but it eemed to be of no importance to him. He did not even put a question to Javert; e neither sought nor avoided him; he bore that embarrassing and almost ppressive gaze without appearing to notice it. He treated Javert with ease and ourtesy, as he did all the rest of the world.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.25#It was divined, from some words which escaped Javert, that he had secretly nvestigated, with that curiosity which belongs to the race, and into which here enters as much instinct as will, all the anterior traces which Father adeleine might have left elsewhere. He seemed to know, and he sometimes said in overt words, that some one had gleaned certain information in a certain istrict about a family which had disappeared. Once he chanced to say, as he was alking to himself, “I think I have him!” Then he remained pensive for three ays, and uttered not a word. It seemed that the thread which he thought he held ad broken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.26#Moreover, and this furnishes the necessary corrective for the too absolute ense which certain words might present, there can be nothing really infallible n a human creature, and the peculiarity of instinct is that it can become onfused, thrown off the track, and defeated. Otherwise, it would be superior to ntelligence, and the beast would be found to be provided with a better light han man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.27#Javert was evidently somewhat disconcerted by the perfect naturalness and ranquillity of M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.5.28#One day, nevertheless, his strange manner appeared to produce an mpression on M. Madeleine. It was on the following occasion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.head#CHAPTER VI—FATHER FAUCHELEVENT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.1#One morning M. Madeleine was passing through an unpaved alley of M. sur M.; e heard a noise, and saw a group some distance away. He approached. An old man amed Father Fauchelevent had just fallen beneath his cart, his horse having umbled down.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.2#This Fauchelevent was one of the few enemies whom M. Madeleine had at that ime. When Madeleine arrived in the neighborhood, Fauchelevent, an ex-notary and peasant who was almost educated, had a business which was beginning to be in a ad way. Fauchelevent had seen this simple workman grow rich, while he, a awyer, was being ruined. This had filled him with jealousy, and he had done all e could, on every occasion, to injure Madeleine. Then bankruptcy had come; and s the old man had nothing left but a cart and a horse, and neither family nor hildren, he had turned carter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.3#The horse had two broken legs and could not rise. The old man was caught in he wheels. The fall had been so unlucky that the whole weight of the vehicle ested on his breast. The cart was quite heavily laden. Father Fauchelevent was attling in the throat in the most lamentable manner. They had tried, but in ain, to drag him out. An unmethodical effort, aid awkwardly given, a wrong hake, might kill him. It was impossible to disengage him otherwise than by ifting the vehicle off of him. Javert, who had come up at the moment of the ccident, had sent for a jack-screw.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.4#M. Madeleine arrived. People stood aside respectfully.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.5#“Help!” cried old Fauchelevent. “Who will be good and save the old an?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.6#M. Madeleine turned towards those present:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.7#“Is there a jack-screw to be had?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.8#“One has been sent for,” answered the peasant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.9#“How long will it take to get it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.10#“They have gone for the nearest, to Flachot’s place, where there is a arrier; but it makes no difference; it will take a good quarter of an our.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.11#“A quarter of an hour!” exclaimed Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.12#It had rained on the preceding night; the soil was soaked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.13#The cart was sinking deeper into the earth every moment, and crushing the ld carter’s breast more and more. It was evident that his ribs would be broken n five minutes more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.14#“It is impossible to wait another quarter of an hour,” said Madeleine to he peasants, who were staring at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.15#“We must!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.16#“But it will be too late then! Don’t you see that the cart is inking?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.17#“Well!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.18#“Listen,” resumed Madeleine; “there is still room enough under the cart to llow a man to crawl beneath it and raise it with his back. Only half a minute, nd the poor man can be taken out. Is there any one here who has stout loins and eart? There are five louis d’or to be earned!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.19#Not a man in the group stirred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.20#“Ten louis,” said Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.21#The persons present dropped their eyes. One of them muttered: “A man would eed to be devilish strong. And then he runs the risk of getting crushed!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.22#“Come,” began Madeleine again, “twenty louis.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.23#The same silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.24#“It is not the will which is lacking,” said a voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.25#M. Madeleine turned round, and recognized Javert. He had not noticed him n his arrival.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.26#Javert went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.27#“It is strength. One would have to be a terrible man to do such a thing as ift a cart like that on his back.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.28#Then, gazing fixedly at M. Madeleine, he went on, emphasizing every word hat he uttered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.29#“Monsieur Madeleine, I have never known but one man capable of doing what ou ask.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.30#Madeleine shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.31#Javert added, with an air of indifference, but without removing his eyes rom Madeleine:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.32#“He was a convict.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.33#“Ah!” said Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.34#“In the galleys at Toulon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.35#Madeleine turned pale.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.36#Meanwhile, the cart continued to sink slowly. Father Fauchelevent rattled n the throat, and shrieked:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.37#“I am strangling! My ribs are breaking! a screw! something! Ah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.38#Madeleine glanced about him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.39#“Is there, then, no one who wishes to earn twenty louis and save the life f this poor old man?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.40#No one stirred. Javert resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.41#“I have never known but one man who could take the place of a screw, and e was that convict.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.42#“Ah! It is crushing me!” cried the old man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.43#Madeleine raised his head, met Javert’s falcon eye still fixed upon him, ooked at the motionless peasants, and smiled sadly. Then, without saying a ord, he fell on his knees, and before the crowd had even had time to utter a ry, he was underneath the vehicle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.44#A terrible moment of expectation and silence ensued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.45#They beheld Madeleine, almost flat on his stomach beneath that terrible eight, make two vain efforts to bring his knees and his elbows together. They houted to him, “Father Madeleine, come out!” Old Fauchelevent himself said to im, “Monsieur Madeleine, go away! You see that I am fated to die! Leave me! You ill get yourself crushed also!” Madeleine made no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.46#All the spectators were panting. The wheels had continued to sink, and it ad become almost impossible for Madeleine to make his way from under the ehicle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.47#Suddenly the enormous mass was seen to quiver, the cart rose slowly, the heels half emerged from the ruts. They heard a stifled voice crying, “Make aste! Help!” It was Madeleine, who had just made a final effort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.48#They rushed forwards. The devotion of a single man had given force and ourage to all. The cart was raised by twenty arms. Old Fauchelevent was aved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.6.49#Madeleine rose. He was pale, though dripping with perspiration. His lothes were torn and covered with mud. All wept. The old man kissed his knees nd called him the good God. As for him, he bore upon his countenance an ndescribable expression of happy and celestial suffering, and he fixed his ranquil eye on Javert, who was still staring at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.7.head#CHAPTER VII—FAUCHELEVENT BECOMES A GARDENER IN PARIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.7.1#Fauchelevent had dislocated his kneepan in his fall. Father Madeleine had im conveyed to an infirmary which he had established for his workmen in the actory building itself, and which was served by two sisters of charity. On the ollowing morning the old man found a thousand-franc bank-note on his ight-stand, with these words in Father Madeleine’s writing: _“I purchase your orse and cart.”_ The cart was broken, and the horse was dead. Fauchelevent ecovered, but his knee remained stiff. M. Madeleine, on the recommendation of he sisters of charity and of his priest, got the good man a place as gardener n a female convent in the Rue Saint-Antoine in Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.7.2#Some time afterwards, M. Madeleine was appointed mayor. The first time that avert beheld M. Madeleine clothed in the scarf which gave him authority over he town, he felt the sort of shudder which a watch-dog might experience on melling a wolf in his master’s clothes. From that time forth he avoided him as uch as he possibly could. When the requirements of the service imperatively emanded it, and he could not do otherwise than meet the mayor, he addressed him ith profound respect.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.7.3#This prosperity created at M. sur M. by Father Madeleine had, besides the isible signs which we have mentioned, another symptom which was nonetheless ignificant for not being visible. This never deceives. When the population uffers, when work is lacking, when there is no commerce, the tax-payer resists mposts through penury, he exhausts and oversteps his respite, and the state xpends a great deal of money in the charges for compelling and collection. When ork is abundant, when the country is rich and happy, the taxes are paid easily nd cost the state nothing. It may be said, that there is one infallible hermometer of the public misery and riches,—the cost of collecting the taxes. n the course of seven years the expense of collecting the taxes had diminished hree-fourths in the arrondissement of M. sur M., and this led to this rrondissement being frequently cited from all the rest by M. de Villèle, then inister of Finance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.7.4#Such was the condition of the country when Fantine returned thither. No one emembered her. Fortunately, the door of M. Madeleine’s factory was like the ace of a friend. She presented herself there, and was admitted to the women’s orkroom. The trade was entirely new to Fantine; she could not be very skilful t it, and she therefore earned but little by her day’s work; but it was ufficient; the problem was solved; she was earning her living.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—MADAME VICTURNIEN EXPENDS THIRTY FRANCS ON ORALITY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.1#When Fantine saw that she was making her living, she felt joyful for a oment. To live honestly by her own labor, what mercy from heaven! The taste for ork had really returned to her. She bought a looking-glass, took pleasure in urveying in it her youth, her beautiful hair, her fine teeth; she forgot many hings; she thought only of Cosette and of the possible future, and was almost appy. She hired a little room and furnished on credit on the strength of her uture work—a lingering trace of her improvident ways. As she was not able to ay that she was married she took good care, as we have seen, not to mention her ittle girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.2#At first, as the reader has seen, she paid the Thénardiers promptly. As she nly knew how to sign her name, she was obliged to write through a public etter-writer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.3#She wrote often, and this was noticed. It began to be said in an undertone, n the women’s workroom, that Fantine “wrote letters” and that “she had ways bout her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.4#There is no one for spying on people’s actions like those who are not oncerned in them. Why does that gentleman never come except at nightfall? Why oes Mr. So-and-So never hang his key on its nail on Tuesday? Why does he always ake the narrow streets? Why does Madame always descend from her hackney-coach efore reaching her house? Why does she send out to purchase six sheets of note aper, when she has a “whole stationer’s shop full of it?” etc. There exist eings who, for the sake of obtaining the key to these enigmas, which are, oreover, of no consequence whatever to them, spend more money, waste more time, ake more trouble, than would be required for ten good actions, and that ratuitously, for their own pleasure, without receiving any other payment for heir curiosity than curiosity. They will follow up such and such a man or woman or whole days; they will do sentry duty for hours at a time on the corners of he streets, under alley-way doors at night, in cold and rain; they will bribe rrand-porters, they will make the drivers of hackney-coaches and lackeys tipsy, uy a waiting-maid, suborn a porter. Why? For no reason. A pure passion for eeing, knowing, and penetrating into things. A pure itch for talking. And often hese secrets once known, these mysteries made public, these enigmas illuminated y the light of day, bring on catastrophies, duels, failures, the ruin of amilies, and broken lives, to the great joy of those who have “found out verything,” without any interest in the matter, and by pure instinct. A sad hing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.5#Certain persons are malicious solely through a necessity for talking. Their onversation, the chat of the drawing-room, gossip of the anteroom, is like hose chimneys which consume wood rapidly; they need a great amount of ombustibles; and their combustibles are furnished by their neighbors.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.6#So Fantine was watched.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.7#In addition, many a one was jealous of her golden hair and of her white eeth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.8#It was remarked that in the workroom she often turned aside, in the midst f the rest, to wipe away a tear. These were the moments when she was thinking f her child; perhaps, also, of the man whom she had loved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.9#Breaking the gloomy bonds of the past is a mournful task.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.10#It was observed that she wrote twice a month at least, and that she paid he carriage on the letter. They managed to obtain the address: _Monsieur, onsieur Thénardier, inn-keeper at Montfermeil_. The public writer, a good old an who could not fill his stomach with red wine without emptying his pocket of ecrets, was made to talk in the wine-shop. In short, it was discovered that antine had a child. “She must be a pretty sort of a woman.” An old gossip was ound, who made the trip to Montfermeil, talked to the Thénardiers, and said on er return: “For my five and thirty francs I have freed my mind. I have seen the hild.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.11#The gossip who did this thing was a gorgon named Madame Victurnien, the uardian and door-keeper of every one’s virtue. Madame Victurnien was fifty-six, nd re-enforced the mask of ugliness with the mask of age. A quavering voice, a himsical mind. This old dame had once been young—astonishing fact! In her outh, in ’93, she had married a monk who had fled from his cloister in a red ap, and passed from the Bernardines to the Jacobins. She was dry, rough, eevish, sharp, captious, almost venomous; all this in memory of her monk, whose idow she was, and who had ruled over her masterfully and bent her to his will. he was a nettle in which the rustle of the cassock was visible. At the estoration she had turned bigot, and that with so much energy that the priests ad forgiven her her monk. She had a small property, which she bequeathed with uch ostentation to a religious community. She was in high favor at the piscopal palace of Arras. So this Madame Victurnien went to Montfermeil, and eturned with the remark, “I have seen the child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.12#All this took time. Fantine had been at the factory for more than a year, hen, one morning, the superintendent of the workroom handed her fifty francs rom the mayor, told her that she was no longer employed in the shop, and equested her, in the mayor’s name, to leave the neighborhood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.13#This was the very month when the Thénardiers, after having demanded twelve rancs instead of six, had just exacted fifteen francs instead of twelve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.14#Fantine was overwhelmed. She could not leave the neighborhood; she was in ebt for her rent and furniture. Fifty francs was not sufficient to cancel this ebt. She stammered a few supplicating words. The superintendent ordered her to eave the shop on the instant. Besides, Fantine was only a moderately good orkwoman. Overcome with shame, even more than with despair, she quitted the hop, and returned to her room. So her fault was now known to every one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.8.15#She no longer felt strong enough to say a word. She was advised to see the ayor; she did not dare. The mayor had given her fifty francs because he was ood, and had dismissed her because he was just. She bowed before the ecision.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.head#CHAPTER IX—MADAME VICTURNIEN’S SUCCESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.1#So the monk’s widow was good for something.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.2#But M. Madeleine had heard nothing of all this. Life is full of just such ombinations of events. M. Madeleine was in the habit of almost never entering he women’s workroom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.3#At the head of this room he had placed an elderly spinster, whom the priest ad provided for him, and he had full confidence in this superintendent,—a truly espectable person, firm, equitable, upright, full of the charity which consists n giving, but not having in the same degree that charity which consists in nderstanding and in forgiving. M. Madeleine relied wholly on her. The best men re often obliged to delegate their authority. It was with this full power, and he conviction that she was doing right, that the superintendent had instituted he suit, judged, condemned, and executed Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.4#As regards the fifty francs, she had given them from a fund which M. adeleine had intrusted to her for charitable purposes, and for giving ssistance to the workwomen, and of which she rendered no account.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.5#Fantine tried to obtain a situation as a servant in the neighborhood; she ent from house to house. No one would have her. She could not leave town. The econd-hand dealer, to whom she was in debt for her furniture—and what urniture!—said to her, “If you leave, I will have you arrested as a thief.” The ouseholder, whom she owed for her rent, said to her, “You are young and pretty; ou can pay.” She divided the fifty francs between the landlord and the urniture-dealer, returned to the latter three-quarters of his goods, kept only ecessaries, and found herself without work, without a trade, with nothing but er bed, and still about fifty francs in debt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.6#She began to make coarse shirts for soldiers of the garrison, and earned welve sous a day. Her daughter cost her ten. It was at this point that she egan to pay the Thénardiers irregularly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.7#However, the old woman who lighted her candle for her when she returned at ight, taught her the art of living in misery. Back of living on little, there s the living on nothing. These are the two chambers; the first is dark, the econd is black.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.8#Fantine learned how to live without fire entirely in the winter; how to ive up a bird which eats a half a farthing’s worth of millet every two days; ow to make a coverlet of one’s petticoat, and a petticoat of one’s coverlet; ow to save one’s candle, by taking one’s meals by the light of the opposite indow. No one knows all that certain feeble creatures, who have grown old in rivation and honesty, can get out of a sou. It ends by being a talent. Fantine cquired this sublime talent, and regained a little courage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.9#At this epoch she said to a neighbor, “Bah! I say to myself, by only leeping five hours, and working all the rest of the time at my sewing, I shall lways manage to nearly earn my bread. And, then, when one is sad, one eats ess. Well, sufferings, uneasiness, a little bread on one hand, trouble on the ther,—all this will support me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.10#It would have been a great happiness to have her little girl with her in his distress. She thought of having her come. But what then! Make her share her wn destitution! And then, she was in debt to the Thénardiers! How could she pay hem? And the journey! How pay for that?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.11#The old woman who had given her lessons in what may be called the life of ndigence, was a sainted spinster named Marguerite, who was pious with a true iety, poor and charitable towards the poor, and even towards the rich, knowing ow to write just sufficiently to sign herself Marguerite, and believing in God, hich is science.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.12#There are many such virtuous people in this lower world; some day they ill be in the world above. This life has a morrow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.13#At first, Fantine had been so ashamed that she had not dared to go ut.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.14#When she was in the street, she divined that people turned round behind er, and pointed at her; every one stared at her and no one greeted her; the old and bitter scorn of the passers-by penetrated her very flesh and soul like north wind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.15#It seems as though an unfortunate woman were utterly bare beneath the arcasm and the curiosity of all in small towns. In Paris, at least, no one nows you, and this obscurity is a garment. Oh! how she would have liked to etake herself to Paris! Impossible!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.16#She was obliged to accustom herself to disrepute, as she had accustomed erself to indigence. Gradually she decided on her course. At the expiration of wo or three months she shook off her shame, and began to go about as though here were nothing the matter. “It is all the same to me,” she said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.17#She went and came, bearing her head well up, with a bitter smile, and was onscious that she was becoming brazen-faced.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.18#Madame Victurnien sometimes saw her passing, from her window, noticed the istress of “that creature” who, “thanks to her,” had been “put back in her roper place,” and congratulated herself. The happiness of the evil-minded is lack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.19#Excess of toil wore out Fantine, and the little dry cough which troubled er increased. She sometimes said to her neighbor, Marguerite, “Just feel how ot my hands are!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.9.20#Nevertheless, when she combed her beautiful hair in the morning with an ld broken comb, and it flowed about her like floss silk, she experienced a oment of happy coquetry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.head#CHAPTER X—RESULT OF THE SUCCESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.1#She had been dismissed towards the end of the winter; the summer passed, ut winter came again. Short days, less work. Winter: no warmth, no light, no oonday, the evening joining on to the morning, fogs, twilight; the window is ray; it is impossible to see clearly at it. The sky is but a vent-hole. The hole day is a cavern. The sun has the air of a beggar. A frightful season! inter changes the water of heaven and the heart of man into a stone. Her reditors harrassed her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.2#Fantine earned too little. Her debts had increased. The Thénardiers, who ere not promptly paid, wrote to her constantly letters whose contents drove her o despair, and whose carriage ruined her. One day they wrote to her that her ittle Cosette was entirely naked in that cold weather, that she needed a oollen skirt, and that her mother must send at least ten francs for this. She eceived the letter, and crushed it in her hands all day long. That evening she ent into a barber’s shop at the corner of the street, and pulled out her comb. er admirable golden hair fell to her knees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.3#“What splendid hair!” exclaimed the barber.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.4#“How much will you give me for it?” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.5#“Ten francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.6#“Cut it off.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.7#She purchased a knitted petticoat and sent it to the Thénardiers. This etticoat made the Thénardiers furious. It was the money that they wanted. They ave the petticoat to Éponine. The poor Lark continued to shiver.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.8#Fantine thought: “My child is no longer cold. I have clothed her with my air.” She put on little round caps which concealed her shorn head, and in which he was still pretty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.9#Dark thoughts held possession of Fantine’s heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.10#When she saw that she could no longer dress her hair, she began to hate very one about her. She had long shared the universal veneration for Father adeleine; yet, by dint of repeating to herself that it was he who had ischarged her, that he was the cause of her unhappiness, she came to hate him lso, and most of all. When she passed the factory in working hours, when the orkpeople were at the door, she affected to laugh and sing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.11#An old workwoman who once saw her laughing and singing in this fashion aid, “There’s a girl who will come to a bad end.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.12#She took a lover, the first who offered, a man whom she did not love, out f bravado and with rage in her heart. He was a miserable scamp, a sort of endicant musician, a lazy beggar, who beat her, and who abandoned her as she ad taken him, in disgust.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.13#She adored her child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.14#The lower she descended, the darker everything grew about her, the more adiant shone that little angel at the bottom of her heart. She said, “When I et rich, I will have my Cosette with me;” and she laughed. Her cough did not eave her, and she had sweats on her back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.15#One day she received from the Thénardiers a letter couched in the ollowing terms: “Cosette is ill with a malady which is going the rounds of the eighborhood. A miliary fever, they call it. Expensive drugs are required. This s ruining us, and we can no longer pay for them. If you do not send us forty rancs before the week is out, the little one will be dead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.16#She burst out laughing, and said to her old neighbor: “Ah! they are good! orty francs! the idea! That makes two napoleons! Where do they think I am to et them? These peasants are stupid, truly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.17#Nevertheless she went to a dormer window in the staircase and read the etter once more. Then she descended the stairs and emerged, running and leaping nd still laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.18#Some one met her and said to her, “What makes you so gay?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.19#She replied: “A fine piece of stupidity that some country people have ritten to me. They demand forty francs of me. So much for you, you easants!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.20#As she crossed the square, she saw a great many people collected around a arriage of eccentric shape, upon the top of which stood a man dressed in red, ho was holding forth. He was a quack dentist on his rounds, who was offering to he public full sets of teeth, opiates, powders and elixirs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.21#Fantine mingled in the group, and began to laugh with the rest at the arangue, which contained slang for the populace and jargon for respectable eople. The tooth-puller espied the lovely, laughing girl, and suddenly xclaimed: “You have beautiful teeth, you girl there, who are laughing; if you ant to sell me your palettes, I will give you a gold napoleon apiece for hem.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.22#“What are my palettes?” asked Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.23#“The palettes,” replied the dental professor, “are the front teeth, the wo upper ones.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.24#“How horrible!” exclaimed Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.25#“Two napoleons!” grumbled a toothless old woman who was present. “Here’s a ucky girl!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.26#Fantine fled and stopped her ears that she might not hear the hoarse voice f the man shouting to her: “Reflect, my beauty! two napoleons; they may prove f service. If your heart bids you, come this evening to the inn of the _Tillac ’Argent_; you will find me there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.27#Fantine returned home. She was furious, and related the occurrence to her ood neighbor Marguerite: “Can you understand such a thing? Is he not an bominable man? How can they allow such people to go about the country! Pull out y two front teeth! Why, I should be horrible! My hair will grow again, but my eeth! Ah! what a monster of a man! I should prefer to throw myself head first n the pavement from the fifth story! He told me that he should be at the Tillac d’Argent_ this evening.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.28#“And what did he offer?” asked Marguerite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.29#“Two napoleons.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.30#“That makes forty francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.31#“Yes,” said Fantine; “that makes forty francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.32#She remained thoughtful, and began her work. At the expiration of a uarter of an hour she left her sewing and went to read the Thénardiers’ letter nce more on the staircase.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.33#On her return, she said to Marguerite, who was at work beside her:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.34#“What is a miliary fever? Do you know?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.35#“Yes,” answered the old spinster; “it is a disease.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.36#“Does it require many drugs?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.37#“Oh! terrible drugs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.38#“How does one get it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.39#“It is a malady that one gets without knowing how.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.40#“Then it attacks children?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.41#“Children in particular.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.42#“Do people die of it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.43#“They may,” said Marguerite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.44#Fantine left the room and went to read her letter once more on the taircase.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.45#That evening she went out, and was seen to turn her steps in the direction f the Rue de Paris, where the inns are situated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.46#The next morning, when Marguerite entered Fantine’s room before aylight,—for they always worked together, and in this manner used only one andle for the two,—she found Fantine seated on her bed, pale and frozen. She ad not lain down. Her cap had fallen on her knees. Her candle had burned all ight, and was almost entirely consumed. Marguerite halted on the threshold, etrified at this tremendous wastefulness, and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.47#“Lord! the candle is all burned out! Something has happened.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.48#Then she looked at Fantine, who turned toward her her head bereft of its air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.49#Fantine had grown ten years older since the preceding night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.50#“Jesus!” said Marguerite, “what is the matter with you, Fantine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.51#“Nothing,” replied Fantine. “Quite the contrary. My child will not die of hat frightful malady, for lack of succor. I am content.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.52#So saying, she pointed out to the spinster two napoleons which were littering on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.53#“Ah! Jesus God!” cried Marguerite. “Why, it is a fortune! Where did you et those louis d’or?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.54#“I got them,” replied Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.55#At the same time she smiled. The candle illuminated her countenance. It as a bloody smile. A reddish saliva soiled the corners of her lips, and she had black hole in her mouth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.56#The two teeth had been extracted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.57#She sent the forty francs to Montfermeil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.58#After all it was a ruse of the Thénardiers to obtain money. Cosette was ot ill.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.59#Fantine threw her mirror out of the window. She had long since quitted her ell on the second floor for an attic with only a latch to fasten it, next the oof; one of those attics whose extremity forms an angle with the floor, and nocks you on the head every instant. The poor occupant can reach the end of his hamber as he can the end of his destiny, only by bending over more and ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.60#She had no longer a bed; a rag which she called her coverlet, a mattress n the floor, and a seatless chair still remained. A little rosebush which she ad, had dried up, forgotten, in one corner. In the other corner was a utter-pot to hold water, which froze in winter, and in which the various levels f the water remained long marked by these circles of ice. She had lost her hame; she lost her coquetry. A final sign. She went out, with dirty caps. hether from lack of time or from indifference, she no longer mended her linen. s the heels wore out, she dragged her stockings down into her shoes. This was vident from the perpendicular wrinkles. She patched her bodice, which was old nd worn out, with scraps of calico which tore at the slightest movement. The eople to whom she was indebted made “scenes” and gave her no peace. She found hem in the street, she found them again on her staircase. She passed many a ight weeping and thinking. Her eyes were very bright, and she felt a steady ain in her shoulder towards the top of the left shoulder-blade. She coughed a reat deal. She deeply hated Father Madeleine, but made no complaint. She sewed eventeen hours a day; but a contractor for the work of prisons, who made the risoners work at a discount, suddenly made prices fall, which reduced the daily arnings of working-women to nine sous. Seventeen hours of toil, and nine sous a ay! Her creditors were more pitiless than ever. The second-hand dealer, who had aken back nearly all his furniture, said to her incessantly, “When will you pay e, you hussy?” What did they want of her, good God! She felt that she was being unted, and something of the wild beast developed in her. About the same time, hénardier wrote to her that he had waited with decidedly too much amiability nd that he must have a hundred francs at once; otherwise he would turn little osette out of doors, convalescent as she was from her heavy illness, into the old and the streets, and that she might do what she liked with herself, and die f she chose. “A hundred francs,” thought Fantine. “But in what trade can one arn a hundred sous a day?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.61#“Come!” said she, “let us sell what is left.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.10.62#The unfortunate girl became a woman of the town.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.head#CHAPTER XI—CHRISTUS NOS LIBERAVIT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.1#What is this history of Fantine? It is society purchasing a slave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.2#From whom? From misery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.3#From hunger, cold, isolation, destitution. A dolorous bargain. A soul for a orsel of bread. Misery offers; society accepts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.4#The sacred law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization, but it does not, s yet, permeate it; it is said that slavery has disappeared from European ivilization. This is a mistake. It still exists; but it weighs only upon the oman, and it is called prostitution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.5#It weighs upon the woman, that is to say, upon grace, weakness, beauty, aternity. This is not one of the least of man’s disgraces.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.6#At the point in this melancholy drama which we have now reached, nothing is eft to Fantine of that which she had formerly been.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.7#She has become marble in becoming mire. Whoever touches her feels cold. She asses; she endures you; she ignores you; she is the severe and dishonored igure. Life and the social order have said their last word for her. All has appened to her that will happen to her. She has felt everything, borne verything, experienced everything, suffered everything, lost everything, ourned everything. She is resigned, with that resignation which resembles ndifference, as death resembles sleep. She no longer avoids anything. Let all he clouds fall upon her, and all the ocean sweep over her! What matters it to er? She is a sponge that is soaked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.8#At least, she believes it to be so; but it is an error to imagine that fate an be exhausted, and that one has reached the bottom of anything whatever.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.9#Alas! What are all these fates, driven on pell-mell? Whither are they oing? Why are they thus?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.10#He who knows that sees the whole of the shadow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.11.11#He is alone. His name is God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.head#CHAPTER XII—M. BAMATABOIS’S INACTIVITY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.1#There is in all small towns, and there was at M. sur M. in particular, a lass of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundred francs with the ame air with which their prototypes devour two hundred thousand francs a year n Paris. These are beings of the great neuter species: impotent men, parasites, yphers, who have a little land, a little folly, a little wit; who would be ustics in a drawing-room, and who think themselves gentlemen in the dram-shop; ho say, “My fields, my peasants, my woods”; who hiss actresses at the theatre o prove that they are persons of taste; quarrel with the officers of the arrison to prove that they are men of war; hunt, smoke, yawn, drink, smell of obacco, play billiards, stare at travellers as they descend from the diligence, ive at the café, dine at the inn, have a dog which eats the bones under the able, and a mistress who eats the dishes on the table; who stick at a sou, xaggerate the fashions, admire tragedy, despise women, wear out their old oots, copy London through Paris, and Paris through the medium of ont-à-Mousson, grow old as dullards, never work, serve no use, and do no great arm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.2#M. Félix Tholomyès, had he remained in his own province and never beheld aris, would have been one of these men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.3#If they were richer, one would say, “They are dandies;” if they were oorer, one would say, “They are idlers.” They are simply men without mployment. Among these unemployed there are bores, the bored, dreamers, and ome knaves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.4#At that period a dandy was composed of a tall collar, a big cravat, a watch ith trinkets, three vests of different colors, worn one on top of the other—the ed and blue inside; of a short-waisted olive coat, with a codfish tail, a ouble row of silver buttons set close to each other and running up to the houlder; and a pair of trousers of a lighter shade of olive, ornamented on the wo seams with an indefinite, but always uneven, number of lines, varying from ne to eleven—a limit which was never exceeded. Add to this, high shoes with ittle irons on the heels, a tall hat with a narrow brim, hair worn in a tuft, n enormous cane, and conversation set off by puns of Potier. Over all, spurs nd a moustache. At that epoch moustaches indicated the bourgeois, and spurs the edestrian.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.5#The provincial dandy wore the longest of spurs and the fiercest of oustaches.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.6#It was the period of the conflict of the republics of South America with he King of Spain, of Bolivar against Morillo. Narrow-brimmed hats were oyalist, and were called _morillos_; liberals wore hats with wide brims, which ere called _bolivars_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.7#Eight or ten months, then, after that which is related in the preceding ages, towards the first of January, 1823, on a snowy evening, one of these andies, one of these unemployed, a “right thinker,” for he wore a morillo, and as, moreover, warmly enveloped in one of those large cloaks which completed the ashionable costume in cold weather, was amusing himself by tormenting a reature who was prowling about in a ball-dress, with neck uncovered and flowers n her hair, in front of the officers’ café. This dandy was smoking, for he was ecidedly fashionable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.8#Each time that the woman passed in front of him, he bestowed on her, ogether with a puff from his cigar, some apostrophe which he considered witty nd mirthful, such as, “How ugly you are!—Will you get out of my sight?—You have o teeth!” etc., etc. This gentleman was known as M. Bamatabois. The woman, a elancholy, decorated spectre which went and came through the snow, made him no eply, did not even glance at him, and nevertheless continued her promenade in ilence, and with a sombre regularity, which brought her every five minutes ithin reach of this sarcasm, like the condemned soldier who returns under the ods. The small effect which he produced no doubt piqued the lounger; and taking dvantage of a moment when her back was turned, he crept up behind her with the ait of a wolf, and stifling his laugh, bent down, picked up a handful of snow rom the pavement, and thrust it abruptly into her back, between her bare houlders. The woman uttered a roar, whirled round, gave a leap like a panther, nd hurled herself upon the man, burying her nails in his face, with the most rightful words which could fall from the guard-room into the gutter. These nsults, poured forth in a voice roughened by brandy, did, indeed, proceed in ideous wise from a mouth which lacked its two front teeth. It was Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.9#At the noise thus produced, the officers ran out in throngs from the café, assers-by collected, and a large and merry circle, hooting and applauding, was ormed around this whirlwind composed of two beings, whom there was some ifficulty in recognizing as a man and a woman: the man struggling, his hat on he ground; the woman striking out with feet and fists, bareheaded, howling, inus hair and teeth, livid with wrath, horrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.10#Suddenly a man of lofty stature emerged vivaciously from the crowd, seized he woman by her satin bodice, which was covered with mud, and said to her, Follow me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.11#The woman raised her head; her furious voice suddenly died away. Her eyes ere glassy; she turned pale instead of livid, and she trembled with a quiver of error. She had recognized Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.12.12#The dandy took advantage of the incident to make his escape.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.head#CHAPTER XIII—THE SOLUTION OF SOME QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE UNICIPAL POLICE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.1#Javert thrust aside the spectators, broke the circle, and set out with long trides towards the police station, which is situated at the extremity of the quare, dragging the wretched woman after him. She yielded mechanically. Neither e nor she uttered a word. The cloud of spectators followed, jesting, in a aroxysm of delight. Supreme misery an occasion for obscenity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.2#On arriving at the police station, which was a low room, warmed by a stove, ith a glazed and grated door opening on the street, and guarded by a etachment, Javert opened the door, entered with Fantine, and shut the door ehind him, to the great disappointment of the curious, who raised themselves on iptoe, and craned their necks in front of the thick glass of the station-house, n their effort to see. Curiosity is a sort of gluttony. To see is to evour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.3#On entering, Fantine fell down in a corner, motionless and mute, crouching own like a terrified dog.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.4#The sergeant of the guard brought a lighted candle to the table. Javert eated himself, drew a sheet of stamped paper from his pocket, and began to rite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.5#This class of women is consigned by our laws entirely to the discretion of he police. The latter do what they please, punish them, as seems good to them, nd confiscate at their will those two sorry things which they entitle their ndustry and their liberty. Javert was impassive; his grave face betrayed no motion whatever. Nevertheless, he was seriously and deeply preoccupied. It was ne of those moments when he was exercising without control, but subject to all he scruples of a severe conscience, his redoubtable discretionary power. At hat moment he was conscious that his police agent’s stool was a tribunal. He as entering judgment. He judged and condemned. He summoned all the ideas which ould possibly exist in his mind, around the great thing which he was doing. The ore he examined the deed of this woman, the more shocked he felt. It was vident that he had just witnessed the commission of a crime. He had just eheld, yonder, in the street, society, in the person of a freeholder and an lector, insulted and attacked by a creature who was outside all pales. A rostitute had made an attempt on the life of a citizen. He had seen that, he, avert. He wrote in silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.6#When he had finished he signed the paper, folded it, and said to the ergeant of the guard, as he handed it to him, “Take three men and conduct this reature to jail.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.7#Then, turning to Fantine, “You are to have six months of it.” The unhappy oman shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.8#“Six months! six months of prison!” she exclaimed. “Six months in which to arn seven sous a day! But what will become of Cosette? My daughter! my aughter! But I still owe the Thénardiers over a hundred francs; do you know hat, Monsieur Inspector?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.9#She dragged herself across the damp floor, among the muddy boots of all hose men, without rising, with clasped hands, and taking great strides on her nees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.10#“Monsieur Javert,” said she, “I beseech your mercy. I assure you that I as not in the wrong. If you had seen the beginning, you would have seen. I wear to you by the good God that I was not to blame! That gentleman, the ourgeois, whom I do not know, put snow in my back. Has any one the right to put now down our backs when we are walking along peaceably, and doing no harm to ny one? I am rather ill, as you see. And then, he had been saying impertinent hings to me for a long time: ‘You are ugly! you have no teeth!’ I know well hat I have no longer those teeth. I did nothing; I said to myself, ‘The entleman is amusing himself.’ I was honest with him; I did not speak to him. It as at that moment that he put the snow down my back. Monsieur Javert, good onsieur Inspector! is there not some person here who saw it and can tell you hat this is quite true? Perhaps I did wrong to get angry. You know that one is ot master of one’s self at the first moment. One gives way to vivacity; and hen, when some one puts something cold down your back just when you are not xpecting it! I did wrong to spoil that gentleman’s hat. Why did he go away? I ould ask his pardon. Oh, my God! It makes no difference to me whether I ask his ardon. Do me the favor to-day, for this once, Monsieur Javert. Hold! you do not now that in prison one can earn only seven sous a day; it is not the overnment’s fault, but seven sous is one’s earnings; and just fancy, I must pay ne hundred francs, or my little girl will be sent to me. Oh, my God! I cannot ave her with me. What I do is so vile! Oh, my Cosette! Oh, my little angel of he Holy Virgin! what will become of her, poor creature? I will tell you: it is he Thénardiers, inn-keepers, peasants; and such people are unreasonable. They ant money. Don’t put me in prison! You see, there is a little girl who will be urned out into the street to get along as best she may, in the very heart of he winter; and you must have pity on such a being, my good Monsieur Javert. If he were older, she might earn her living; but it cannot be done at that age. I m not a bad woman at bottom. It is not cowardliness and gluttony that have made e what I am. If I have drunk brandy, it was out of misery. I do not love it; ut it benumbs the senses. When I was happy, it was only necessary to glance nto my closets, and it would have been evident that I was not a coquettish and ntidy woman. I had linen, a great deal of linen. Have pity on me, Monsieur avert!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.11#She spoke thus, rent in twain, shaken with sobs, blinded with tears, her eck bare, wringing her hands, and coughing with a dry, short cough, stammering oftly with a voice of agony. Great sorrow is a divine and terrible ray, which ransfigures the unhappy. At that moment Fantine had become beautiful once more. rom time to time she paused, and tenderly kissed the police agent’s coat. She ould have softened a heart of granite; but a heart of wood cannot be oftened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.12#“Come!” said Javert, “I have heard you out. Have you entirely finished? ou will get six months. Now march! The Eternal Father in person could do othing more.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.13#At these solemn words, _“the Eternal Father in person could do nothing ore,”_ she understood that her fate was sealed. She sank down, murmuring, Mercy!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.14#Javert turned his back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.15#The soldiers seized her by the arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.16#A few moments earlier a man had entered, but no one had paid any heed to im. He shut the door, leaned his back against it, and listened to Fantine’s espairing supplications.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.17#At the instant when the soldiers laid their hands upon the unfortunate oman, who would not rise, he emerged from the shadow, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.18#“One moment, if you please.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.19#Javert raised his eyes and recognized M. Madeleine. He removed his hat, nd, saluting him with a sort of aggrieved awkwardness:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.20#“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.21#The words “Mr. Mayor” produced a curious effect upon Fantine. She rose to er feet with one bound, like a spectre springing from the earth, thrust aside he soldiers with both arms, walked straight up to M. Madeleine before any one ould prevent her, and gazing intently at him, with a bewildered air, she ried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.22#“Ah! so it is you who are M. le Maire!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.23#Then she burst into a laugh, and spit in his face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.24#M. Madeleine wiped his face, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.25#“Inspector Javert, set this woman at liberty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.26#Javert felt that he was on the verge of going mad. He experienced at that oment, blow upon blow and almost simultaneously, the most violent emotions hich he had ever undergone in all his life. To see a woman of the town spit in he mayor’s face was a thing so monstrous that, in his most daring flights of ancy, he would have regarded it as a sacrilege to believe it possible. On the ther hand, at the very bottom of his thought, he made a hideous comparison as o what this woman was, and as to what this mayor might be; and then he, with orror, caught a glimpse of I know not what simple explanation of this rodigious attack. But when he beheld that mayor, that magistrate, calmly wipe is face and say, _“Set this woman at liberty,”_ he underwent a sort of ntoxication of amazement; thought and word failed him equally; the sum total of ossible astonishment had been exceeded in his case. He remained mute.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.27#The words had produced no less strange an effect on Fantine. She raised er bare arm, and clung to the damper of the stove, like a person who is eeling. Nevertheless, she glanced about her, and began to speak in a low voice, s though talking to herself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.28#“At liberty! I am to be allowed to go! I am not to go to prison for six onths! Who said that? It is not possible that any one could have said that. I id not hear aright. It cannot have been that monster of a mayor! Was it you, my ood Monsieur Javert, who said that I was to be set free? Oh, see here! I will ell you about it, and you will let me go. That monster of a mayor, that old lackguard of a mayor, is the cause of all. Just imagine, Monsieur Javert, he urned me out! all because of a pack of rascally women, who gossip in the orkroom. If that is not a horror, what is? To dismiss a poor girl who is doing er work honestly! Then I could no longer earn enough, and all this misery ollowed. In the first place, there is one improvement which these gentlemen of he police ought to make, and that is, to prevent prison contractors from ronging poor people. I will explain it to you, you see: you are earning twelve ous at shirt-making, the price falls to nine sous; and it is not enough to live n. Then one has to become whatever one can. As for me, I had my little Cosette, nd I was actually forced to become a bad woman. Now you understand how it is hat that blackguard of a mayor caused all the mischief. After that I stamped on hat gentleman’s hat in front of the officers’ café; but he had spoiled my whole ress with snow. We women have but one silk dress for evening wear. You see that did not do wrong deliberately—truly, Monsieur Javert; and everywhere I behold omen who are far more wicked than I, and who are much happier. O Monsieur avert! it was you who gave orders that I am to be set free, was it not? Make nquiries, speak to my landlord; I am paying my rent now; they will tell you hat I am perfectly honest. Ah! my God! I beg your pardon; I have nintentionally touched the damper of the stove, and it has made it smoke.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.29#M. Madeleine listened to her with profound attention. While she was peaking, he fumbled in his waistcoat, drew out his purse and opened it. It was mpty. He put it back in his pocket. He said to Fantine, “How much did you say hat you owed?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.30#Fantine, who was looking at Javert only, turned towards him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.31#“Was I speaking to you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.32#Then, addressing the soldiers:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.33#“Say, you fellows, did you see how I spit in his face? Ah! you old wretch f a mayor, you came here to frighten me, but I’m not afraid of you. I am afraid f Monsieur Javert. I am afraid of my good Monsieur Javert!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.34#So saying, she turned to the inspector again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.35#“And yet, you see, Mr. Inspector, it is necessary to be just. I understand hat you are just, Mr. Inspector; in fact, it is perfectly simple: a man amuses imself by putting snow down a woman’s back, and that makes the officers laugh; ne must divert themselves in some way; and we—well, we are here for them to muse themselves with, of course! And then, you, you come; you are certainly bliged to preserve order, you lead off the woman who is in the wrong; but on eflection, since you are a good man, you say that I am to be set at liberty; it s for the sake of the little one, for six months in prison would prevent my upporting my child. ‘Only, don’t do it again, you hussy!’ Oh! I won’t do it gain, Monsieur Javert! They may do whatever they please to me now; I will not tir. But to-day, you see, I cried because it hurt me. I was not expecting that now from the gentleman at all; and then as I told you, I am not well; I have a ough; I seem to have a burning ball in my stomach, and the doctor tells me, Take care of yourself.’ Here, feel, give me your hand; don’t be afraid—it is ere.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.36#She no longer wept, her voice was caressing; she placed Javert’s coarse and on her delicate, white throat and looked smilingly at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.37#All at once she rapidly adjusted her disordered garments, dropped the olds of her skirt, which had been pushed up as she dragged herself along, lmost to the height of her knee, and stepped towards the door, saying to the oldiers in a low voice, and with a friendly nod:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.38#“Children, Monsieur l’Inspecteur has said that I am to be released, and I m going.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.39#She laid her hand on the latch of the door. One step more and she would be n the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.40#Javert up to that moment had remained erect, motionless, with his eyes ixed on the ground, cast athwart this scene like some displaced statue, which s waiting to be put away somewhere.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.41#The sound of the latch roused him. He raised his head with an expression f sovereign authority, an expression all the more alarming in proportion as the uthority rests on a low level, ferocious in the wild beast, atrocious in the an of no estate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.42#“Sergeant!” he cried, “don’t you see that that jade is walking off! Who ade you let her go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.43#“I,” said Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.44#Fantine trembled at the sound of Javert’s voice, and let go of the latch s a thief relinquishes the article which he has stolen. At the sound of adeleine’s voice she turned around, and from that moment forth she uttered no ord, nor dared so much as to breathe freely, but her glance strayed from adeleine to Javert, and from Javert to Madeleine in turn, according to which as speaking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.45#It was evident that Javert must have been exasperated beyond measure efore he would permit himself to apostrophize the sergeant as he had done, fter the mayor’s suggestion that Fantine should be set at liberty. Had he eached the point of forgetting the mayor’s presence? Had he finally declared to imself that it was impossible that any “authority” should have given such an rder, and that the mayor must certainly have said one thing by mistake for nother, without intending it? Or, in view of the enormities of which he had een a witness for the past two hours, did he say to himself, that it was ecessary to recur to supreme resolutions, that it was indispensable that the mall should be made great, that the police spy should transform himself into a agistrate, that the policeman should become a dispenser of justice, and that, n this prodigious extremity, order, law, morality, government, society in its ntirety, was personified in him, Javert?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.46#However that may be, when M. Madeleine uttered that word, _I_, as we have ust heard, Police Inspector Javert was seen to turn toward the mayor, pale, old, with blue lips, and a look of despair, his whole body agitated by an mperceptible quiver and an unprecedented occurrence, and say to him, with owncast eyes but a firm voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.47#“Mr. Mayor, that cannot be.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.48#“Why not?” said M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.49#“This miserable woman has insulted a citizen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.50#“Inspector Javert,” replied the mayor, in a calm and conciliating tone, listen. You are an honest man, and I feel no hesitation in explaining matters o you. Here is the true state of the case: I was passing through the square ust as you were leading this woman away; there were still groups of people tanding about, and I made inquiries and learned everything; it was the townsman ho was in the wrong and who should have been arrested by properly conducted olice.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.51#Javert retorted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.52#“This wretch has just insulted Monsieur le Maire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.53#“That concerns me,” said M. Madeleine. “My own insult belongs to me, I hink. I can do what I please about it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.54#“I beg Monsieur le Maire’s pardon. The insult is not to him but to the aw.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.55#“Inspector Javert,” replied M. Madeleine, “the highest law is conscience. have heard this woman; I know what I am doing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.56#“And I, Mr. Mayor, do not know what I see.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.57#“Then content yourself with obeying.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.58#“I am obeying my duty. My duty demands that this woman shall serve six onths in prison.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.59#M. Madeleine replied gently:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.60#“Heed this well; she will not serve a single day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.61#At this decisive word, Javert ventured to fix a searching look on the ayor and to say, but in a tone of voice that was still profoundly espectful:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.62#“I am sorry to oppose Monsieur le Maire; it is for the first time in my ife, but he will permit me to remark that I am within the bounds of my uthority. I confine myself, since Monsieur le Maire desires it, to the question f the gentleman. I was present. This woman flung herself on Monsieur amatabois, who is an elector and the proprietor of that handsome house with a alcony, which forms the corner of the esplanade, three stories high and ntirely of cut stone. Such things as there are in the world! In any case, onsieur le Maire, this is a question of police regulations in the streets, and oncerns me, and I shall detain this woman Fantine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.63#Then M. Madeleine folded his arms, and said in a severe voice which no one n the town had heard hitherto:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.64#“The matter to which you refer is one connected with the municipal police. ccording to the terms of articles nine, eleven, fifteen, and sixty-six of the ode of criminal examination, I am the judge. I order that this woman shall be et at liberty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.65#Javert ventured to make a final effort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.66#“But, Mr. Mayor—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.67#“I refer you to article eighty-one of the law of the 13th of December, 799, in regard to arbitrary detention.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.68#“Monsieur le Maire, permit me—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.69#“Not another word.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.70#“But—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.71#“Leave the room,” said M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.72#Javert received the blow erect, full in the face, in his breast, like a ussian soldier. He bowed to the very earth before the mayor and left the oom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.73#Fantine stood aside from the door and stared at him in amazement as he assed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.74#Nevertheless, she also was the prey to a strange confusion. She had just een herself a subject of dispute between two opposing powers. She had seen two en who held in their hands her liberty, her life, her soul, her child, in ombat before her very eyes; one of these men was drawing her towards darkness, he other was leading her back towards the light. In this conflict, viewed hrough the exaggerations of terror, these two men had appeared to her like two iants; the one spoke like her demon, the other like her good angel. The angel ad conquered the demon, and, strange to say, that which made her shudder from ead to foot was the fact that this angel, this liberator, was the very man whom he abhorred, that mayor whom she had so long regarded as the author of all her oes, that Madeleine! And at the very moment when she had insulted him in so ideous a fashion, he had saved her! Had she, then, been mistaken? Must she hange her whole soul? She did not know; she trembled. She listened in ewilderment, she looked on in affright, and at every word uttered by M. adeleine she felt the frightful shades of hatred crumble and melt within her, nd something warm and ineffable, indescribable, which was both joy, confidence nd love, dawn in her heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.75#When Javert had taken his departure, M. Madeleine turned to her and said o her in a deliberate voice, like a serious man who does not wish to weep and ho finds some difficulty in speaking:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.76#“I have heard you. I knew nothing about what you have mentioned. I believe hat it is true, and I feel that it is true. I was even ignorant of the fact hat you had left my shop. Why did you not apply to me? But here; I will pay our debts, I will send for your child, or you shall go to her. You shall live ere, in Paris, or where you please. I undertake the care of your child and ourself. You shall not work any longer if you do not like. I will give all the oney you require. You shall be honest and happy once more. And listen! I eclare to you that if all is as you say,—and I do not doubt it,—you have never eased to be virtuous and holy in the sight of God. Oh! poor woman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.77#This was more than Fantine could bear. To have Cosette! To leave this life f infamy. To live free, rich, happy, respectable with Cosette; to see all these ealities of paradise blossom of a sudden in the midst of her misery. She stared tupidly at this man who was talking to her, and could only give vent to two or hree sobs, “Oh! Oh! Oh!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.78#Her limbs gave way beneath her, she knelt in front of M. Madeleine, and efore he could prevent her he felt her grasp his hand and press her lips to t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.5.13.79#Then she fainted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.head#BOOK SIXTH—JAVERT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE BEGINNING OF REPOSE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.1#M. Madeleine had Fantine removed to that infirmary which he had established n his own house. He confided her to the sisters, who put her to bed. A burning ever had come on. She passed a part of the night in delirium and raving. At ength, however, she fell asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.2#On the morrow, towards midday, Fantine awoke. She heard some one breathing lose to her bed; she drew aside the curtain and saw M. Madeleine standing there nd looking at something over her head. His gaze was full of pity, anguish, and upplication. She followed its direction, and saw that it was fixed on a rucifix which was nailed to the wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.3#Thenceforth, M. Madeleine was transfigured in Fantine’s eyes. He seemed to er to be clothed in light. He was absorbed in a sort of prayer. She gazed at im for a long time without daring to interrupt him. At last she said imidly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.4#“What are you doing?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.5#M. Madeleine had been there for an hour. He had been waiting for Fantine to wake. He took her hand, felt of her pulse, and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.6#“How do you feel?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.7#“Well, I have slept,” she replied; “I think that I am better. It is othing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.8#He answered, responding to the first question which she had put to him as hough he had just heard it:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.9#“I was praying to the martyr there on high.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.10#And he added in his own mind, “For the martyr here below.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.11#M. Madeleine had passed the night and the morning in making inquiries. He new all now. He knew Fantine’s history in all its heart-rending details. He ent on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.12#“You have suffered much, poor mother. Oh! do not complain; you now have he dowry of the elect. It is thus that men are transformed into angels. It is ot their fault they do not know how to go to work otherwise. You see this hell rom which you have just emerged is the first form of heaven. It was necessary o begin there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.13#He sighed deeply. But she smiled on him with that sublime smile in which wo teeth were lacking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.14#That same night, Javert wrote a letter. The next morning be posted it imself at the office of M. sur M. It was addressed to Paris, and the uperscription ran: _To Monsieur Chabouillet, Secretary of Monsieur le Préfet of olice_. As the affair in the station-house had been bruited about, the ost-mistress and some other persons who saw the letter before it was sent off, nd who recognized Javert’s handwriting on the cover, thought that he was ending in his resignation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.15#M. Madeleine made haste to write to the Thénardiers. Fantine owed them one undred and twenty francs. He sent them three hundred francs, telling them to ay themselves from that sum, and to fetch the child instantly to M. sur M., here her sick mother required her presence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.16#This dazzled Thénardier. “The devil!” said the man to his wife; “don’t et’s allow the child to go. This lark is going to turn into a milch cow. I see hrough it. Some ninny has taken a fancy to the mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.17#He replied with a very well drawn-up bill for five hundred and some odd rancs. In this memorandum two indisputable items figured up over three hundred rancs,—one for the doctor, the other for the apothecary who had attended and hysicked Éponine and Azelma through two long illnesses. Cosette, as we have lready said, had not been ill. It was only a question of a trifling ubstitution of names. At the foot of the memorandum Thénardier wrote, _Received n account, three hundred francs_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.18#M. Madeleine immediately sent three hundred francs more, and wrote, “Make aste to bring Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.19#“Christi!” said Thénardier, “let’s not give up the child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.20#In the meantime, Fantine did not recover. She still remained in the nfirmary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.21#The sisters had at first only received and nursed “that woman” with epugnance. Those who have seen the bas-reliefs of Rheims will recall the nflation of the lower lip of the wise virgins as they survey the foolish irgins. The ancient scorn of the vestals for the ambubajæ is one of the most rofound instincts of feminine dignity; the sisters felt it with the double orce contributed by religion. But in a few days Fantine disarmed them. She said ll kinds of humble and gentle things, and the mother in her provoked enderness. One day the sisters heard her say amid her fever: “I have been a inner; but when I have my child beside me, it will be a sign that God has ardoned me. While I was leading a bad life, I should not have liked to have my osette with me; I could not have borne her sad, astonished eyes. It was for her ake that I did evil, and that is why God pardons me. I shall feel the enediction of the good God when Cosette is here. I shall gaze at her; it will o me good to see that innocent creature. She knows nothing at all. She is an ngel, you see, my sisters. At that age the wings have not fallen off.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.22#M. Madeleine went to see her twice a day, and each time she asked im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.23#“Shall I see my Cosette soon?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.24#He answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.25#“To-morrow, perhaps. She may arrive at any moment. I am expecting er.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.26#And the mother’s pale face grew radiant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.27#“Oh!” she said, “how happy I am going to be!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.28#We have just said that she did not recover her health. On the contrary, er condition seemed to become more grave from week to week. That handful of now applied to her bare skin between her shoulder-blades had brought about a udden suppression of perspiration, as a consequence of which the malady which ad been smouldering within her for many years was violently developed at last. t that time people were beginning to follow the fine Laënnec’s fine suggestions n the study and treatment of chest maladies. The doctor sounded Fantine’s chest nd shook his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.29#M. Madeleine said to the doctor:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.30#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.31#“Has she not a child which she desires to see?” said the doctor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.32#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.33#“Well! Make haste and get it here!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.34#M. Madeleine shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.35#Fantine inquired:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.36#“What did the doctor say?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.37#M. Madeleine forced himself to smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.38#“He said that your child was to be brought speedily. That that would estore your health.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.39#“Oh!” she rejoined, “he is right! But what do those Thénardiers mean by eeping my Cosette from me! Oh! she is coming. At last I behold happiness close eside me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.40#In the meantime Thénardier did not “let go of the child,” and gave a undred insufficient reasons for it. Cosette was not quite well enough to take a ourney in the winter. And then, there still remained some petty but pressing ebts in the neighborhood, and they were collecting the bills for them, etc., tc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.41#“I shall send some one to fetch Cosette!” said Father Madeleine. “If ecessary, I will go myself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.42#He wrote the following letter to Fantine’s dictation, and made her sign t:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.43#“MONSIEUR THÉNARDIER:— You will deliver Cosette to this person. You will e paid for all the little things. I have the honor to salute you with respect. FANTINE.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.1.44#In the meantime a serious incident occurred. Carve as we will the ysterious block of which our life is made, the black vein of destiny constantly eappears in it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.head#CHAPTER II—HOW JEAN MAY BECOME CHAMP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.1#One morning M. Madeleine was in his study, occupied in arranging in advance ome pressing matters connected with the mayor’s office, in case he should ecide to take the trip to Montfermeil, when he was informed that Police nspector Javert was desirous of speaking with him. Madeleine could not refrain rom a disagreeable impression on hearing this name. Javert had avoided him more han ever since the affair of the police-station, and M. Madeleine had not seen im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.2#“Admit him,” he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.3#Javert entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.4#M. Madeleine had retained his seat near the fire, pen in hand, his eyes ixed on the docket which he was turning over and annotating, and which ontained the trials of the commission on highways for the infraction of police egulations. He did not disturb himself on Javert’s account. He could not help hinking of poor Fantine, and it suited him to be glacial in his manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.5#Javert bestowed a respectful salute on the mayor, whose back was turned to im. The mayor did not look at him, but went on annotating this docket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.6#Javert advanced two or three paces into the study, and halted, without reaking the silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.7#If any physiognomist who had been familiar with Javert, and who had made a engthy study of this savage in the service of civilization, this singular omposite of the Roman, the Spartan, the monk, and the corporal, this spy who as incapable of a lie, this unspotted police agent—if any physiognomist had nown his secret and long-cherished aversion for M. Madeleine, his conflict with he mayor on the subject of Fantine, and had examined Javert at that moment, he ould have said to himself, “What has taken place?” It was evident to any one cquainted with that clear, upright, sincere, honest, austere, and ferocious onscience, that Javert had but just gone through some great interior struggle. avert had nothing in his soul which he had not also in his countenance. Like iolent people in general, he was subject to abrupt changes of opinion. His hysiognomy had never been more peculiar and startling. On entering he bowed to . Madeleine with a look in which there was neither rancor, anger, nor distrust; e halted a few paces in the rear of the mayor’s armchair, and there he stood, erfectly erect, in an attitude almost of discipline, with the cold, ingenuous oughness of a man who has never been gentle and who has always been patient; he aited without uttering a word, without making a movement, in genuine humility nd tranquil resignation, calm, serious, hat in hand, with eyes cast down, and n expression which was half-way between that of a soldier in the presence of is officer and a criminal in the presence of his judge, until it should please he mayor to turn round. All the sentiments as well as all the memories which ne might have attributed to him had disappeared. That face, as impenetrable and imple as granite, no longer bore any trace of anything but a melancholy epression. His whole person breathed lowliness and firmness and an ndescribable courageous despondency.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.8#At last the mayor laid down his pen and turned half round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.9#“Well! What is it? What is the matter, Javert?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.10#Javert remained silent for an instant as though collecting his ideas, then aised his voice with a sort of sad solemnity, which did not, however, preclude implicity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.11#“This is the matter, Mr. Mayor; a culpable act has been committed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.12#“What act?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.13#“An inferior agent of the authorities has failed in respect, and in the ravest manner, towards a magistrate. I have come to bring the fact to your nowledge, as it is my duty to do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.14#“Who is the agent?” asked M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.15#“I,” said Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.16#“You?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.17#“I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.18#“And who is the magistrate who has reason to complain of the agent?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.19#“You, Mr. Mayor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.20#M. Madeleine sat erect in his armchair. Javert went on, with a severe air nd his eyes still cast down.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.21#“Mr. Mayor, I have come to request you to instigate the authorities to ismiss me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.22#M. Madeleine opened his mouth in amazement. Javert interrupted him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.23#“You will say that I might have handed in my resignation, but that does ot suffice. Handing in one’s resignation is honorable. I have failed in my uty; I ought to be punished; I must be turned out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.24#And after a pause he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.25#“Mr. Mayor, you were severe with me the other day, and unjustly. Be so o-day, with justice.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.26#“Come, now! Why?” exclaimed M. Madeleine. “What nonsense is this? What is he meaning of this? What culpable act have you been guilty of towards me? What ave you done to me? What are your wrongs with regard to me? You accuse ourself; you wish to be superseded—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.27#“Turned out,” said Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.28#“Turned out; so it be, then. That is well. I do not understand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.29#“You shall understand, Mr. Mayor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.30#Javert sighed from the very bottom of his chest, and resumed, still coldly nd sadly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.31#“Mr. Mayor, six weeks ago, in consequence of the scene over that woman, I as furious, and I informed against you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.32#“Informed against me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.33#“At the Prefecture of Police in Paris.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.34#M. Madeleine, who was not in the habit of laughing much oftener than avert himself, burst out laughing now:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.35#“As a mayor who had encroached on the province of the police?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.36#“As an ex-convict.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.37#The mayor turned livid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.38#Javert, who had not raised his eyes, went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.39#“I thought it was so. I had had an idea for a long time; a resemblance; nquiries which you had caused to be made at Faverolles; the strength of your oins; the adventure with old Fauchelevant; your skill in marksmanship; your eg, which you drag a little;—I hardly know what all,—absurdities! But, at all vents, I took you for a certain Jean Valjean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.40#“A certain—What did you say the name was?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.41#“Jean Valjean. He was a convict whom I was in the habit of seeing twenty ears ago, when I was adjutant-guard of convicts at Toulon. On leaving the alleys, this Jean Valjean, as it appears, robbed a bishop; then he committed nother theft, accompanied with violence, on a public highway on the person of a ittle Savoyard. He disappeared eight years ago, no one knows how, and he has een sought, I fancied. In short, I did this thing! Wrath impelled me; I enounced you at the Prefecture!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.42#M. Madeleine, who had taken up the docket again several moments before his, resumed with an air of perfect indifference:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.43#“And what reply did you receive?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.44#“That I was mad.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.45#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.46#“Well, they were right.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.47#“It is lucky that you recognize the fact.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.48#“I am forced to do so, since the real Jean Valjean has been found.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.49#The sheet of paper which M. Madeleine was holding dropped from his hand; e raised his head, gazed fixedly at Javert, and said with his indescribable ccent:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.50#“Ah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.51#Javert continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.52#“This is the way it is, Mr. Mayor. It seems that there was in the eighborhood near Ailly-le-Haut-Clocher an old fellow who was called Father hampmathieu. He was a very wretched creature. No one paid any attention to him. o one knows what such people subsist on. Lately, last autumn, Father hampmathieu was arrested for the theft of some cider apples from—Well, no atter, a theft had been committed, a wall scaled, branches of trees broken. My hampmathieu was arrested. He still had the branch of apple-tree in his hand. he scamp is locked up. Up to this point it was merely an affair of a isdemeanor. But here is where Providence intervened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.53#“The jail being in a bad condition, the examining magistrate finds it onvenient to transfer Champmathieu to Arras, where the departmental prison is ituated. In this prison at Arras there is an ex-convict named Brevet, who is etained for I know not what, and who has been appointed turnkey of the house, ecause of good behavior. Mr. Mayor, no sooner had Champmathieu arrived than revet exclaims: ‘Eh! Why, I know that man! He is a _fagot!_4 Take a good look t me, my good man! You are Jean Valjean!’ ‘Jean Valjean! who’s Jean Valjean?’ hampmathieu feigns astonishment. ‘Don’t play the innocent dodge,’ says Brevet. You are Jean Valjean! You have been in the galleys of Toulon; it was twenty ears ago; we were there together.’ Champmathieu denies it. Parbleu! You nderstand. The case is investigated. The thing was well ventilated for me. This s what they discovered: This Champmathieu had been, thirty years ago, a pruner f trees in various localities, notably at Faverolles. There all trace of him as lost. A long time afterwards he was seen again in Auvergne; then in Paris, here he is said to have been a wheelwright, and to have had a daughter, who was laundress; but that has not been proved. Now, before going to the galleys for heft, what was Jean Valjean? A pruner of trees. Where? At Faverolles. Another act. This Valjean’s Christian name was Jean, and his mother’s surname was athieu. What more natural to suppose than that, on emerging from the galleys, e should have taken his mother’s name for the purpose of concealing himself, nd have called himself Jean Mathieu? He goes to Auvergne. The local ronunciation turns _Jean_ into _Chan_—he is called Chan Mathieu. Our man offers o opposition, and behold him transformed into Champmathieu. You follow me, do ou not? Inquiries were made at Faverolles. The family of Jean Valjean is no onger there. It is not known where they have gone. You know that among those lasses a family often disappears. Search was made, and nothing was found. When uch people are not mud, they are dust. And then, as the beginning of the story ates thirty years back, there is no longer any one at Faverolles who knew Jean aljean. Inquiries were made at Toulon. Besides Brevet, there are only two onvicts in existence who have seen Jean Valjean; they are Cochepaille and henildieu, and are sentenced for life. They are taken from the galleys and onfronted with the pretended Champmathieu. They do not hesitate; he is Jean aljean for them as well as for Brevet. The same age,—he is fifty-four,—the same eight, the same air, the same man; in short, it is he. It was precisely at this oment that I forwarded my denunciation to the Prefecture in Paris. I was told hat I had lost my reason, and that Jean Valjean is at Arras, in the power of he authorities. You can imagine whether this surprised me, when I thought that had that same Jean Valjean here. I write to the examining judge; he sends for e; Champmathieu is conducted to me—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.54#“Well?” interposed M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.55#Javert replied, his face incorruptible, and as melancholy as ever:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.56#“Mr. Mayor, the truth is the truth. I am sorry; but that man is Jean aljean. I recognized him also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.57#M. Madeleine resumed in, a very low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.58#“You are sure?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.59#Javert began to laugh, with that mournful laugh which comes from profound onviction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.60#“O! Sure!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.61#He stood there thoughtfully for a moment, mechanically taking pinches of owdered wood for blotting ink from the wooden bowl which stood on the table, nd he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.62#“And even now that I have seen the real Jean Valjean, I do not see how I ould have thought otherwise. I beg your pardon, Mr. Mayor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.63#Javert, as he addressed these grave and supplicating words to the man, who ix weeks before had humiliated him in the presence of the whole station-house, nd bade him “leave the room,”—Javert, that haughty man, was unconsciously full f simplicity and dignity,—M. Madeleine made no other reply to his prayer than he abrupt question:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.64#“And what does this man say?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.65#“Ah! Indeed, Mr. Mayor, it’s a bad business. If he is Jean Valjean, he has is previous conviction against him. To climb a wall, to break a branch, to urloin apples, is a mischievous trick in a child; for a man it is a isdemeanor; for a convict it is a crime. Robbing and housebreaking—it is all here. It is no longer a question of correctional police; it is a matter for the ourt of Assizes. It is no longer a matter of a few days in prison; it is the alleys for life. And then, there is the affair with the little Savoyard, who ill return, I hope. The deuce! there is plenty to dispute in the matter, is here not? Yes, for any one but Jean Valjean. But Jean Valjean is a sly dog. hat is the way I recognized him. Any other man would have felt that things were etting hot for him; he would struggle, he would cry out—the kettle sings before he fire; he would not be Jean Valjean, _et cetera_. But he has not the ppearance of understanding; he says, ‘I am Champmathieu, and I won’t depart rom that!’ He has an astonished air, he pretends to be stupid; it is far etter. Oh! the rogue is clever! But it makes no difference. The proofs are here. He has been recognized by four persons; the old scamp will be condemned. he case has been taken to the Assizes at Arras. I shall go there to give my estimony. I have been summoned.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.66#M. Madeleine had turned to his desk again, and taken up his docket, and as turning over the leaves tranquilly, reading and writing by turns, like a usy man. He turned to Javert:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.67#“That will do, Javert. In truth, all these details interest me but little. e are wasting our time, and we have pressing business on hand. Javert, you will etake yourself at once to the house of the woman Buseaupied, who sells herbs at he corner of the Rue Saint-Saulve. You will tell her that she must enter her omplaint against carter Pierre Chesnelong. The man is a brute, who came near rushing this woman and her child. He must be punished. You will then go to M. harcellay, Rue Montre-de-Champigny. He complained that there is a gutter on the djoining house which discharges rain-water on his premises, and is undermining he foundations of his house. After that, you will verify the infractions of olice regulations which have been reported to me in the Rue Guibourg, at Widow oris’s, and Rue du Garraud-Blanc, at Madame Renée le Bossé‘s, and you will repare documents. But I am giving you a great deal of work. Are you not to be bsent? Did you not tell me that you were going to Arras on that matter in a eek or ten days?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.68#“Sooner than that, Mr. Mayor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.69#“On what day, then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.70#“Why, I thought that I had said to Monsieur le Maire that the case was to e tried to-morrow, and that I am to set out by diligence to-night.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.71#M. Madeleine made an imperceptible movement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.72#“And how long will the case last?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.73#“One day, at the most. The judgment will be pronounced to-morrow evening t latest. But I shall not wait for the sentence, which is certain; I shall eturn here as soon as my deposition has been taken.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.74#“That is well,” said M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.75#And he dismissed Javert with a wave of the hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.76#Javert did not withdraw.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.77#“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.78#“What is it now?” demanded M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.79#“Mr. Mayor, there is still something of which I must remind you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.80#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.81#“That I must be dismissed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.82#M. Madeleine rose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.83#“Javert, you are a man of honor, and I esteem you. You exaggerate your ault. Moreover, this is an offence which concerns me. Javert, you deserve romotion instead of degradation. I wish you to retain your post.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.84#Javert gazed at M. Madeleine with his candid eyes, in whose depths his not ery enlightened but pure and rigid conscience seemed visible, and said in a ranquil voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.85#“Mr. Mayor, I cannot grant you that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.86#“I repeat,” replied M. Madeleine, “that the matter concerns me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.87#But Javert, heeding his own thought only, continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.88#“So far as exaggeration is concerned, I am not exaggerating. This is the ay I reason: I have suspected you unjustly. That is nothing. It is our right to herish suspicion, although suspicion directed above ourselves is an abuse. But ithout proofs, in a fit of rage, with the object of wreaking my vengeance, I ave denounced you as a convict, you, a respectable man, a mayor, a magistrate! hat is serious, very serious. I have insulted authority in your person, I, an gent of the authorities! If one of my subordinates had done what I have done, I hould have declared him unworthy of the service, and have expelled him. Well? top, Mr. Mayor; one word more. I have often been severe in the course of my ife towards others. That is just. I have done well. Now, if I were not severe owards myself, all the justice that I have done would become injustice. Ought I o spare myself more than others? No! What! I should be good for nothing but to hastise others, and not myself! Why, I should be a blackguard! Those who say, That blackguard of a Javert!’ would be in the right. Mr. Mayor, I do not desire hat you should treat me kindly; your kindness roused sufficient bad blood in me hen it was directed to others. I want none of it for myself. The kindness which onsists in upholding a woman of the town against a citizen, the police agent gainst the mayor, the man who is down against the man who is up in the world, s what I call false kindness. That is the sort of kindness which disorganizes ociety. Good God! it is very easy to be kind; the difficulty lies in being ust. Come! if you had been what I thought you, I should not have been kind to ou, not I! You would have seen! Mr. Mayor, I must treat myself as I would treat ny other man. When I have subdued malefactors, when I have proceeded with vigor gainst rascals, I have often said to myself, ‘If you flinch, if I ever catch ou in fault, you may rest at your ease!’ I have flinched, I have caught myself n a fault. So much the worse! Come, discharged, cashiered, expelled! That is ell. I have arms. I will till the soil; it makes no difference to me. Mr. ayor, the good of the service demands an example. I simply require the ischarge of Inspector Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.89#All this was uttered in a proud, humble, despairing, yet convinced tone, hich lent indescribable grandeur to this singular, honest man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.90#“We shall see,” said M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.91#And he offered him his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.92#Javert recoiled, and said in a wild voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.93#“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor, but this must not be. A mayor does not offer his and to a police spy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.94#He added between his teeth:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.95#“A police spy, yes; from the moment when I have misused the police. I am o more than a police spy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.96#Then he bowed profoundly, and directed his steps towards the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.97#There he wheeled round, and with eyes still downcast:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.98#“Mr. Mayor,” he said, “I shall continue to serve until I am uperseded.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.6.2.99#He withdrew. M. Madeleine remained thoughtfully listening to the firm, ure step, which died away on the pavement of the corridor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.head#BOOK SEVENTH—THE CHAMPMATHIEU AFFAIR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.head#CHAPTER I—SISTER SIMPLICE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.1#The incidents the reader is about to peruse were not all known at M. sur M. ut the small portion of them which became known left such a memory in that town hat a serious gap would exist in this book if we did not narrate them in their ost minute details. Among these details the reader will encounter two or three mprobable circumstances, which we preserve out of respect for the truth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.2#On the afternoon following the visit of Javert, M. Madeleine went to see antine according to his wont.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.3#Before entering Fantine’s room, he had Sister Simplice summoned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.4#The two nuns who performed the services of nurse in the infirmary, azariste ladies, like all sisters of charity, bore the names of Sister Perpétue nd Sister Simplice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.5#Sister Perpétue was an ordinary villager, a sister of charity in a coarse tyle, who had entered the service of God as one enters any other service. She as a nun as other women are cooks. This type is not so very rare. The monastic rders gladly accept this heavy peasant earthenware, which is easily fashioned nto a Capuchin or an Ursuline. These rustics are utilized for the rough work of evotion. The transition from a drover to a Carmelite is not in the least iolent; the one turns into the other without much effort; the fund of ignorance ommon to the village and the cloister is a preparation ready at hand, and laces the boor at once on the same footing as the monk: a little more amplitude n the smock, and it becomes a frock. Sister Perpétue was a robust nun from arines near Pontoise, who chattered her patois, droned, grumbled, sugared the otion according to the bigotry or the hypocrisy of the invalid, treated her atients abruptly, roughly, was crabbed with the dying, almost flung God in heir faces, stoned their death agony with prayers mumbled in a rage; was bold, onest, and ruddy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.6#Sister Simplice was white, with a waxen pallor. Beside Sister Perpétue, she as the taper beside the candle. Vincent de Paul has divinely traced the eatures of the Sister of Charity in these admirable words, in which he mingles s much freedom as servitude: “They shall have for their convent only the house f the sick; for cell only a hired room; for chapel only their parish church; or cloister only the streets of the town and the wards of the hospitals; for nclosure only obedience; for gratings only the fear of God; for veil only odesty.” This ideal was realized in the living person of Sister Simplice: she ad never been young, and it seemed as though she would never grow old. No one ould have told Sister Simplice’s age. She was a person—we dare not say a oman—who was gentle, austere, well-bred, cold, and who had never lied. She was o gentle that she appeared fragile; but she was more solid than granite. She ouched the unhappy with fingers that were charmingly pure and fine. There was, o to speak, silence in her speech; she said just what was necessary, and she ossessed a tone of voice which would have equally edified a confessional or nchanted a drawing-room. This delicacy accommodated itself to the serge gown, inding in this harsh contact a continual reminder of heaven and of God. Let us mphasize one detail. Never to have lied, never to have said, for any interest hatever, even in indifference, any single thing which was not the truth, the acred truth, was Sister Simplice’s distinctive trait; it was the accent of her irtue. She was almost renowned in the congregation for this imperturbable eracity. The Abbé Sicard speaks of Sister Simplice in a letter to the deaf-mute assieu. However pure and sincere we may be, we all bear upon our candor the rack of the little, innocent lie. She did not. Little lie, innocent lie—does uch a thing exist? To lie is the absolute form of evil. To lie a little is not ossible: he who lies, lies the whole lie. To lie is the very face of the demon. atan has two names; he is called Satan and Lying. That is what she thought; and s she thought, so she did. The result was the whiteness which we have entioned—a whiteness which covered even her lips and her eyes with radiance. er smile was white, her glance was white. There was not a single spider’s web, ot a grain of dust, on the glass window of that conscience. On entering the rder of Saint Vincent de Paul, she had taken the name of Simplice by special hoice. Simplice of Sicily, as we know, is the saint who preferred to allow both er breasts to be torn off rather than to say that she had been born at Segesta hen she had been born at Syracuse—a lie which would have saved her. This patron aint suited this soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.7#Sister Simplice, on her entrance into the order, had had two faults which he had gradually corrected: she had a taste for dainties, and she liked to eceive letters. She never read anything but a book of prayers printed in Latin, n coarse type. She did not understand Latin, but she understood the book.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.8#This pious woman had conceived an affection for Fantine, probably feeling a atent virtue there, and she had devoted herself almost exclusively to her are.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.9#M. Madeleine took Sister Simplice apart and recommended Fantine to her in a ingular tone, which the sister recalled later on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.10#On leaving the sister, he approached Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.11#Fantine awaited M. Madeleine’s appearance every day as one awaits a ray of armth and joy. She said to the sisters, “I only live when Monsieur le Maire is ere.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.12#She had a great deal of fever that day. As soon as she saw M. Madeleine he asked him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.13#“And Cosette?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.14#He replied with a smile:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.15#“Soon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.16#M. Madeleine was the same as usual with Fantine. Only he remained an hour nstead of half an hour, to Fantine’s great delight. He urged every one epeatedly not to allow the invalid to want for anything. It was noticed that here was a moment when his countenance became very sombre. But this was xplained when it became known that the doctor had bent down to his ear and said o him, “She is losing ground fast.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.1.17#Then he returned to the town-hall, and the clerk observed him attentively xamining a road map of France which hung in his study. He wrote a few figures n a bit of paper with a pencil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE PERSPICACITY OF MASTER SCAUFFLAIRE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.1#From the town-hall he betook himself to the extremity of the town, to a leming named Master Scaufflaer, French Scaufflaire, who let out “horses and abriolets as desired.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.2#In order to reach this Scaufflaire, the shortest way was to take the ittle-frequented street in which was situated the parsonage of the parish in hich M. Madeleine resided. The curé was, it was said, a worthy, respectable, nd sensible man. At the moment when M. Madeleine arrived in front of the arsonage there was but one passer-by in the street, and this person noticed his: After the mayor had passed the priest’s house he halted, stood motionless, hen turned about, and retraced his steps to the door of the parsonage, which ad an iron knocker. He laid his hand quickly on the knocker and lifted it; then e paused again and stopped short, as though in thought, and after the lapse of few seconds, instead of allowing the knocker to fall abruptly, he placed it ently, and resumed his way with a sort of haste which had not been apparent reviously.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.3#M. Madeleine found Master Scaufflaire at home, engaged in stitching a arness over.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.4#“Master Scaufflaire,” he inquired, “have you a good horse?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.5#“Mr. Mayor,” said the Fleming, “all my horses are good. What do you mean by good horse?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.6#“I mean a horse which can travel twenty leagues in a day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.7#“The deuce!” said the Fleming. “Twenty leagues!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.8#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.9#“Hitched to a cabriolet?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.10#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.11#“And how long can he rest at the end of his journey?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.12#“He must be able to set out again on the next day if necessary.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.13#“To traverse the same road?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.14#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.15#“The deuce! the deuce! And it is twenty leagues?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.16#M. Madeleine drew from his pocket the paper on which he had pencilled some igures. He showed it to the Fleming. The figures were 5, 6, 8½.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.17#“You see,” he said, “total, nineteen and a half; as well say twenty eagues.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.18#“Mr. Mayor,” returned the Fleming, “I have just what you want. My little hite horse—you may have seen him pass occasionally; he is a small beast from ower Boulonnais. He is full of fire. They wanted to make a saddle-horse of him t first. Bah! He reared, he kicked, he laid everybody flat on the ground. He as thought to be vicious, and no one knew what to do with him. I bought him. I arnessed him to a carriage. That is what he wanted, sir; he is as gentle as a irl; he goes like the wind. Ah! indeed he must not be mounted. It does not suit is ideas to be a saddle-horse. Every one has his ambition. ‘Draw? Yes. Carry? o.’ We must suppose that is what he said to himself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.19#“And he will accomplish the trip?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.20#“Your twenty leagues all at a full trot, and in less than eight hours. But ere are the conditions.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.21#“State them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.22#“In the first place, you will give him half an hour’s breathing spell idway of the road; he will eat; and some one must be by while he is eating to revent the stable boy of the inn from stealing his oats; for I have noticed hat in inns the oats are more often drunk by the stable men than eaten by the orses.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.23#“Some one will be by.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.24#“In the second place—is the cabriolet for Monsieur le Maire?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.25#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.26#“Does Monsieur le Maire know how to drive?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.27#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.28#“Well, Monsieur le Maire will travel alone and without baggage, in order ot to overload the horse?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.29#“Agreed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.30#“But as Monsieur le Maire will have no one with him, he will be obliged to ake the trouble himself of seeing that the oats are not stolen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.31#“That is understood.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.32#“I am to have thirty francs a day. The days of rest to be paid for lso—not a farthing less; and the beast’s food to be at Monsieur le Maire’s xpense.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.33#M. Madeleine drew three napoleons from his purse and laid them on the able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.34#“Here is the pay for two days in advance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.35#“Fourthly, for such a journey a cabriolet would be too heavy, and would atigue the horse. Monsieur le Maire must consent to travel in a little tilbury hat I own.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.36#“I consent to that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.37#“It is light, but it has no cover.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.38#“That makes no difference to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.39#“Has Monsieur le Maire reflected that we are in the middle of winter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.40#M. Madeleine did not reply. The Fleming resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.41#“That it is very cold?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.42#M. Madeleine preserved silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.43#Master Scaufflaire continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.44#“That it may rain?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.45#M. Madeleine raised his head and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.46#“The tilbury and the horse will be in front of my door to-morrow morning t half-past four o’clock.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.47#“Of course, Monsieur le Maire,” replied Scaufflaire; then, scratching a peck in the wood of the table with his thumb-nail, he resumed with that areless air which the Flemings understand so well how to mingle with their hrewdness:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.48#“But this is what I am thinking of now: Monsieur le Maire has not told me here he is going. Where is Monsieur le Maire going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.49#He had been thinking of nothing else since the beginning of the onversation, but he did not know why he had not dared to put the question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.50#“Are your horse’s forelegs good?” said M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.51#“Yes, Monsieur le Maire. You must hold him in a little when going down ill. Are there many descends between here and the place whither you are oing?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.52#“Do not forget to be at my door at precisely half-past four o’clock o-morrow morning,” replied M. Madeleine; and he took his departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.53#The Fleming remained “utterly stupid,” as he himself said some time fterwards.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.54#The mayor had been gone two or three minutes when the door opened again; t was the mayor once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.55#He still wore the same impassive and preoccupied air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.56#“Monsieur Scaufflaire,” said he, “at what sum do you estimate the value of he horse and tilbury which you are to let to me,—the one bearing the ther?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.57#“The one dragging the other, Monsieur le Maire,” said the Fleming, with a road smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.58#“So be it. Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.59#“Does Monsieur le Maire wish to purchase them or me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.60#“No; but I wish to guarantee you in any case. You shall give me back the um at my return. At what value do you estimate your horse and cabriolet?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.61#“Five hundred francs, Monsieur le Maire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.62#“Here it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.63#M. Madeleine laid a bank-bill on the table, then left the room; and this ime he did not return.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.64#Master Scaufflaire experienced a frightful regret that he had not said a housand francs. Besides the horse and tilbury together were worth but a hundred rowns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.65#The Fleming called his wife, and related the affair to her. “Where the evil could Monsieur le Maire be going?” They held counsel together. “He is oing to Paris,” said the wife. “I don’t believe it,” said the husband.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.66#M. Madeleine had forgotten the paper with the figures on it, and it lay on he chimney-piece. The Fleming picked it up and studied it. “Five, six, eight nd a half? That must designate the posting relays.” He turned to his wife:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.67#“I have found out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.68#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.69#“It is five leagues from here to Hesdin, six from Hesdin to Saint-Pol, ight and a half from Saint-Pol to Arras. He is going to Arras.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.70#Meanwhile, M. Madeleine had returned home. He had taken the longest way to eturn from Master Scaufflaire’s, as though the parsonage door had been a emptation for him, and he had wished to avoid it. He ascended to his room, and here he shut himself up, which was a very simple act, since he liked to go to ed early. Nevertheless, the portress of the factory, who was, at the same time, . Madeleine’s only servant, noticed that the latter’s light was extinguished at alf-past eight, and she mentioned it to the cashier when he came home, dding:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.71#“Is Monsieur le Maire ill? I thought he had a rather singular air.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.72#This cashier occupied a room situated directly under M. Madeleine’s hamber. He paid no heed to the portress’s words, but went to bed and to sleep. owards midnight he woke up with a start; in his sleep he had heard a noise bove his head. He listened; it was a footstep pacing back and forth, as though ome one were walking in the room above him. He listened more attentively, and ecognized M. Madeleine’s step. This struck him as strange; usually, there was o noise in M. Madeleine’s chamber until he rose in the morning. A moment later he cashier heard a noise which resembled that of a cupboard being opened, and hen shut again; then a piece of furniture was disarranged; then a pause ensued; hen the step began again. The cashier sat up in bed, quite awake now, and taring; and through his window-panes he saw the reddish gleam of a lighted indow reflected on the opposite wall; from the direction of the rays, it could nly come from the window of M. Madeleine’s chamber. The reflection wavered, as hough it came rather from a fire which had been lighted than from a candle. The hadow of the window-frame was not shown, which indicated that the window was ide open. The fact that this window was open in such cold weather was urprising. The cashier fell asleep again. An hour or two later he waked again. he same step was still passing slowly and regularly back and forth verhead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.73#The reflection was still visible on the wall, but now it was pale and eaceful, like the reflection of a lamp or of a candle. The window was still pen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.2.74#This is what had taken place in M. Madeleine’s room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.head#CHAPTER III—A TEMPEST IN A SKULL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.1#The reader has, no doubt, already divined that M. Madeleine is no other han Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.2#We have already gazed into the depths of this conscience; the moment has ow come when we must take another look into it. We do so not without emotion nd trepidation. There is nothing more terrible in existence than this sort of ontemplation. The eye of the spirit can nowhere find more dazzling brilliance nd more shadow than in man; it can fix itself on no other thing which is more ormidable, more complicated, more mysterious, and more infinite. There is a pectacle more grand than the sea; it is heaven: there is a spectacle more grand han heaven; it is the inmost recesses of the soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.3#To make the poem of the human conscience, were it only with reference to a ingle man, were it only in connection with the basest of men, would be to blend ll epics into one superior and definitive epic. Conscience is the chaos of himæras, of lusts, and of temptations; the furnace of dreams; the lair of ideas f which we are ashamed; it is the pandemonium of sophisms; it is the attlefield of the passions. Penetrate, at certain hours, past the livid face of human being who is engaged in reflection, and look behind, gaze into that oul, gaze into that obscurity. There, beneath that external silence, battles of iants, like those recorded in Homer, are in progress; skirmishes of dragons and ydras and swarms of phantoms, as in Milton; visionary circles, as in Dante. hat a solemn thing is this infinity which every man bears within him, and which e measures with despair against the caprices of his brain and the actions of is life!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.4#Alighieri one day met with a sinister-looking door, before which he esitated. Here is one before us, upon whose threshold we hesitate. Let us nter, nevertheless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.5#We have but little to add to what the reader already knows of what had appened to Jean Valjean after the adventure with Little Gervais. From that oment forth he was, as we have seen, a totally different man. What the Bishop ad wished to make of him, that he carried out. It was more than a ransformation; it was a transfiguration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.6#He succeeded in disappearing, sold the Bishop’s silver, reserving only the andlesticks as a souvenir, crept from town to town, traversed France, came to . sur M., conceived the idea which we have mentioned, accomplished what we have elated, succeeded in rendering himself safe from seizure and inaccessible, and, henceforth, established at M. sur M., happy in feeling his conscience saddened y the past and the first half of his existence belied by the last, he lived in eace, reassured and hopeful, having henceforth only two thoughts,—to conceal is name and to sanctify his life; to escape men and to return to God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.7#These two thoughts were so closely intertwined in his mind that they formed ut a single one there; both were equally absorbing and imperative and ruled his lightest actions. In general, they conspired to regulate the conduct of his ife; they turned him towards the gloom; they rendered him kindly and simple; hey counselled him to the same things. Sometimes, however, they conflicted. In hat case, as the reader will remember, the man whom all the country of M. sur . called M. Madeleine did not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second—his ecurity to his virtue. Thus, in spite of all his reserve and all his prudence, e had preserved the Bishop’s candlesticks, worn mourning for him, summoned and nterrogated all the little Savoyards who passed that way, collected information egarding the families at Faverolles, and saved old Fauchelevent’s life, despite he disquieting insinuations of Javert. It seemed, as we have already remarked, s though he thought, following the example of all those who have been wise, oly, and just, that his first duty was not towards himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.8#At the same time, it must be confessed, nothing just like this had yet resented itself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.9#Never had the two ideas which governed the unhappy man whose sufferings we re narrating, engaged in so serious a struggle. He understood this confusedly ut profoundly at the very first words pronounced by Javert, when the latter ntered his study. At the moment when that name, which he had buried beneath so any layers, was so strangely articulated, he was struck with stupor, and as hough intoxicated with the sinister eccentricity of his destiny; and through his stupor he felt that shudder which precedes great shocks. He bent like an ak at the approach of a storm, like a soldier at the approach of an assault. He elt shadows filled with thunders and lightnings descending upon his head. As he istened to Javert, the first thought which occurred to him was to go, to run nd denounce himself, to take that Champmathieu out of prison and place himself here; this was as painful and as poignant as an incision in the living flesh. hen it passed away, and he said to himself, “We will see! We will see!” He epressed this first, generous instinct, and recoiled before heroism.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.10#It would be beautiful, no doubt, after the Bishop’s holy words, after so any years of repentance and abnegation, in the midst of a penitence admirably egun, if this man had not flinched for an instant, even in the presence of so errible a conjecture, but had continued to walk with the same step towards this awning precipice, at the bottom of which lay heaven; that would have been eautiful; but it was not thus. We must render an account of the things which ent on in this soul, and we can only tell what there was there. He was carried way, at first, by the instinct of self-preservation; he rallied all his ideas n haste, stifled his emotions, took into consideration Javert’s presence, that reat danger, postponed all decision with the firmness of terror, shook off hought as to what he had to do, and resumed his calmness as a warrior picks up is buckler.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.11#He remained in this state during the rest of the day, a whirlwind within, profound tranquillity without. He took no “preservative measures,” as they may e called. Everything was still confused, and jostling together in his brain. is trouble was so great that he could not perceive the form of a single idea istinctly, and he could have told nothing about himself, except that he had eceived a great blow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.12#He repaired to Fantine’s bed of suffering, as usual, and prolonged his isit, through a kindly instinct, telling himself that he must behave thus, and ecommend her well to the sisters, in case he should be obliged to be absent imself. He had a vague feeling that he might be obliged to go to Arras; and ithout having the least in the world made up his mind to this trip, he said to imself that being, as he was, beyond the shadow of any suspicion, there could e nothing out of the way in being a witness to what was to take place, and he ngaged the tilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.13#He dined with a good deal of appetite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.14#On returning to his room, he communed with himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.15#He examined the situation, and found it unprecedented; so unprecedented hat in the midst of his reverie he rose from his chair, moved by some nexplicable impulse of anxiety, and bolted his door. He feared lest something ore should enter. He was barricading himself against possibilities.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.16#A moment later he extinguished his light; it embarrassed him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.17#It seemed to him as though he might be seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.18#By whom?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.19#Alas! That on which he desired to close the door had already entered; that hich he desired to blind was staring him in the face,—his conscience.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.20#His conscience; that is to say, God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.21#Nevertheless, he deluded himself at first; he had a feeling of security nd of solitude; the bolt once drawn, he thought himself impregnable; the candle xtinguished, he felt himself invisible. Then he took possession of himself: he et his elbows on the table, leaned his head on his hand, and began to meditate n the dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.22#“Where do I stand? Am not I dreaming? What have I heard? Is it really true hat I have seen that Javert, and that he spoke to me in that manner? Who can hat Champmathieu be? So he resembles me! Is it possible? When I reflect that esterday I was so tranquil, and so far from suspecting anything! What was I oing yesterday at this hour? What is there in this incident? What will the end e? What is to be done?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.23#This was the torment in which he found himself. His brain had lost its ower of retaining ideas; they passed like waves, and he clutched his brow in oth hands to arrest them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.24#Nothing but anguish extricated itself from this tumult which overwhelmed is will and his reason, and from which he sought to draw proof and esolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.25#His head was burning. He went to the window and threw it wide open. There ere no stars in the sky. He returned and seated himself at the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.26#The first hour passed in this manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.27#Gradually, however, vague outlines began to take form and to fix hemselves in his meditation, and he was able to catch a glimpse with precision f the reality,—not the whole situation, but some of the details. He began by ecognizing the fact that, critical and extraordinary as was this situation, he as completely master of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.28#This only caused an increase of his stupor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.29#Independently of the severe and religious aim which he had assigned to his ctions, all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but a hole in hich to bury his name. That which he had always feared most of all in his hours f self-communion, during his sleepless nights, was to ever hear that name ronounced; he had said to himself, that that would be the end of all things for im; that on the day when that name made its reappearance it would cause his new ife to vanish from about him, and—who knows?—perhaps even his new soul within im, also. He shuddered at the very thought that this was possible. Assuredly, f any one had said to him at such moments that the hour would come when that ame would ring in his ears, when the hideous words, Jean Valjean, would uddenly emerge from the darkness and rise in front of him, when that formidable ight, capable of dissipating the mystery in which he had enveloped himself, ould suddenly blaze forth above his head, and that that name would not menace im, that that light would but produce an obscurity more dense, that this rent eil would but increase the mystery, that this earthquake would solidify his difice, that this prodigious incident would have no other result, so far as he as concerned, if so it seemed good to him, than that of rendering his existence t once clearer and more impenetrable, and that, out of his confrontation with he phantom of Jean Valjean, the good and worthy citizen Monsieur Madeleine ould emerge more honored, more peaceful, and more respected than ever—if any ne had told him that, he would have tossed his head and regarded the words as hose of a madman. Well, all this was precisely what had just come to pass; all hat accumulation of impossibilities was a fact, and God had permitted these ild fancies to become real things!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.30#His reverie continued to grow clearer. He came more and more to an nderstanding of his position.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.31#It seemed to him that he had but just waked up from some inexplicable ream, and that he found himself slipping down a declivity in the middle of the ight, erect, shivering, holding back all in vain, on the very brink of the byss. He distinctly perceived in the darkness a stranger, a man unknown to him, hom destiny had mistaken for him, and whom she was thrusting into the gulf in is stead; in order that the gulf might close once more, it was necessary that ome one, himself or that other man, should fall into it: he had only let things ake their course.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.32#The light became complete, and he acknowledged this to himself: That his lace was empty in the galleys; that do what he would, it was still awaiting im; that the theft from little Gervais had led him back to it; that this vacant lace would await him, and draw him on until he filled it; that this was nevitable and fatal; and then he said to himself, “that, at this moment, he had substitute; that it appeared that a certain Champmathieu had that ill luck, nd that, as regards himself, being present in the galleys in the person of that hampmathieu, present in society under the name of M. Madeleine, he had nothing ore to fear, provided that he did not prevent men from sealing over the head of hat Champmathieu this stone of infamy which, like the stone of the sepulchre, alls once, never to rise again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.33#All this was so strange and so violent, that there suddenly took place in im that indescribable movement, which no man feels more than two or three times n the course of his life, a sort of convulsion of the conscience which stirs up ll that there is doubtful in the heart, which is composed of irony, of joy, and f despair, and which may be called an outburst of inward laughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.34#He hastily relighted his candle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.35#“Well, what then?” he said to himself; “what am I afraid of? What is there n all that for me to think about? I am safe; all is over. I had but one partly pen door through which my past might invade my life, and behold that door is alled up forever! That Javert, who has been annoying me so long; that terrible nstinct which seemed to have divined me, which had divined me—good God! and hich followed me everywhere; that frightful hunting-dog, always making a point t me, is thrown off the scent, engaged elsewhere, absolutely turned from the rail: henceforth he is satisfied; he will leave me in peace; he has his Jean aljean. Who knows? it is even probable that he will wish to leave town! And all his has been brought about without any aid from me, and I count for nothing in t! Ah! but where is the misfortune in this? Upon my honor, people would think, o see me, that some catastrophe had happened to me! After all, if it does bring arm to some one, that is not my fault in the least: it is Providence which has one it all; it is because it wishes it so to be, evidently. Have I the right to isarrange what it has arranged? What do I ask now? Why should I meddle? It does ot concern me; what! I am not satisfied: but what more do I want? The goal to hich I have aspired for so many years, the dream of my nights, the object of my rayers to Heaven,—security,—I have now attained; it is God who wills it; I can o nothing against the will of God, and why does God will it? In order that I ay continue what I have begun, that I may do good, that I may one day be a rand and encouraging example, that it may be said at last, that a little appiness has been attached to the penance which I have undergone, and to that irtue to which I have returned. Really, I do not understand why I was afraid, a ittle while ago, to enter the house of that good curé, and to ask his advice; his is evidently what he would have said to me: It is settled; let things take heir course; let the good God do as he likes!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.36#Thus did he address himself in the depths of his own conscience, bending ver what may be called his own abyss; he rose from his chair, and began to pace he room: “Come,” said he, “let us think no more about it; my resolve is taken!” ut he felt no joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.37#Quite the reverse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.38#One can no more prevent thought from recurring to an idea than one can the ea from returning to the shore: the sailor calls it the tide; the guilty man alls it remorse; God upheaves the soul as he does the ocean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.39#After the expiration of a few moments, do what he would, he resumed the loomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened, saying that hich he would have preferred to ignore, and listened to that which he would ave preferred not to hear, yielding to that mysterious power which said to him: Think!” as it said to another condemned man, two thousand years ago, “March n!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.40#Before proceeding further, and in order to make ourselves fully nderstood, let us insist upon one necessary observation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.41#It is certain that people do talk to themselves; there is no living being ho has not done it. It may even be said that the word is never a more agnificent mystery than when it goes from thought to conscience within a man, nd when it returns from conscience to thought; it is in this sense only that he words so often employed in this chapter, _he said, he exclaimed_, must be nderstood; one speaks to one’s self, talks to one’s self, exclaims to one’s elf without breaking the external silence; there is a great tumult; everything bout us talks except the mouth. The realities of the soul are nonetheless ealities because they are not visible and palpable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.42#So he asked himself where he stood. He interrogated himself upon that settled resolve.” He confessed to himself that all that he had just arranged in is mind was monstrous, that “to let things take their course, to let the good od do as he liked,” was simply horrible; to allow this error of fate and of men o be carried out, not to hinder it, to lend himself to it through his silence, o do nothing, in short, was to do everything! that this was hypocritical aseness in the last degree! that it was a base, cowardly, sneaking, abject, ideous crime!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.43#For the first time in eight years, the wretched man had just tasted the itter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.44#He spit it out with disgust.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.45#He continued to question himself. He asked himself severely what he had eant by this, “My object is attained!” He declared to himself that his life eally had an object; but what object? To conceal his name? To deceive the olice? Was it for so petty a thing that he had done all that he had done? Had e not another and a grand object, which was the true one—to save, not his erson, but his soul; to become honest and good once more; to be a just man? Was t not that above all, that alone, which he had always desired, which the Bishop ad enjoined upon him—to shut the door on his past? But he was not shutting it! reat God! he was re-opening it by committing an infamous action! He was ecoming a thief once more, and the most odious of thieves! He was robbing nother of his existence, his life, his peace, his place in the sunshine. He was ecoming an assassin. He was murdering, morally murdering, a wretched man. He as inflicting on him that frightful living death, that death beneath the open ky, which is called the galleys. On the other hand, to surrender himself to ave that man, struck down with so melancholy an error, to resume his own name, o become once more, out of duty, the convict Jean Valjean, that was, in truth, o achieve his resurrection, and to close forever that hell whence he had just merged; to fall back there in appearance was to escape from it in reality. This ust be done! He had done nothing if he did not do all this; his whole life was seless; all his penitence was wasted. There was no longer any need of saying, What is the use?” He felt that the Bishop was there, that the Bishop was resent all the more because he was dead, that the Bishop was gazing fixedly at im, that henceforth Mayor Madeleine, with all his virtues, would be abominable o him, and that the convict Jean Valjean would be pure and admirable in his ight; that men beheld his mask, but that the Bishop saw his face; that men saw is life, but that the Bishop beheld his conscience. So he must go to Arras, eliver the false Jean Valjean, and denounce the real one. Alas! that was the reatest of sacrifices, the most poignant of victories, the last step to take; ut it must be done. Sad fate! he would enter into sanctity only in the eyes of od when he returned to infamy in the eyes of men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.46#“Well,” said he, “let us decide upon this; let us do our duty; let us save his man.” He uttered these words aloud, without perceiving that he was speaking loud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.47#He took his books, verified them, and put them in order. He flung in the ire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassed tradesmen. He rote and sealed a letter, and on the envelope it might have been read, had here been any one in his chamber at the moment, _To Monsieur Laffitte, Banker, ue d’Artois, Paris_. He drew from his secretary a pocket-book which contained everal bank-notes and the passport of which he had made use that same year when e went to the elections.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.48#Any one who had seen him during the execution of these various acts, into hich there entered such grave thought, would have had no suspicion of what was oing on within him. Only occasionally did his lips move; at other times he aised his head and fixed his gaze upon some point of the wall, as though there xisted at that point something which he wished to elucidate or interrogate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.49#When he had finished the letter to M. Laffitte, he put it into his pocket, ogether with the pocket-book, and began his walk once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.50#His reverie had not swerved from its course. He continued to see his duty learly, written in luminous letters, which flamed before his eyes and changed ts place as he altered the direction of his glance:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.51#_“Go! Tell your name! Denounce yourself!”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.52#In the same way he beheld, as though they had passed before him in visible orms, the two ideas which had, up to that time, formed the double rule of his oul,—the concealment of his name, the sanctification of his life. For the first ime they appeared to him as absolutely distinct, and he perceived the distance hich separated them. He recognized the fact that one of these ideas was, ecessarily, good, while the other might become bad; that the first was elf-devotion, and that the other was personality; that the one said, _my eighbour_, and that the other said, _myself_; that one emanated from the light, nd the other from darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.53#They were antagonistic. He saw them in conflict. In proportion as he editated, they grew before the eyes of his spirit. They had now attained olossal statures, and it seemed to him that he beheld within himself, in that nfinity of which we were recently speaking, in the midst of the darkness and he lights, a goddess and a giant contending.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.54#He was filled with terror; but it seemed to him that the good thought was etting the upper hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.55#He felt that he was on the brink of the second decisive crisis of his onscience and of his destiny; that the Bishop had marked the first phase of his ew life, and that Champmathieu marked the second. After the grand crisis, the rand test.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.56#But the fever, allayed for an instant, gradually resumed possession of im. A thousand thoughts traversed his mind, but they continued to fortify him n his resolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.57#One moment he said to himself that he was, perhaps, taking the matter too eenly; that, after all, this Champmathieu was not interesting, and that he had ctually been guilty of theft.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.58#He answered himself: “If this man has, indeed, stolen a few apples, that eans a month in prison. It is a long way from that to the galleys. And who nows? Did he steal? Has it been proved? The name of Jean Valjean overwhelms im, and seems to dispense with proofs. Do not the attorneys for the Crown lways proceed in this manner? He is supposed to be a thief because he is known o be a convict.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.59#In another instant the thought had occurred to him that, when he denounced imself, the heroism of his deed might, perhaps, be taken into consideration, nd his honest life for the last seven years, and what he had done for the istrict, and that they would have mercy on him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.60#But this supposition vanished very quickly, and he smiled bitterly as he emembered that the theft of the forty sous from little Gervais put him in the osition of a man guilty of a second offence after conviction, that this affair ould certainly come up, and, according to the precise terms of the law, would ender him liable to penal servitude for life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.61#He turned aside from all illusions, detached himself more and more from arth, and sought strength and consolation elsewhere. He told himself that he ust do his duty; that perhaps he should not be more unhappy after doing his uty than after having avoided it; that if he _allowed things to take their own ourse_, if he remained at M. sur M., his consideration, his good name, his good orks, the deference and veneration paid to him, his charity, his wealth, his opularity, his virtue, would be seasoned with a crime. And what would be the aste of all these holy things when bound up with this hideous thing? while, if e accomplished his sacrifice, a celestial idea would be mingled with the alleys, the post, the iron necklet, the green cap, unceasing toil, and pitiless hame.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.62#At length he told himself that it must be so, that his destiny was thus llotted, that he had not authority to alter the arrangements made on high, hat, in any case, he must make his choice: virtue without and abomination ithin, or holiness within and infamy without.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.63#The stirring up of these lugubrious ideas did not cause his courage to ail, but his brain grow weary. He began to think of other things, of ndifferent matters, in spite of himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.64#The veins in his temples throbbed violently; he still paced to and fro; idnight sounded first from the parish church, then from the town-hall; he ounted the twelve strokes of the two clocks, and compared the sounds of the two ells; he recalled in this connection the fact that, a few days previously, he ad seen in an ironmonger’s shop an ancient clock for sale, upon which was ritten the name, _Antoine-Albin de Romainville_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.65#He was cold; he lighted a small fire; it did not occur to him to close the indow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.66#In the meantime he had relapsed into his stupor; he was obliged to make a olerably vigorous effort to recall what had been the subject of his thoughts efore midnight had struck; he finally succeeded in doing this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.67#“Ah! yes,” he said to himself, “I had resolved to inform against yself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.68#And then, all of a sudden, he thought of Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.69#“Hold!” said he, “and what about that poor woman?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.70#Here a fresh crisis declared itself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.71#Fantine, by appearing thus abruptly in his reverie, produced the effect of n unexpected ray of light; it seemed to him as though everything about him were ndergoing a change of aspect: he exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.72#“Ah! but I have hitherto considered no one but myself; it is proper for me o hold my tongue or to denounce myself, to conceal my person or to save my oul, to be a despicable and respected magistrate, or an infamous and venerable onvict; it is I, it is always I and nothing but I: but, good God! all this is gotism; these are diverse forms of egotism, but it is egotism all the same. hat if I were to think a little about others? The highest holiness is to think f others; come, let us examine the matter. The _I_ excepted, the _I_ effaced, he _I_ forgotten, what would be the result of all this? What if I denounce yself? I am arrested; this Champmathieu is released; I am put back in the alleys; that is well—and what then? What is going on here? Ah! here is a ountry, a town, here are factories, an industry, workers, both men and women, ged grandsires, children, poor people! All this I have created; all these I rovide with their living; everywhere where there is a smoking chimney, it is I ho have placed the brand on the hearth and meat in the pot; I have created ase, circulation, credit; before me there was nothing; I have elevated, ivified, informed with life, fecundated, stimulated, enriched the whole ountry-side; lacking me, the soul is lacking; I take myself off, everything ies: and this woman, who has suffered so much, who possesses so many merits in pite of her fall; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been! And hat child whom I meant to go in search of, whom I have promised to her mother; o I not also owe something to this woman, in reparation for the evil which I ave done her? If I disappear, what happens? The mother dies; the child becomes hat it can; that is what will take place, if I denounce myself. If I do not enounce myself? come, let us see how it will be if I do not denounce yself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.73#After putting this question to himself, he paused; he seemed to undergo a omentary hesitation and trepidation; but it did not last long, and he answered imself calmly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.74#“Well, this man is going to the galleys; it is true, but what the deuce! e has stolen! There is no use in my saying that he has not been guilty of heft, for he has! I remain here; I go on: in ten years I shall have made ten illions; I scatter them over the country; I have nothing of my own; what is hat to me? It is not for myself that I am doing it; the prosperity of all goes n augmenting; industries are aroused and animated; factories and shops are ultiplied; families, a hundred families, a thousand families, are happy; the istrict becomes populated; villages spring up where there were only farms efore; farms rise where there was nothing; wretchedness disappears, and with retchedness debauchery, prostitution, theft, murder; all vices disappear, all rimes: and this poor mother rears her child; and behold a whole country rich nd honest! Ah! I was a fool! I was absurd! what was that I was saying about enouncing myself? I really must pay attention and not be precipitate about nything. What! because it would have pleased me to play the grand and generous; his is melodrama, after all; because I should have thought of no one but yself, the idea! for the sake of saving from a punishment, a trifle xaggerated, perhaps, but just at bottom, no one knows whom, a thief, a ood-for-nothing, evidently, a whole country-side must perish! a poor woman must ie in the hospital! a poor little girl must die in the street! like dogs; ah, his is abominable! And without the mother even having seen her child once more, lmost without the child’s having known her mother; and all that for the sake of n old wretch of an apple-thief who, most assuredly, has deserved the galleys or something else, if not for that; fine scruples, indeed, which save a guilty an and sacrifice the innocent, which save an old vagabond who has only a few ears to live at most, and who will not be more unhappy in the galleys than in is hovel, and which sacrifice a whole population, mothers, wives, children. his poor little Cosette who has no one in the world but me, and who is, no oubt, blue with cold at this moment in the den of those Thénardiers; those eoples are rascals; and I was going to neglect my duty towards all these poor reatures; and I was going off to denounce myself; and I was about to commit hat unspeakable folly! Let us put it at the worst: suppose that there is a rong action on my part in this, and that my conscience will reproach me for it ome day, to accept, for the good of others, these reproaches which weigh only n myself; this evil action which compromises my soul alone; in that lies elf-sacrifice; in that alone there is virtue.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.75#He rose and resumed his march; this time, he seemed to be content.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.76#Diamonds are found only in the dark places of the earth; truths are found nly in the depths of thought. It seemed to him, that, after having descended nto these depths, after having long groped among the darkest of these shadows, e had at last found one of these diamonds, one of these truths, and that he now eld it in his hand, and he was dazzled as he gazed upon it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.77#“Yes,” he thought, “this is right; I am on the right road; I have the olution; I must end by holding fast to something; my resolve is taken; let hings take their course; let us no longer vacillate; let us no longer hang ack; this is for the interest of all, not for my own; I am Madeleine, and adeleine I remain. Woe to the man who is Jean Valjean! I am no longer he; I do ot know that man; I no longer know anything; it turns out that some one is Jean aljean at the present moment; let him look out for himself; that does not oncern me; it is a fatal name which was floating abroad in the night; if it alts and descends on a head, so much the worse for that head.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.78#He looked into the little mirror which hung above his chimney-piece, and aid:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.79#“Hold! it has relieved me to come to a decision; I am quite another man ow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.80#He proceeded a few paces further, then he stopped short.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.81#“Come!” he said, “I must not flinch before any of the consequences of the esolution which I have once adopted; there are still threads which attach me to hat Jean Valjean; they must be broken; in this very room there are objects hich would betray me, dumb things which would bear witness against me; it is ettled; all these things must disappear.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.82#He fumbled in his pocket, drew out his purse, opened it, and took out a mall key; he inserted the key in a lock whose aperture could hardly be seen, so idden was it in the most sombre tones of the design which covered the all-paper; a secret receptacle opened, a sort of false cupboard constructed in he angle between the wall and the chimney-piece; in this hiding-place there ere some rags—a blue linen blouse, an old pair of trousers, an old knapsack, nd a huge thorn cudgel shod with iron at both ends. Those who had seen Jean aljean at the epoch when he passed through D—— in October, 1815, could easily ave recognized all the pieces of this miserable outfit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.83#He had preserved them as he had preserved the silver candlesticks, in rder to remind himself continually of his starting-point, but he had concealed ll that came from the galleys, and he had allowed the candlesticks which came rom the Bishop to be seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.84#He cast a furtive glance towards the door, as though he feared that it ould open in spite of the bolt which fastened it; then, with a quick and abrupt ovement, he took the whole in his arms at once, without bestowing so much as a lance on the things which he had so religiously and so perilously preserved for o many years, and flung them all, rags, cudgel, knapsack, into the fire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.85#He closed the false cupboard again, and with redoubled precautions, enceforth unnecessary, since it was now empty, he concealed the door behind a eavy piece of furniture, which he pushed in front of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.86#After the lapse of a few seconds, the room and the opposite wall were ighted up with a fierce, red, tremulous glow. Everything was on fire; the thorn udgel snapped and threw out sparks to the middle of the chamber.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.87#As the knapsack was consumed, together with the hideous rags which it ontained, it revealed something which sparkled in the ashes. By bending over, ne could have readily recognized a coin,—no doubt the forty-sou piece stolen rom the little Savoyard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.88#He did not look at the fire, but paced back and forth with the same tep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.89#All at once his eye fell on the two silver candlesticks, which shone aguely on the chimney-piece, through the glow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.90#“Hold!” he thought; “the whole of Jean Valjean is still in them. They must e destroyed also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.91#He seized the two candlesticks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.92#There was still fire enough to allow of their being put out of shape, and onverted into a sort of unrecognizable bar of metal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.93#He bent over the hearth and warmed himself for a moment. He felt a sense f real comfort. “How good warmth is!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.94#He stirred the live coals with one of the candlesticks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.95#A minute more, and they were both in the fire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.96#At that moment it seemed to him that he heard a voice within him shouting: Jean Valjean! Jean Valjean!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.97#His hair rose upright: he became like a man who is listening to some errible thing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.98#“Yes, that’s it! finish!” said the voice. “Complete what you are about! estroy these candlesticks! Annihilate this souvenir! Forget the Bishop! Forget verything! Destroy this Champmathieu, do! That is right! Applaud yourself! So t is settled, resolved, fixed, agreed: here is an old man who does not know hat is wanted of him, who has, perhaps, done nothing, an innocent man, whose hole misfortune lies in your name, upon whom your name weighs like a crime, who s about to be taken for you, who will be condemned, who will finish his days in bjectness and horror. That is good! Be an honest man yourself; remain Monsieur e Maire; remain honorable and honored; enrich the town; nourish the indigent; ear the orphan; live happy, virtuous, and admired; and, during this time, while ou are here in the midst of joy and light, there will be a man who will wear our red blouse, who will bear your name in ignominy, and who will drag your hain in the galleys. Yes, it is well arranged thus. Ah, wretch!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.99#The perspiration streamed from his brow. He fixed a haggard eye on the andlesticks. But that within him which had spoken had not finished. The voice ontinued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.100#“Jean Valjean, there will be around you many voices, which will make a reat noise, which will talk very loud, and which will bless you, and only one hich no one will hear, and which will curse you in the dark. Well! listen, nfamous man! All those benedictions will fall back before they reach heaven, nd only the malediction will ascend to God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.101#This voice, feeble at first, and which had proceeded from the most bscure depths of his conscience, had gradually become startling and formidable, nd he now heard it in his very ear. It seemed to him that it had detached tself from him, and that it was now speaking outside of him. He thought that he eard the last words so distinctly, that he glanced around the room in a sort of error.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.102#“Is there any one here?” he demanded aloud, in utter bewilderment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.103#Then he resumed, with a laugh which resembled that of an idiot:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.104#“How stupid I am! There can be no one!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.105#There was some one; but the person who was there was of those whom the uman eye cannot see.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.106#He placed the candlesticks on the chimney-piece.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.107#Then he resumed his monotonous and lugubrious tramp, which troubled the reams of the sleeping man beneath him, and awoke him with a start.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.108#This tramping to and fro soothed and at the same time intoxicated him. It ometimes seems, on supreme occasions, as though people moved about for the urpose of asking advice of everything that they may encounter by change of lace. After the lapse of a few minutes he no longer knew his position.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.109#He now recoiled in equal terror before both the resolutions at which he ad arrived in turn. The two ideas which counselled him appeared to him equally atal. What a fatality! What conjunction that that Champmathieu should have been aken for him; to be overwhelmed by precisely the means which Providence seemed o have employed, at first, to strengthen his position!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.110#There was a moment when he reflected on the future. Denounce himself, reat God! Deliver himself up! With immense despair he faced all that he should e obliged to leave, all that he should be obliged to take up once more. He hould have to bid farewell to that existence which was so good, so pure, so adiant, to the respect of all, to honor, to liberty. He should never more troll in the fields; he should never more hear the birds sing in the month of ay; he should never more bestow alms on the little children; he should never ore experience the sweetness of having glances of gratitude and love fixed upon im; he should quit that house which he had built, that little chamber! verything seemed charming to him at that moment. Never again should he read hose books; never more should he write on that little table of white wood; his ld portress, the only servant whom he kept, would never more bring him his offee in the morning. Great God! instead of that, the convict gang, the iron ecklet, the red waistcoat, the chain on his ankle, fatigue, the cell, the camp ed all those horrors which he knew so well! At his age, after having been what e was! If he were only young again! but to be addressed in his old age as thou” by any one who pleased; to be searched by the convict-guard; to receive he galley-sergeant’s cudgellings; to wear iron-bound shoes on his bare feet; to ave to stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer of the roundsman who isits the gang; to submit to the curiosity of strangers, who would be told: That man yonder is the famous Jean Valjean, who was mayor of M. sur M.”; and at ight, dripping with perspiration, overwhelmed with lassitude, their green caps rawn over their eyes, to remount, two by two, the ladder staircase of the alleys beneath the sergeant’s whip. Oh, what misery! Can destiny, then, be as alicious as an intelligent being, and become as monstrous as the human eart?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.111#And do what he would, he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemma hich lay at the foundation of his reverie: “Should he remain in paradise and ecome a demon? Should he return to hell and become an angel?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.112#What was to be done? Great God! what was to be done?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.113#The torment from which he had escaped with so much difficulty was nchained afresh within him. His ideas began to grow confused once more; they ssumed a kind of stupefied and mechanical quality which is peculiar to despair. he name of Romainville recurred incessantly to his mind, with the two verses of song which he had heard in the past. He thought that Romainville was a little rove near Paris, where young lovers go to pluck lilacs in the month of pril.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.114#He wavered outwardly as well as inwardly. He walked like a little child ho is permitted to toddle alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.115#At intervals, as he combated his lassitude, he made an effort to recover he mastery of his mind. He tried to put to himself, for the last time, and efinitely, the problem over which he had, in a manner, fallen prostrate with atigue: Ought he to denounce himself? Ought he to hold his peace? He could not anage to see anything distinctly. The vague aspects of all the courses of easoning which had been sketched out by his meditations quivered and vanished, ne after the other, into smoke. He only felt that, to whatever course of action e made up his mind, something in him must die, and that of necessity, and ithout his being able to escape the fact; that he was entering a sepulchre on he right hand as much as on the left; that he was passing through a death gony,—the agony of his happiness, or the agony of his virtue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.116#Alas! all his resolution had again taken possession of him. He was no urther advanced than at the beginning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.3.117#Thus did this unhappy soul struggle in its anguish. Eighteen hundred ears before this unfortunate man, the mysterious Being in whom are summed up ll the sanctities and all the sufferings of humanity had also long thrust aside ith his hand, while the olive-trees quivered in the wild wind of the infinite, he terrible cup which appeared to Him dripping with darkness and overflowing ith shadows in the depths all studded with stars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.head#CHAPTER IV—FORMS ASSUMED BY SUFFERING DURING SLEEP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.1#Three o’clock in the morning had just struck, and he had been walking thus or five hours, almost uninterruptedly, when he at length allowed himself to rop into his chair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.2#There he fell asleep and had a dream.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.3#This dream, like the majority of dreams, bore no relation to the situation, xcept by its painful and heart-rending character, but it made an impression on im. This nightmare struck him so forcibly that he wrote it down later on. It is ne of the papers in his own handwriting which he has bequeathed to us. We think hat we have here reproduced the thing in strict accordance with the text.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.4#Of whatever nature this dream may be, the history of this night would be ncomplete if we were to omit it: it is the gloomy adventure of an ailing oul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.5#Here it is. On the envelope we find this line inscribed, “The Dream I had hat Night.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.6#“I was in a plain; a vast, gloomy plain, where there was no grass. It did ot seem to me to be daylight nor yet night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.7#“I was walking with my brother, the brother of my childish years, the rother of whom, I must say, I never think, and whom I now hardly remember.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.8#“We were conversing and we met some passers-by. We were talking of a eighbor of ours in former days, who had always worked with her window open from he time when she came to live on the street. As we talked we felt cold because f that open window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.9#“There were no trees in the plain. We saw a man passing close to us. He was ntirely nude, of the hue of ashes, and mounted on a horse which was earth olor. The man had no hair; we could see his skull and the veins on it. In his and he held a switch which was as supple as a vine-shoot and as heavy as iron. his horseman passed and said nothing to us.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.10#“My brother said to me, ‘Let us take to the hollow road.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.11#“There existed a hollow way wherein one saw neither a single shrub nor a pear of moss. Everything was dirt-colored, even the sky. After proceeding a few aces, I received no reply when I spoke: I perceived that my brother was no onger with me.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.12#“I entered a village which I espied. I reflected that it must be omainville. (Why Romainville?)5
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.13#“The first street that I entered was deserted. I entered a second street. ehind the angle formed by the two streets, a man was standing erect against the all. I said to this man:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.14#“‘What country is this? Where am I?’ The man made no reply. I saw the door f a house open, and I entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.15#“The first chamber was deserted. I entered the second. Behind the door of his chamber a man was standing erect against the wall. I inquired of this man, Whose house is this? Where am I?’ The man replied not.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.16#“The house had a garden. I quitted the house and entered the garden. The arden was deserted. Behind the first tree I found a man standing upright. I aid to this man, ‘What garden is this? Where am I?’ The man did not answer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.17#“I strolled into the village, and perceived that it was a town. All the treets were deserted, all the doors were open. Not a single living being was assing in the streets, walking through the chambers or strolling in the ardens. But behind each angle of the walls, behind each door, behind each tree, tood a silent man. Only one was to be seen at a time. These men watched me ass.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.18#“I left the town and began to ramble about the fields.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.19#“After the lapse of some time I turned back and saw a great crowd coming p behind me. I recognized all the men whom I had seen in that town. They had trange heads. They did not seem to be in a hurry, yet they walked faster than I id. They made no noise as they walked. In an instant this crowd had overtaken nd surrounded me. The faces of these men were earthen in hue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.20#“Then the first one whom I had seen and questioned on entering the town aid to me:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.21#“‘Whither are you going! Do you not know that you have been dead this long ime?’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.22#“I opened my mouth to reply, and I perceived that there was no one near e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.23#He woke. He was icy cold. A wind which was chill like the breeze of dawn as rattling the leaves of the window, which had been left open on their hinges. he fire was out. The candle was nearing its end. It was still black night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.24#He rose, he went to the window. There were no stars in the sky even et.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.25#From his window the yard of the house and the street were visible. A harp, harsh noise, which made him drop his eyes, resounded from the earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.26#Below him he perceived two red stars, whose rays lengthened and shortened n a singular manner through the darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.27#As his thoughts were still half immersed in the mists of sleep, “Hold!” aid he, “there are no stars in the sky. They are on earth now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.28#But this confusion vanished; a second sound similar to the first roused im thoroughly; he looked and recognized the fact that these two stars were the anterns of a carriage. By the light which they cast he was able to distinguish he form of this vehicle. It was a tilbury harnessed to a small white horse. The oise which he had heard was the trampling of the horse’s hoofs on the avement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.29#“What vehicle is this?” he said to himself. “Who is coming here so early n the morning?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.30#At that moment there came a light tap on the door of his chamber.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.31#He shuddered from head to foot, and cried in a terrible voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.32#“Who is there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.33#Some one said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.34#“I, Monsieur le Maire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.35#He recognized the voice of the old woman who was his portress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.36#“Well!” he replied, “what is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.37#“Monsieur le Maire, it is just five o’clock in the morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.38#“What is that to me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.39#“The cabriolet is here, Monsieur le Maire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.40#“What cabriolet?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.41#“The tilbury.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.42#“What tilbury?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.43#“Did not Monsieur le Maire order a tilbury?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.44#“No,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.45#“The coachman says that he has come for Monsieur le Maire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.46#“What coachman?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.47#“M. Scaufflaire’s coachman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.48#“M. Scaufflaire?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.49#That name sent a shudder over him, as though a flash of lightning had assed in front of his face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.50#“Ah! yes,” he resumed; “M. Scaufflaire!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.51#If the old woman could have seen him at that moment, she would have been rightened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.52#A tolerably long silence ensued. He examined the flame of the candle with stupid air, and from around the wick he took some of the burning wax, which he olled between his fingers. The old woman waited for him. She even ventured to plift her voice once more:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.53#“What am I to say, Monsieur le Maire?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.4.54#“Say that it is well, and that I am coming down.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.head#CHAPTER V—HINDRANCES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.1#The posting service from Arras to M. sur M. was still operated at this eriod by small mail-wagons of the time of the Empire. These mail-wagons were wo-wheeled cabriolets, upholstered inside with fawn-colored leather, hung on prings, and having but two seats, one for the postboy, the other for the raveller. The wheels were armed with those long, offensive axles which keep ther vehicles at a distance, and which may still be seen on the road in ermany. The despatch box, an immense oblong coffer, was placed behind the ehicle and formed a part of it. This coffer was painted black, and the abriolet yellow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.2#These vehicles, which have no counterparts nowadays, had something istorted and hunchbacked about them; and when one saw them passing in the istance, and climbing up some road to the horizon, they resembled the insects hich are called, I think, termites, and which, though with but little corselet, rag a great train behind them. But they travelled at a very rapid rate. The ost-wagon which set out from Arras at one o’clock every night, after the mail rom Paris had passed, arrived at M. sur M. a little before five o’clock in the orning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.3#That night the wagon which was descending to M. sur M. by the Hesdin road, ollided at the corner of a street, just as it was entering the town, with a ittle tilbury harnessed to a white horse, which was going in the opposite irection, and in which there was but one person, a man enveloped in a mantle. he wheel of the tilbury received quite a violent shock. The postman shouted to he man to stop, but the traveller paid no heed and pursued his road at full allop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.4#“That man is in a devilish hurry!” said the postman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.5#The man thus hastening on was the one whom we have just seen struggling in onvulsions which are certainly deserving of pity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.6#Whither was he going? He could not have told. Why was he hastening? He did ot know. He was driving at random, straight ahead. Whither? To Arras, no doubt; ut he might have been going elsewhere as well. At times he was conscious of it, nd he shuddered. He plunged into the night as into a gulf. Something urged him orward; something drew him on. No one could have told what was taking place ithin him; every one will understand it. What man is there who has not entered, t least once in his life, into that obscure cavern of the unknown?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.7#However, he had resolved on nothing, decided nothing, formed no plan, done othing. None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive. He was, more han ever, as he had been at the first moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.8#Why was he going to Arras?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.9#He repeated what he had already said to himself when he had hired caufflaire’s cabriolet: that, whatever the result was to be, there was no eason why he should not see with his own eyes, and judge of matters for imself; that this was even prudent; that he must know what took place; that no ecision could be arrived at without having observed and scrutinized; that one ade mountains out of everything from a distance; that, at any rate, when he hould have seen that Champmathieu, some wretch, his conscience would probably e greatly relieved to allow him to go to the galleys in his stead; that Javert ould indeed be there; and that Brevet, that Chenildieu, that Cochepaille, old onvicts who had known him; but they certainly would not recognize him;—bah! hat an idea! that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the truth; that ll conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu, and that there s nothing so headstrong as suppositions and conjectures; that accordingly there as no danger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.10#That it was, no doubt, a dark moment, but that he should emerge from it; hat, after all, he held his destiny, however bad it might be, in his own hand; hat he was master of it. He clung to this thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.11#At bottom, to tell the whole truth, he would have preferred not to go to rras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.12#Nevertheless, he was going thither.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.13#As he meditated, he whipped up his horse, which was proceeding at that ine, regular, and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a half an our.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.14#In proportion as the cabriolet advanced, he felt something within him draw ack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.15#At daybreak he was in the open country; the town of M. sur M. lay far ehind him. He watched the horizon grow white; he stared at all the chilly igures of a winter’s dawn as they passed before his eyes, but without seeing hem. The morning has its spectres as well as the evening. He did not see them; ut without his being aware of it, and by means of a sort of penetration which as almost physical, these black silhouettes of trees and of hills added some loomy and sinister quality to the violent state of his soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.16#Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings which sometimes order on the highway, he said to himself, “And yet there are people there ithin who are sleeping!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.17#The trot of the horse, the bells on the harness, the wheels on the road, roduced a gentle, monotonous noise. These things are charming when one is oyous, and lugubrious when one is sad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.18#It was broad daylight when he arrived at Hesdin. He halted in front of the nn, to allow the horse a breathing spell, and to have him given some oats.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.19#The horse belonged, as Scaufflaire had said, to that small race of the oulonnais, which has too much head, too much belly, and not enough neck and houlders, but which has a broad chest, a large crupper, thin, fine legs, and olid hoofs—a homely, but a robust and healthy race. The excellent beast had ravelled five leagues in two hours, and had not a drop of sweat on his oins.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.20#He did not get out of the tilbury. The stableman who brought the oats uddenly bent down and examined the left wheel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.21#“Are you going far in this condition?” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.22#He replied, with an air of not having roused himself from his everie:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.23#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.24#“Have you come from a great distance?” went on the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.25#“Five leagues.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.26#“Ah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.27#“Why do you say, ‘Ah?’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.28#The man bent down once more, was silent for a moment, with his eyes fixed n the wheel; then he rose erect and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.29#“Because, though this wheel has travelled five leagues, it certainly will ot travel another quarter of a league.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.30#He sprang out of the tilbury.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.31#“What is that you say, my friend?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.32#“I say that it is a miracle that you should have travelled five leagues ithout you and your horse rolling into some ditch on the highway. Just see ere!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.33#The wheel really had suffered serious damage. The shock administered by he mail-wagon had split two spokes and strained the hub, so that the nut no onger held firm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.34#“My friend,” he said to the stableman, “is there a wheelwright here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.35#“Certainly, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.36#“Do me the service to go and fetch him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.37#“He is only a step from here. Hey! Master Bourgaillard!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.38#Master Bourgaillard, the wheelwright, was standing on his own threshold. e came, examined the wheel and made a grimace like a surgeon when the latter hinks a limb is broken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.39#“Can you repair this wheel immediately?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.40#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.41#“When can I set out again?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.42#“To-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.43#“To-morrow!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.44#“There is a long day’s work on it. Are you in a hurry, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.45#“In a very great hurry. I must set out again in an hour at the atest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.46#“Impossible, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.47#“I will pay whatever you ask.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.48#“Impossible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.49#“Well, in two hours, then.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.50#“Impossible to-day. Two new spokes and a hub must be made. Monsieur will ot be able to start before to-morrow morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.51#“The matter cannot wait until to-morrow. What if you were to replace this heel instead of repairing it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.52#“How so?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.53#“You are a wheelwright?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.54#“Certainly, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.55#“Have you not a wheel that you can sell me? Then I could start again at nce.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.56#“A spare wheel?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.57#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.58#“I have no wheel on hand that would fit your cabriolet. Two wheels make a air. Two wheels cannot be put together hap-hazard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.59#“In that case, sell me a pair of wheels.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.60#“Not all wheels fit all axles, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.61#“Try, nevertheless.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.62#“It is useless, sir. I have nothing to sell but cart-wheels. We are but a oor country here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.63#“Have you a cabriolet that you can let me have?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.64#The wheelwright had seen at the first glance that the tilbury was a hired ehicle. He shrugged his shoulders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.65#“You treat the cabriolets that people let you so well! If I had one, I ould not let it to you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.66#“Well, sell it to me, then.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.67#“I have none.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.68#“What! not even a spring-cart? I am not hard to please, as you see.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.69#“We live in a poor country. There is, in truth,” added the wheelwright, an old calash under the shed yonder, which belongs to a bourgeois of the town, ho gave it to me to take care of, and who only uses it on the thirty-sixth of he month—never, that is to say. I might let that to you, for what matters it to e? But the bourgeois must not see it pass—and then, it is a calash; it would equire two horses.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.70#“I will take two post-horses.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.71#“Where is Monsieur going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.72#“To Arras.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.73#“And Monsieur wishes to reach there to-day?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.74#“Yes, of course.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.75#“By taking two post-horses?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.76#“Why not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.77#“Does it make any difference whether Monsieur arrives at four o’clock o-morrow morning?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.78#“Certainly not.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.79#“There is one thing to be said about that, you see, by taking ost-horses—Monsieur has his passport?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.80#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.81#“Well, by taking post-horses, Monsieur cannot reach Arras before o-morrow. We are on a crossroad. The relays are badly served, the horses are in he fields. The season for ploughing is just beginning; heavy teams are equired, and horses are seized upon everywhere, from the post as well as lsewhere. Monsieur will have to wait three or four hours at the least at every elay. And, then, they drive at a walk. There are many hills to ascend.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.82#“Come then, I will go on horseback. Unharness the cabriolet. Some one can urely sell me a saddle in the neighborhood.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.83#“Without doubt. But will this horse bear the saddle?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.84#“That is true; you remind me of that; he will not bear it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.85#“Then—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.86#“But I can surely hire a horse in the village?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.87#“A horse to travel to Arras at one stretch?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.88#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.89#“That would require such a horse as does not exist in these parts. You ould have to buy it to begin with, because no one knows you. But you will not ind one for sale nor to let, for five hundred francs, or for a thousand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.90#“What am I to do?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.91#“The best thing is to let me repair the wheel like an honest man, and set ut on your journey to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.92#“To-morrow will be too late.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.93#“The deuce!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.94#“Is there not a mail-wagon which runs to Arras? When will it pass?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.95#“To-night. Both the posts pass at night; the one going as well as the one oming.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.96#“What! It will take you a day to mend this wheel?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.97#“A day, and a good long one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.98#“If you set two men to work?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.99#“If I set ten men to work.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.100#“What if the spokes were to be tied together with ropes?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.101#“That could be done with the spokes, not with the hub; and the felly is n a bad state, too.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.102#“Is there any one in this village who lets out teams?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.103#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.104#“Is there another wheelwright?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.105#The stableman and the wheelwright replied in concert, with a toss of the ead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.106#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.107#He felt an immense joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.108#It was evident that Providence was intervening. That it was it who had roken the wheel of the tilbury and who was stopping him on the road. He had not ielded to this sort of first summons; he had just made every possible effort to ontinue the journey; he had loyally and scrupulously exhausted all means; he ad been deterred neither by the season, nor fatigue, nor by the expense; he had othing with which to reproach himself. If he went no further, that was no fault f his. It did not concern him further. It was no longer his fault. It was not he act of his own conscience, but the act of Providence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.109#He breathed again. He breathed freely and to the full extent of his lungs or the first time since Javert’s visit. It seemed to him that the hand of iron hich had held his heart in its grasp for the last twenty hours had just eleased him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.110#It seemed to him that God was for him now, and was manifesting imself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.111#He said to himself that he had done all he could, and that now he had othing to do but retrace his steps quietly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.112#If his conversation with the wheelwright had taken place in a chamber of he inn, it would have had no witnesses, no one would have heard him, things ould have rested there, and it is probable that we should not have had to elate any of the occurrences which the reader is about to peruse; but this onversation had taken place in the street. Any colloquy in the street nevitably attracts a crowd. There are always people who ask nothing better than o become spectators. While he was questioning the wheelwright, some people who ere passing back and forth halted around them. After listening for a few inutes, a young lad, to whom no one had paid any heed, detached himself from he group and ran off.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.113#At the moment when the traveller, after the inward deliberation which we ave just described, resolved to retrace his steps, this child returned. He was ccompanied by an old woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.114#“Monsieur,” said the woman, “my boy tells me that you wish to hire a abriolet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.115#These simple words uttered by an old woman led by a child made the erspiration trickle down his limbs. He thought that he beheld the hand which ad relaxed its grasp reappear in the darkness behind him, ready to seize him nce more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.116#He answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.117#“Yes, my good woman; I am in search of a cabriolet which I can hire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.118#And he hastened to add:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.119#“But there is none in the place.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.120#“Certainly there is,” said the old woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.121#“Where?” interpolated the wheelwright.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.122#“At my house,” replied the old woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.123#He shuddered. The fatal hand had grasped him again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.124#The old woman really had in her shed a sort of basket spring-cart. The heelwright and the stable-man, in despair at the prospect of the traveller scaping their clutches, interfered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.125#“It was a frightful old trap; it rests flat on the axle; it is an actual act that the seats were suspended inside it by leather thongs; the rain came nto it; the wheels were rusted and eaten with moisture; it would not go much urther than the tilbury; a regular ramshackle old stage-wagon; the gentleman ould make a great mistake if he trusted himself to it,” etc., etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.126#All this was true; but this trap, this ramshackle old vehicle, this hing, whatever it was, ran on its two wheels and could go to Arras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.127#He paid what was asked, left the tilbury with the wheelwright to be epaired, intending to reclaim it on his return, had the white horse put to the art, climbed into it, and resumed the road which he had been travelling since orning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.128#At the moment when the cart moved off, he admitted that he had felt, a oment previously, a certain joy in the thought that he should not go whither he as now proceeding. He examined this joy with a sort of wrath, and found it bsurd. Why should he feel joy at turning back? After all, he was taking this rip of his own free will. No one was forcing him to it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.129#And assuredly nothing would happen except what he should choose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.130#As he left Hesdin, he heard a voice shouting to him: “Stop! Stop!” He alted the cart with a vigorous movement which contained a feverish and onvulsive element resembling hope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.131#It was the old woman’s little boy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.132#“Monsieur,” said the latter, “it was I who got the cart for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.133#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.134#“You have not given me anything.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.135#He who gave to all so readily thought this demand exorbitant and almost dious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.136#“Ah! it’s you, you scamp?” said he; “you shall have nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.137#He whipped up his horse and set off at full speed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.138#He had lost a great deal of time at Hesdin. He wanted to make it good. he little horse was courageous, and pulled for two; but it was the month of ebruary, there had been rain; the roads were bad. And then, it was no longer he tilbury. The cart was very heavy, and in addition, there were many scents.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.139#He took nearly four hours to go from Hesdin to Saint-Pol; four hours for ive leagues.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.140#At Saint-Pol he had the horse unharnessed at the first inn he came to and ed to the stable; as he had promised Scaufflaire, he stood beside the manger hile the horse was eating; he thought of sad and confusing things.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.141#The inn-keeper’s wife came to the stable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.142#“Does not Monsieur wish to breakfast?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.143#“Come, that is true; I even have a good appetite.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.144#He followed the woman, who had a rosy, cheerful face; she led him to the ublic room where there were tables covered with waxed cloth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.145#“Make haste!” said he; “I must start again; I am in a hurry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.146#A big Flemish servant-maid placed his knife and fork in all haste; he ooked at the girl with a sensation of comfort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.147#“That is what ailed me,” he thought; “I had not breakfasted.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.148#His breakfast was served; he seized the bread, took a mouthful, and then lowly replaced it on the table, and did not touch it again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.149#A carter was eating at another table; he said to this man:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.150#“Why is their bread so bitter here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.151#The carter was a German and did not understand him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.152#He returned to the stable and remained near the horse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.153#An hour later he had quitted Saint-Pol and was directing his course owards Tinques, which is only five leagues from Arras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.154#What did he do during this journey? Of what was he thinking? As in the orning, he watched the trees, the thatched roofs, the tilled fields pass by, nd the way in which the landscape, broken at every turn of the road, vanished; his is a sort of contemplation which sometimes suffices to the soul, and almost elieves it from thought. What is more melancholy and more profound than to see thousand objects for the first and the last time? To travel is to be born and o die at every instant; perhaps, in the vaguest region of his mind, he did make omparisons between the shifting horizon and our human existence: all the things f life are perpetually fleeing before us; the dark and bright intervals are ntermingled; after a dazzling moment, an eclipse; we look, we hasten, we tretch out our hands to grasp what is passing; each event is a turn in the oad, and, all at once, we are old; we feel a shock; all is black; we istinguish an obscure door; the gloomy horse of life, which has been drawing us alts, and we see a veiled and unknown person unharnessing amid the shadows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.155#Twilight was falling when the children who were coming out of school eheld this traveller enter Tinques; it is true that the days were still short; e did not halt at Tinques; as he emerged from the village, a laborer, who was ending the road with stones, raised his head and said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.156#“That horse is very much fatigued.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.157#The poor beast was, in fact, going at a walk.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.158#“Are you going to Arras?” added the road-mender.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.159#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.160#“If you go on at that rate you will not arrive very early.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.161#He stopped his horse, and asked the laborer:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.162#“How far is it from here to Arras?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.163#“Nearly seven good leagues.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.164#“How is that? the posting guide only says five leagues and a uarter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.165#“Ah!” returned the road-mender, “so you don’t know that the road is under epair? You will find it barred a quarter of an hour further on; there is no way o proceed further.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.166#“Really?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.167#“You will take the road on the left, leading to Carency; you will cross he river; when you reach Camblin, you will turn to the right; that is the road o Mont-Saint-Éloy which leads to Arras.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.168#“But it is night, and I shall lose my way.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.169#“You do not belong in these parts?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.170#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.171#“And, besides, it is all crossroads; stop! sir,” resumed the road-mender; shall I give you a piece of advice? your horse is tired; return to Tinques; here is a good inn there; sleep there; you can reach Arras to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.172#“I must be there this evening.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.173#“That is different; but go to the inn all the same, and get an extra orse; the stable-boy will guide you through the crossroads.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.174#He followed the road-mender’s advice, retraced his steps, and, half an our later, he passed the same spot again, but this time at full speed, with a ood horse to aid; a stable-boy, who called himself a postilion, was seated on he shaft of the cariole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.175#Still, he felt that he had lost time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.176#Night had fully come.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.177#They turned into the crossroad; the way became frightfully bad; the cart urched from one rut to the other; he said to the postilion:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.178#“Keep at a trot, and you shall have a double fee.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.179#In one of the jolts, the whiffle-tree broke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.180#“There’s the whiffle-tree broken, sir,” said the postilion; “I don’t know ow to harness my horse now; this road is very bad at night; if you wish to eturn and sleep at Tinques, we could be in Arras early to-morrow morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.181#He replied, “Have you a bit of rope and a knife?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.182#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.183#He cut a branch from a tree and made a whiffle-tree of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.184#This caused another loss of twenty minutes; but they set out again at a allop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.185#The plain was gloomy; low-hanging, black, crisp fogs crept over the hills nd wrenched themselves away like smoke: there were whitish gleams in the louds; a strong breeze which blew in from the sea produced a sound in all uarters of the horizon, as of some one moving furniture; everything that could e seen assumed attitudes of terror. How many things shiver beneath these vast reaths of the night!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.186#He was stiff with cold; he had eaten nothing since the night before; he aguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in the neighborhood f D——, eight years previously, and it seemed but yesterday.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.187#The hour struck from a distant tower; he asked the boy:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.188#“What time is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.189#“Seven o’clock, sir; we shall reach Arras at eight; we have but three eagues still to go.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.190#At that moment, he for the first time indulged in this reflection, hinking it odd the while that it had not occurred to him sooner: that all this rouble which he was taking was, perhaps, useless; that he did not know so much s the hour of the trial; that he should, at least, have informed himself of hat; that he was foolish to go thus straight ahead without knowing whether he ould be of any service or not; then he sketched out some calculations in his ind: that, ordinarily, the sittings of the Court of Assizes began at nine ’clock in the morning; that it could not be a long affair; that the theft of he apples would be very brief; that there would then remain only a question of dentity, four or five depositions, and very little for the lawyers to say; that e should arrive after all was over.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.191#The postilion whipped up the horses; they had crossed the river and left ont-Saint-Éloy behind them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.5.192#The night grew more profound.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.head#CHAPTER VI—SISTER SIMPLICE PUT TO THE PROOF
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.1#But at that moment Fantine was joyous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.2#She had passed a very bad night; her cough was frightful; her fever had oubled in intensity; she had had dreams: in the morning, when the doctor paid is visit, she was delirious; he assumed an alarmed look, and ordered that he hould be informed as soon as M. Madeleine arrived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.3#All the morning she was melancholy, said but little, and laid plaits in her heets, murmuring the while, in a low voice, calculations which seemed to be alculations of distances. Her eyes were hollow and staring. They seemed almost xtinguished at intervals, then lighted up again and shone like stars. It seems s though, at the approach of a certain dark hour, the light of heaven fills hose who are quitting the light of earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.4#Each time that Sister Simplice asked her how she felt, she replied nvariably, “Well. I should like to see M. Madeleine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.5#Some months before this, at the moment when Fantine had just lost her last odesty, her last shame, and her last joy, she was the shadow of herself; now he was the spectre of herself. Physical suffering had completed the work of oral suffering. This creature of five and twenty had a wrinkled brow, flabby heeks, pinched nostrils, teeth from which the gums had receded, a leaden omplexion, a bony neck, prominent shoulder-blades, frail limbs, a clayey skin, nd her golden hair was growing out sprinkled with gray. Alas! how illness mprovises old-age!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.6#At midday the physician returned, gave some directions, inquired whether he mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary, and shook his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.7#M. Madeleine usually came to see the invalid at three o’clock. As exactness s kindness, he was exact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.8#About half-past two, Fantine began to be restless. In the course of twenty inutes, she asked the nun more than ten times, “What time is it, sister?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.9#Three o’clock struck. At the third stroke, Fantine sat up in bed; she who ould, in general, hardly turn over, joined her yellow, fleshless hands in a ort of convulsive clasp, and the nun heard her utter one of those profound ighs which seem to throw off dejection. Then Fantine turned and looked at the oor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.10#No one entered; the door did not open.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.11#She remained thus for a quarter of an hour, her eyes riveted on the door, otionless and apparently holding her breath. The sister dared not speak to her. he clock struck a quarter past three. Fantine fell back on her pillow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.12#She said nothing, but began to plait the sheets once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.13#Half an hour passed, then an hour, no one came; every time the clock truck, Fantine started up and looked towards the door, then fell back gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.14#Her thought was clearly perceptible, but she uttered no name, she made no omplaint, she blamed no one. But she coughed in a melancholy way. One would ave said that something dark was descending upon her. She was livid and her ips were blue. She smiled now and then.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.15#Five o’clock struck. Then the sister heard her say, very low and gently, He is wrong not to come to-day, since I am going away to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.16#Sister Simplice herself was surprised at M. Madeleine’s delay.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.17#In the meantime, Fantine was staring at the tester of her bed. She seemed o be endeavoring to recall something. All at once she began to sing in a voice s feeble as a breath. The nun listened. This is what Fantine was singing:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.18#“Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through. Roses are ink, corn-flowers are blue, I love my love, corn-flowers are blue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.19#“Yestere’en the Virgin Mary came near my stove, in a broidered mantle lad, and said to me, ‘Here, hide ‘neath my veil the child whom you one day egged from me. Haste to the city, buy linen, buy a needle, buy thread.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.20#“Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.21#“Dear Holy Virgin, beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbons ecked. God may give me his loveliest star; I prefer the child thou hast granted e. ‘Madame, what shall I do with this linen fine?’—‘Make of it clothes for thy ew-born babe.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.22#“Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue, I love my love, and orn-flowers are blue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.23#“‘Wash this linen.’—‘Where?’—‘In the stream. Make of it, soiling not, poiling not, a petticoat fair with its bodice fine, which I will embroider and ill with flowers.’—‘Madame, the child is no longer here; what is to be one?’—‘Then make of it a winding-sheet in which to bury me.’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.24#“Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through, Roses are ink, corn-flowers are blue, I love my love, corn-flowers are blue.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.25#This song was an old cradle romance with which she had, in former days, ulled her little Cosette to sleep, and which had never recurred to her mind in ll the five years during which she had been parted from her child. She sang it n so sad a voice, and to so sweet an air, that it was enough to make any one, ven a nun, weep. The sister, accustomed as she was to austerities, felt a tear pring to her eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.26#The clock struck six. Fantine did not seem to hear it. She no longer eemed to pay attention to anything about her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.27#Sister Simplice sent a serving-maid to inquire of the portress of the actory, whether the mayor had returned, and if he would not come to the nfirmary soon. The girl returned in a few minutes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.28#Fantine was still motionless and seemed absorbed in her own thoughts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.29#The servant informed Sister Simplice in a very low tone, that the mayor ad set out that morning before six o’clock, in a little tilbury harnessed to a hite horse, cold as the weather was; that he had gone alone, without even a river; that no one knew what road he had taken; that people said he had been een to turn into the road to Arras; that others asserted that they had met him n the road to Paris. That when he went away he had been very gentle, as usual, nd that he had merely told the portress not to expect him that night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.30#While the two women were whispering together, with their backs turned to antine’s bed, the sister interrogating, the servant conjecturing, Fantine, with he feverish vivacity of certain organic maladies, which unite the free ovements of health with the frightful emaciation of death, had raised herself o her knees in bed, with her shrivelled hands resting on the bolster, and her ead thrust through the opening of the curtains, and was listening. All at once he cried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.31#“You are speaking of M. Madeleine! Why are you talking so low? What is he oing? Why does he not come?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.32#Her voice was so abrupt and hoarse that the two women thought they heard he voice of a man; they wheeled round in affright.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.33#“Answer me!” cried Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.34#The servant stammered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.35#“The portress told me that he could not come to-day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.36#“Be calm, my child,” said the sister; “lie down again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.37#Fantine, without changing her attitude, continued in a loud voice, and ith an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.38#“He cannot come? Why not? You know the reason. You are whispering it to ach other there. I want to know it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.39#The servant-maid hastened to say in the nun’s ear, “Say that he is busy ith the city council.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.40#Sister Simplice blushed faintly, for it was a lie that the maid had roposed to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.41#On the other hand, it seemed to her that the mere communication of the ruth to the invalid would, without doubt, deal her a terrible blow, and that his was a serious matter in Fantine’s present state. Her flush did not last ong; the sister raised her calm, sad eyes to Fantine, and said, “Monsieur le aire has gone away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.42#Fantine raised herself and crouched on her heels in the bed: her eyes parkled; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.43#“Gone!” she cried; “he has gone to get Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.44#Then she raised her arms to heaven, and her white face became ineffable; er lips moved; she was praying in a low voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.45#When her prayer was finished, “Sister,” she said, “I am willing to lie own again; I will do anything you wish; I was naughty just now; I beg your ardon for having spoken so loud; it is very wrong to talk loudly; I know that ell, my good sister, but, you see, I am very happy: the good God is good; M. adeleine is good; just think! he has gone to Montfermeil to get my little osette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.46#She lay down again, with the nun’s assistance, helped the nun to arrange er pillow, and kissed the little silver cross which she wore on her neck, and hich Sister Simplice had given her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.47#“My child,” said the sister, “try to rest now, and do not talk any ore.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.48#Fantine took the sister’s hand in her moist hands, and the latter was ained to feel that perspiration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.49#“He set out this morning for Paris; in fact, he need not even go through aris; Montfermeil is a little to the left as you come thence. Do you remember ow he said to me yesterday, when I spoke to him of Cosette, _Soon, soon?_ He ants to give me a surprise, you know! he made me sign a letter so that she ould be taken from the Thénardiers; they cannot say anything, can they? they ill give back Cosette, for they have been paid; the authorities will not allow hem to keep the child since they have received their pay. Do not make signs to e that I must not talk, sister! I am extremely happy; I am doing well; I am not ll at all any more; I am going to see Cosette again; I am even quite hungry; it s nearly five years since I saw her last; you cannot imagine how much attached ne gets to children, and then, she will be so pretty; you will see! If you only new what pretty little rosy fingers she had! In the first place, she will have ery beautiful hands; she had ridiculous hands when she was only a year old; ike this! she must be a big girl now; she is seven years old; she is quite a oung lady; I call her Cosette, but her name is really Euphrasie. Stop! this orning I was looking at the dust on the chimney-piece, and I had a sort of idea ome across me, like that, that I should see Cosette again soon. Mon Dieu! how rong it is not to see one’s children for years! One ought to reflect that life s not eternal. Oh, how good M. le Maire is to go! it is very cold! it is true; e had on his cloak, at least? he will be here to-morrow, will he not? to-morrow ill be a festival day; to-morrow morning, sister, you must remind me to put on y little cap that has lace on it. What a place that Montfermeil is! I took that ourney on foot once; it was very long for me, but the diligences go very uickly! he will be here to-morrow with Cosette: how far is it from here to ontfermeil?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.50#The sister, who had no idea of distances, replied, “Oh, I think that he ill be here to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.51#“To-morrow! to-morrow!” said Fantine, “I shall see Cosette to-morrow! you ee, good sister of the good God, that I am no longer ill; I am mad; I could ance if any one wished it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.52#A person who had seen her a quarter of an hour previously would not have nderstood the change; she was all rosy now; she spoke in a lively and natural oice; her whole face was one smile; now and then she talked, she laughed oftly; the joy of a mother is almost infantile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.53#“Well,” resumed the nun, “now that you are happy, mind me, and do not talk ny more.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.54#Fantine laid her head on her pillow and said in a low voice: “Yes, lie own again; be good, for you are going to have your child; Sister Simplice is ight; every one here is right.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.55#And then, without stirring, without even moving her head, she began to tare all about her with wide-open eyes and a joyous air, and she said nothing ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.56#The sister drew the curtains together again, hoping that she would fall nto a doze. Between seven and eight o’clock the doctor came; not hearing any ound, he thought Fantine was asleep, entered softly, and approached the bed on iptoe; he opened the curtains a little, and, by the light of the taper, he saw antine’s big eyes gazing at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.57#She said to him, “She will be allowed to sleep beside me in a little bed, ill she not, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.58#The doctor thought that she was delirious. She added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.59#“See! there is just room.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.60#The doctor took Sister Simplice aside, and she explained matters to him; hat M. Madeleine was absent for a day or two, and that in their doubt they had ot thought it well to undeceive the invalid, who believed that the mayor had one to Montfermeil; that it was possible, after all, that her guess was orrect: the doctor approved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.61#He returned to Fantine’s bed, and she went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.62#“You see, when she wakes up in the morning, I shall be able to say good orning to her, poor kitten, and when I cannot sleep at night, I can hear her sleep; her little gentle breathing will do me good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.63#“Give me your hand,” said the doctor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.64#She stretched out her arm, and exclaimed with a laugh:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.65#“Ah, hold! in truth, you did not know it; I am cured; Cosette will arrive o-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.66#The doctor was surprised; she was better; the pressure on her chest had ecreased; her pulse had regained its strength; a sort of life had suddenly upervened and reanimated this poor, worn-out creature.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.67#“Doctor,” she went on, “did the sister tell you that M. le Maire has gone o get that mite of a child?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.68#The doctor recommended silence, and that all painful emotions should be voided; he prescribed an infusion of pure chinchona, and, in case the fever hould increase again during the night, a calming potion. As he took his eparture, he said to the sister:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.6.69#“She is doing better; if good luck willed that the mayor should actually rrive to-morrow with the child, who knows? there are crises so astounding; reat joy has been known to arrest maladies; I know well that this is an organic isease, and in an advanced state, but all those things are such mysteries: we ay be able to save her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE TRAVELLER ON HIS ARRIVAL TAKES PRECAUTIONS FOR EPARTURE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.1#It was nearly eight o’clock in the evening when the cart, which we left on he road, entered the porte-cochère of the Hotel de la Poste in Arras; the man hom we have been following up to this moment alighted from it, responded with n abstracted air to the attentions of the people of the inn, sent back the xtra horse, and with his own hands led the little white horse to the stable; hen he opened the door of a billiard-room which was situated on the ground loor, sat down there, and leaned his elbows on a table; he had taken fourteen ours for the journey which he had counted on making in six; he did himself the ustice to acknowledge that it was not his fault, but at bottom, he was not orry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.2#The landlady of the hotel entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.3#“Does Monsieur wish a bed? Does Monsieur require supper?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.4#He made a sign of the head in the negative.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.5#“The stableman says that Monsieur’s horse is extremely fatigued.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.6#Here he broke his silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.7#“Will not the horse be in a condition to set out again to-morrow orning?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.8#“Oh, Monsieur! he must rest for two days at least.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.9#He inquired:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.10#“Is not the posting-station located here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.11#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.12#The hostess conducted him to the office; he showed his passport, and nquired whether there was any way of returning that same night to M. sur M. by he mail-wagon; the seat beside the post-boy chanced to be vacant; he engaged it nd paid for it. “Monsieur,” said the clerk, “do not fail to be here ready to tart at precisely one o’clock in the morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.13#This done, he left the hotel and began to wander about the town.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.14#He was not acquainted with Arras; the streets were dark, and he walked on t random; but he seemed bent upon not asking the way of the passers-by. He rossed the little river Crinchon, and found himself in a labyrinth of narrow lleys where he lost his way. A citizen was passing along with a lantern. After ome hesitation, he decided to apply to this man, not without having first lanced behind and in front of him, as though he feared lest some one should ear the question which he was about to put.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.15#“Monsieur,” said he, “where is the court-house, if you please.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.16#“You do not belong in town, sir?” replied the bourgeois, who was an oldish an; “well, follow me. I happen to be going in the direction of the court-house, hat is to say, in the direction of the hotel of the prefecture; for the ourt-house is undergoing repairs just at this moment, and the courts are olding their sittings provisionally in the prefecture.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.17#“Is it there that the Assizes are held?” he asked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.18#“Certainly, sir; you see, the prefecture of to-day was the bishop’s palace efore the Revolution. M. de Conzié, who was bishop in ’82, built a grand hall here. It is in this grand hall that the court is held.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.19#On the way, the bourgeois said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.20#“If Monsieur desires to witness a case, it is rather late. The sittings enerally close at six o’clock.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.21#When they arrived on the grand square, however, the man pointed out to him our long windows all lighted up, in the front of a vast and gloomy uilding.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.22#“Upon my word, sir, you are in luck; you have arrived in season. Do you ee those four windows? That is the Court of Assizes. There is light there, so hey are not through. The matter must have been greatly protracted, and they are olding an evening session. Do you take an interest in this affair? Is it a riminal case? Are you a witness?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.23#He replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.24#“I have not come on any business; I only wish to speak to one of the awyers.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.25#“That is different,” said the bourgeois. “Stop, sir; here is the door here the sentry stands. You have only to ascend the grand staircase.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.26#He conformed to the bourgeois’s directions, and a few minutes later he was n a hall containing many people, and where groups, intermingled with lawyers in heir gowns, were whispering together here and there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.27#It is always a heart-breaking thing to see these congregations of men obed in black, murmuring together in low voices, on the threshold of the halls f justice. It is rare that charity and pity are the outcome of these words. ondemnations pronounced in advance are more likely to be the result. All these roups seem to the passing and thoughtful observer so many sombre hives where uzzing spirits construct in concert all sorts of dark edifices.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.28#This spacious hall, illuminated by a single lamp, was the old hall of the piscopal palace, and served as the large hall of the palace of justice. A ouble-leaved door, which was closed at that moment, separated it from the large partment where the court was sitting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.29#The obscurity was such that he did not fear to accost the first lawyer hom he met.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.30#“What stage have they reached, sir?” he asked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.31#“It is finished,” said the lawyer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.32#“Finished!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.33#This word was repeated in such accents that the lawyer turned round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.34#“Excuse me sir; perhaps you are a relative?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.35#“No; I know no one here. Has judgment been pronounced?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.36#“Of course. Nothing else was possible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.37#“To penal servitude?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.38#“For life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.39#He continued, in a voice so weak that it was barely audible:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.40#“Then his identity was established?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.41#“What identity?” replied the lawyer. “There was no identity to be stablished. The matter was very simple. The woman had murdered her child; the nfanticide was proved; the jury threw out the question of premeditation, and he was condemned for life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.42#“So it was a woman?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.43#“Why, certainly. The Limosin woman. Of what are you speaking?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.44#“Nothing. But since it is all over, how comes it that the hall is still ighted?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.45#“For another case, which was begun about two hours ago.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.46#“What other case?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.47#“Oh! this one is a clear case also. It is about a sort of blackguard; a an arrested for a second offence; a convict who has been guilty of theft. I on’t know his name exactly. There’s a bandit’s phiz for you! I’d send him to he galleys on the strength of his face alone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.48#“Is there any way of getting into the court-room, sir?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.49#“I really think that there is not. There is a great crowd. However, the earing has been suspended. Some people have gone out, and when the hearing is esumed, you might make an effort.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.50#“Where is the entrance?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.51#“Through yonder large door.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.52#The lawyer left him. In the course of a few moments he had experienced, lmost simultaneously, almost intermingled with each other, all possible motions. The words of this indifferent spectator had, in turn, pierced his eart like needles of ice and like blades of fire. When he saw that nothing was ettled, he breathed freely once more; but he could not have told whether what e felt was pain or pleasure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.53#He drew near to many groups and listened to what they were saying. The ocket of the session was very heavy; the president had appointed for the same ay two short and simple cases. They had begun with the infanticide, and now hey had reached the convict, the old offender, the “return horse.” This man had tolen apples, but that did not appear to be entirely proved; what had been roved was, that he had already been in the galleys at Toulon. It was that which ent a bad aspect to his case. However, the man’s examination and the epositions of the witnesses had been completed, but the lawyer’s plea, and the peech of the public prosecutor were still to come; it could not be finished efore midnight. The man would probably be condemned; the attorney-general was ery clever, and never _missed_ his culprits; he was a brilliant fellow who rote verses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.54#An usher stood at the door communicating with the hall of the Assizes. He nquired of this usher:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.55#“Will the door be opened soon, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.56#“It will not be opened at all,” replied the usher.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.57#“What! It will not be opened when the hearing is resumed? Is not the earing suspended?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.58#“The hearing has just been begun again,” replied the usher, “but the door ill not be opened again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.59#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.60#“Because the hall is full.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.61#“What! There is not room for one more?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.62#“Not another one. The door is closed. No one can enter now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.63#The usher added after a pause: “There are, to tell the truth, two or three xtra places behind Monsieur le Président, but Monsieur le Président only admits ublic functionaries to them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.64#So saying, the usher turned his back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.65#He retired with bowed head, traversed the antechamber, and slowly escended the stairs, as though hesitating at every step. It is probable that he as holding counsel with himself. The violent conflict which had been going on ithin him since the preceding evening was not yet ended; and every moment he ncountered some new phase of it. On reaching the landing-place, he leaned his ack against the balusters and folded his arms. All at once he opened his coat, rew out his pocket-book, took from it a pencil, tore out a leaf, and upon that eaf he wrote rapidly, by the light of the street lantern, this line: _M. adeleine, Mayor of M. sur M._; then he ascended the stairs once more with great trides, made his way through the crowd, walked straight up to the usher, handed im the paper, and said in an authoritative manner:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.66#“Take this to Monsieur le Président.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.7.67#The usher took the paper, cast a glance upon it, and obeyed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—AN ENTRANCE BY FAVOR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.1#Although he did not suspect the fact, the mayor of M. sur M. enjoyed a sort f celebrity. For the space of seven years his reputation for virtue had filled he whole of Bas Boulonnais; it had eventually passed the confines of a small istrict and had been spread abroad through two or three neighboring epartments. Besides the service which he had rendered to the chief town by esuscitating the black jet industry, there was not one out of the hundred and orty communes of the arrondissement of M. sur M. which was not indebted to him or some benefit. He had even at need contrived to aid and multiply the ndustries of other arrondissements. It was thus that he had, when occasion ffered, supported with his credit and his funds the linen factory at Boulogne, he flax-spinning industry at Frévent, and the hydraulic manufacture of cloth at oubers-sur-Canche. Everywhere the name of M. Madeleine was pronounced with eneration. Arras and Douai envied the happy little town of M. sur M. its ayor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.2#The Councillor of the Royal Court of Douai, who was presiding over this ession of the Assizes at Arras, was acquainted, in common with the rest of the orld, with this name which was so profoundly and universally honored. When the sher, discreetly opening the door which connected the council-chamber with the ourt-room, bent over the back of the President’s armchair and handed him the aper on which was inscribed the line which we have just perused, adding: “The entleman desires to be present at the trial,” the President, with a quick and eferential movement, seized a pen and wrote a few words at the bottom of the aper and returned it to the usher, saying, “Admit him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.3#The unhappy man whose history we are relating had remained near the door of he hall, in the same place and the same attitude in which the usher had left im. In the midst of his reverie he heard some one saying to him, “Will Monsieur o me the honor to follow me?” It was the same usher who had turned his back pon him but a moment previously, and who was now bowing to the earth before im. At the same time, the usher handed him the paper. He unfolded it, and as he hanced to be near the light, he could read it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.4#“The President of the Court of Assizes presents his respects to M. adeleine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.5#He crushed the paper in his hand as though those words contained for him a trange and bitter aftertaste.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.6#He followed the usher.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.7#A few minutes later he found himself alone in a sort of wainscoted cabinet f severe aspect, lighted by two wax candles, placed upon a table with a green loth. The last words of the usher who had just quitted him still rang in his ars: “Monsieur, you are now in the council-chamber; you have only to turn the opper handle of yonder door, and you will find yourself in the court-room, ehind the President’s chair.” These words were mingled in his thoughts with a ague memory of narrow corridors and dark staircases which he had recently raversed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.8#The usher had left him alone. The supreme moment had arrived. He sought to ollect his faculties, but could not. It is chiefly at the moment when there is he greatest need for attaching them to the painful realities of life, that the hreads of thought snap within the brain. He was in the very place where the udges deliberated and condemned. With stupid tranquillity he surveyed this eaceful and terrible apartment, where so many lives had been broken, which was oon to ring with his name, and which his fate was at that moment traversing. He tared at the wall, then he looked at himself, wondering that it should be that hamber and that it should be he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.9#He had eaten nothing for four and twenty hours; he was worn out by the olts of the cart, but he was not conscious of it. It seemed to him that he felt othing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.10#He approached a black frame which was suspended on the wall, and which ontained, under glass, an ancient autograph letter of Jean Nicolas Pache, mayor f Paris and minister, and dated, through an error, no doubt, the _9th of June_, f the year II., and in which Pache forwarded to the commune the list of inisters and deputies held in arrest by them. Any spectator who had chanced to ee him at that moment, and who had watched him, would have imagined, doubtless, hat this letter struck him as very curious, for he did not take his eyes from t, and he read it two or three times. He read it without paying any attention o it, and unconsciously. He was thinking of Fantine and Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.11#As he dreamed, he turned round, and his eyes fell upon the brass knob of he door which separated him from the Court of Assizes. He had almost forgotten hat door. His glance, calm at first, paused there, remained fixed on that brass andle, then grew terrified, and little by little became impregnated with fear. eads of perspiration burst forth among his hair and trickled down upon his emples.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.12#At a certain moment he made that indescribable gesture of a sort of uthority mingled with rebellion, which is intended to convey, and which does so ell convey, _“Pardieu! who compels me to this?”_ Then he wheeled briskly round, aught sight of the door through which he had entered in front of him, went to t, opened it, and passed out. He was no longer in that chamber; he was outside n a corridor, a long, narrow corridor, broken by steps and gratings, making all orts of angles, lighted here and there by lanterns similar to the night taper f invalids, the corridor through which he had approached. He breathed, he istened; not a sound in front, not a sound behind him, and he fled as though ursued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.13#When he had turned many angles in this corridor, he still listened. The ame silence reigned, and there was the same darkness around him. He was out of reath; he staggered; he leaned against the wall. The stone was cold; the erspiration lay ice-cold on his brow; he straightened himself up with a hiver.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.14#Then, there alone in the darkness, trembling with cold and with something lse, too, perchance, he meditated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.15#He had meditated all night long; he had meditated all the day: he heard ithin him but one voice, which said, “Alas!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.16#A quarter of an hour passed thus. At length he bowed his head, sighed with gony, dropped his arms, and retraced his steps. He walked slowly, and as though rushed. It seemed as though some one had overtaken him in his flight and was eading him back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.17#He re-entered the council-chamber. The first thing he caught sight of was he knob of the door. This knob, which was round and of polished brass, shone ike a terrible star for him. He gazed at it as a lamb might gaze into the eye f a tiger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.18#He could not take his eyes from it. From time to time he advanced a step nd approached the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.19#Had he listened, he would have heard the sound of the adjoining hall like sort of confused murmur; but he did not listen, and he did not hear.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.20#Suddenly, without himself knowing how it happened, he found himself near he door; he grasped the knob convulsively; the door opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.8.21#He was in the court-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.head#CHAPTER IX—A PLACE WHERE CONVICTIONS ARE IN PROCESS OF ORMATION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.1#He advanced a pace, closed the door mechanically behind him, and remained tanding, contemplating what he saw.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.2#It was a vast and badly lighted apartment, now full of uproar, now full of ilence, where all the apparatus of a criminal case, with its petty and mournful ravity in the midst of the throng, was in process of development.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.3#At the one end of the hall, the one where he was, were judges, with bstracted air, in threadbare robes, who were gnawing their nails or closing heir eyelids; at the other end, a ragged crowd; lawyers in all sorts of ttitudes; soldiers with hard but honest faces; ancient, spotted woodwork, a irty ceiling, tables covered with serge that was yellow rather than green; oors blackened by handmarks; tap-room lamps which emitted more smoke than ight, suspended from nails in the wainscot; on the tables candles in brass andlesticks; darkness, ugliness, sadness; and from all this there was isengaged an austere and august impression, for one there felt that grand human hing which is called the law, and that grand divine thing which is called ustice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.4#No one in all that throng paid any attention to him; all glances were irected towards a single point, a wooden bench placed against a small door, in he stretch of wall on the President’s left; on this bench, illuminated by everal candles, sat a man between two gendarmes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.5#This man was _the_ man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.6#He did not seek him; he saw him; his eyes went thither naturally, as though hey had known beforehand where that figure was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.7#He thought he was looking at himself, grown old; not absolutely the same in ace, of course, but exactly similar in attitude and aspect, with his bristling air, with that wild and uneasy eye, with that blouse, just as it was on the day hen he entered D——, full of hatred, concealing his soul in that hideous mass of rightful thoughts which he had spent nineteen years in collecting on the floor f the prison.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.8#He said to himself with a shudder, “Good God! shall I become like that gain?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.9#This creature seemed to be at least sixty; there was something ndescribably coarse, stupid, and frightened about him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.10#At the sound made by the opening door, people had drawn aside to make way or him; the President had turned his head, and, understanding that the ersonage who had just entered was the mayor of M. sur M., he had bowed to him; he attorney-general, who had seen M. Madeleine at M. sur M., whither the duties f his office had called him more than once, recognized him and saluted him lso: he had hardly perceived it; he was the victim of a sort of hallucination; e was watching.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.11#Judges, clerks, gendarmes, a throng of cruelly curious heads, all these he ad already beheld once, in days gone by, twenty-seven years before; he had ncountered those fatal things once more; there they were; they moved; they xisted; it was no longer an effort of his memory, a mirage of his thought; they ere real gendarmes and real judges, a real crowd, and real men of flesh and lood: it was all over; he beheld the monstrous aspects of his past reappear and ive once more around him, with all that there is formidable in reality.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.12#All this was yawning before him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.13#He was horrified by it; he shut his eyes, and exclaimed in the deepest ecesses of his soul, “Never!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.14#And by a tragic play of destiny which made all his ideas tremble, and endered him nearly mad, it was another self of his that was there! all called hat man who was being tried Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.15#Under his very eyes, unheard-of vision, he had a sort of representation of he most horrible moment of his life, enacted by his spectre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.16#Everything was there; the apparatus was the same, the hour of the night, he faces of the judges, of soldiers, and of spectators; all were the same, only bove the President’s head there hung a crucifix, something which the courts had acked at the time of his condemnation: God had been absent when he had been udged.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.17#There was a chair behind him; he dropped into it, terrified at the thought hat he might be seen; when he was seated, he took advantage of a pile of ardboard boxes, which stood on the judge’s desk, to conceal his face from the hole room; he could now see without being seen; he had fully regained onsciousness of the reality of things; gradually he recovered; he attained that hase of composure where it is possible to listen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.18#M. Bamatabois was one of the jurors.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.19#He looked for Javert, but did not see him; the seat of the witnesses was idden from him by the clerk’s table, and then, as we have just said, the hall as sparely lighted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.20#At the moment of this entrance, the defendant’s lawyer had just finished is plea.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.21#The attention of all was excited to the highest pitch; the affair had asted for three hours: for three hours that crowd had been watching a strange an, a miserable specimen of humanity, either profoundly stupid or profoundly ubtle, gradually bending beneath the weight of a terrible likeness. This man, s the reader already knows, was a vagabond who had been found in a field arrying a branch laden with ripe apples, broken in the orchard of a neighbor, alled the Pierron orchard. Who was this man? an examination had been made; itnesses had been heard, and they were unanimous; light had abounded throughout he entire debate; the accusation said: “We have in our grasp not only a arauder, a stealer of fruit; we have here, in our hands, a bandit, an old ffender who has broken his ban, an ex-convict, a miscreant of the most angerous description, a malefactor named Jean Valjean, whom justice has long een in search of, and who, eight years ago, on emerging from the galleys at oulon, committed a highway robbery, accompanied by violence, on the person of a hild, a Savoyard named Little Gervais; a crime provided for by article 383 of he Penal Code, the right to try him for which we reserve hereafter, when his dentity shall have been judicially established. He has just committed a fresh heft; it is a case of a second offence; condemn him for the fresh deed; later n he will be judged for the old crime.” In the face of this accusation, in the ace of the unanimity of the witnesses, the accused appeared to be astonished ore than anything else; he made signs and gestures which were meant to convey o, or else he stared at the ceiling: he spoke with difficulty, replied with mbarrassment, but his whole person, from head to foot, was a denial; he was an diot in the presence of all these minds ranged in order of battle around him, nd like a stranger in the midst of this society which was seizing fast upon im; nevertheless, it was a question of the most menacing future for him; the ikeness increased every moment, and the entire crowd surveyed, with more nxiety than he did himself, that sentence freighted with calamity, which escended ever closer over his head; there was even a glimpse of a possibility fforded; besides the galleys, a possible death penalty, in case his identity ere established, and the affair of Little Gervais were to end thereafter in ondemnation. Who was this man? what was the nature of his apathy? was it mbecility or craft? Did he understand too well, or did he not understand at ll? these were questions which divided the crowd, and seemed to divide the ury; there was something both terrible and puzzling in this case: the drama was ot only melancholy; it was also obscure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.22#The counsel for the defence had spoken tolerably well, in that provincial ongue which has long constituted the eloquence of the bar, and which was ormerly employed by all advocates, at Paris as well as at Romorantin or at ontbrison, and which to-day, having become classic, is no longer spoken except y the official orators of magistracy, to whom it is suited on account of its rave sonorousness and its majestic stride; a tongue in which a husband is alled _a consort_, and a woman _a spouse_; Paris, _the centre of art and ivilization_; the king, _the monarch_; Monseigneur the Bishop, _a sainted ontiff_; the district-attorney, _the eloquent interpreter of public rosecution_; the arguments, _the accents which we have just listened to_; the ge of Louis XIV., _the grand age_; a theatre, _the temple of Melpomene_; the eigning family, _the august blood of our kings_; a concert, _a musical olemnity_; the General Commandant of the province, _the illustrious warrior, ho, etc._; the pupils in the seminary, _these tender levities_; errors imputed o newspapers, _the imposture which distills its venom through the columns of hose organs_; etc. The lawyer had, accordingly, begun with an explanation as to he theft of the apples,—an awkward matter couched in fine style; but Bénigne ossuet himself was obliged to allude to a chicken in the midst of a funeral ration, and he extricated himself from the situation in stately fashion. The awyer established the fact that the theft of the apples had not been ircumstantially proved. His client, whom he, in his character of counsel, ersisted in calling Champmathieu, had not been seen scaling that wall nor reaking that branch by any one. He had been taken with that branch (which the awyer preferred to call a _bough_) in his possession; but he said that he had ound it broken off and lying on the ground, and had picked it up. Where was here any proof to the contrary? No doubt that branch had been broken off and oncealed after the scaling of the wall, then thrown away by the alarmed arauder; there was no doubt that there had been a thief in the case. But what roof was there that that thief had been Champmathieu? One thing only. His haracter as an ex-convict. The lawyer did not deny that that character appeared o be, unhappily, well attested; the accused had resided at Faverolles; the ccused had exercised the calling of a tree-pruner there; the name of hampmathieu might well have had its origin in Jean Mathieu; all that was rue,—in short, four witnesses recognize Champmathieu, positively and without esitation, as that convict, Jean Valjean; to these signs, to this testimony, he counsel could oppose nothing but the denial of his client, the denial of an nterested party; but supposing that he was the convict Jean Valjean, did that rove that he was the thief of the apples? that was a presumption at the most, ot a proof. The prisoner, it was true, and his counsel, “in good faith,” was bliged to admit it, had adopted “a bad system of defence.” He obstinately enied everything, the theft and his character of convict. An admission upon his last point would certainly have been better, and would have won for him the ndulgence of his judges; the counsel had advised him to do this; but the ccused had obstinately refused, thinking, no doubt, that he would save verything by admitting nothing. It was an error; but ought not the paucity of his intelligence to be taken into consideration? This man was visibly stupid. ong-continued wretchedness in the galleys, long misery outside the galleys, had rutalized him, etc. He defended himself badly; was that a reason for condemning im? As for the affair with Little Gervais, the counsel need not discuss it; it id not enter into the case. The lawyer wound up by beseeching the jury and the ourt, if the identity of Jean Valjean appeared to them to be evident, to apply o him the police penalties which are provided for a criminal who has broken his an, and not the frightful chastisement which descends upon the convict guilty f a second offence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.23#The district-attorney answered the counsel for the defence. He was violent nd florid, as district-attorneys usually are.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.24#He congratulated the counsel for the defence on his “loyalty,” and kilfully took advantage of this loyalty. He reached the accused through all the oncessions made by his lawyer. The advocate had seemed to admit that the risoner was Jean Valjean. He took note of this. So this man was Jean Valjean. his point had been conceded to the accusation and could no longer be disputed. ere, by means of a clever autonomasia which went back to the sources and causes f crime, the district-attorney thundered against the immorality of the romantic chool, then dawning under the name of _the Satanic school_, which had been estowed upon it by the critics of the _Quotidienne_ and the _Oriflamme_; he ttributed, not without some probability, to the influence of this perverse iterature the crime of Champmathieu, or rather, to speak more correctly, of ean Valjean. Having exhausted these considerations, he passed on to Jean aljean himself. Who was this Jean Valjean? Description of Jean Valjean: a onster spewed forth, etc. The model for this sort of description is contained n the tale of Théramène, which is not useful to tragedy, but which every day enders great services to judicial eloquence. The audience and the jury shuddered.” The description finished, the district-attorney resumed with an ratorical turn calculated to raise the enthusiasm of the journal of the refecture to the highest pitch on the following day: And it is such a man, tc., etc., etc., vagabond, beggar, without means of existence, etc., etc., nured by his past life to culpable deeds, and but little reformed by his ojourn in the galleys, as was proved by the crime committed against Little ervais, etc., etc.; it is such a man, caught upon the highway in the very act f theft, a few paces from a wall that had been scaled, still holding in his and the object stolen, who denies the crime, the theft, the climbing the wall; enies everything; denies even his own identity! In addition to a hundred other roofs, to which we will not recur, four witnesses recognize him—Javert, the pright inspector of police; Javert, and three of his former companions in nfamy, the convicts Brevet, Chenildieu, and Cochepaille. What does he offer in pposition to this overwhelming unanimity? His denial. What obduracy! You will o justice, gentlemen of the jury, etc., etc. While the district-attorney was peaking, the accused listened to him open-mouthed, with a sort of amazement in hich some admiration was assuredly blended. He was evidently surprised that a an could talk like that. From time to time, at those “energetic” moments of the rosecutor’s speech, when eloquence which cannot contain itself overflows in a lood of withering epithets and envelops the accused like a storm, he moved his ead slowly from right to left and from left to right in the sort of mute and elancholy protest with which he had contented himself since the beginning of he argument. Two or three times the spectators who were nearest to him heard im say in a low voice, “That is what comes of not having asked M. Baloup.” The istrict-attorney directed the attention of the jury to this stupid attitude, vidently deliberate, which denoted not imbecility, but craft, skill, a habit of eceiving justice, and which set forth in all its nakedness the “profound erversity” of this man. He ended by making his reserves on the affair of Little ervais and demanding a severe sentence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.25#At that time, as the reader will remember, it was penal servitude for ife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.9.26#The counsel for the defence rose, began by complimenting Monsieur ’Avocat-General on his “admirable speech,” then replied as best he could; but e weakened; the ground was evidently slipping away from under his feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.head#CHAPTER X—THE SYSTEM OF DENIALS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.1#The moment for closing the debate had arrived. The President had the ccused stand up, and addressed to him the customary question, “Have you nything to add to your defence?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.2#The man did not appear to understand, as he stood there, twisting in his ands a terrible cap which he had.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.3#The President repeated the question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.4#This time the man heard it. He seemed to understand. He made a motion like man who is just waking up, cast his eyes about him, stared at the audience, he gendarmes, his counsel, the jury, the court, laid his monstrous fist on the im of woodwork in front of his bench, took another look, and all at once, ixing his glance upon the district-attorney, he began to speak. It was like an ruption. It seemed, from the manner in which the words escaped from his outh,—incoherent, impetuous, pell-mell, tumbling over each other,—as though hey were all pressing forward to issue forth at once. He said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.5#“This is what I have to say. That I have been a wheelwright in Paris, and hat it was with Monsieur Baloup. It is a hard trade. In the wheelwright’s trade ne works always in the open air, in courtyards, under sheds when the masters re good, never in closed workshops, because space is required, you see. In inter one gets so cold that one beats one’s arms together to warm one’s self; ut the masters don’t like it; they say it wastes time. Handling iron when there s ice between the paving-stones is hard work. That wears a man out quickly. One s old while he is still quite young in that trade. At forty a man is done for. was fifty-three. I was in a bad state. And then, workmen are so mean! When a an is no longer young, they call him nothing but an old bird, old beast! I was ot earning more than thirty sous a day. They paid me as little as possible. The asters took advantage of my age—and then I had my daughter, who was a laundress t the river. She earned a little also. It sufficed for us two. She had trouble, lso; all day long up to her waist in a tub, in rain, in snow. When the wind uts your face, when it freezes, it is all the same; you must still wash. There re people who have not much linen, and wait until late; if you do not wash, you ose your custom. The planks are badly joined, and water drops on you from verywhere; you have your petticoats all damp above and below. That penetrates. he has also worked at the laundry of the Enfants-Rouges, where the water comes hrough faucets. You are not in the tub there; you wash at the faucet in front f you, and rinse in a basin behind you. As it is enclosed, you are not so cold; ut there is that hot steam, which is terrible, and which ruins your eyes. She ame home at seven o’clock in the evening, and went to bed at once, she was so ired. Her husband beat her. She is dead. We have not been very happy. She was a ood girl, who did not go to the ball, and who was very peaceable. I remember ne Shrove-Tuesday when she went to bed at eight o’clock. There, I am telling he truth; you have only to ask. Ah, yes! how stupid I am! Paris is a gulf. Who nows Father Champmathieu there? But M. Baloup does, I tell you. Go see at M. aloup’s; and after all, I don’t know what is wanted of me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.6#The man ceased speaking, and remained standing. He had said these things in loud, rapid, hoarse voice, with a sort of irritated and savage ingenuousness. nce he paused to salute some one in the crowd. The sort of affirmations which e seemed to fling out before him at random came like hiccoughs, and to each he dded the gesture of a wood-cutter who is splitting wood. When he had finished, he audience burst into a laugh. He stared at the public, and, perceiving that hey were laughing, and not understanding why, he began to laugh himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.7#It was inauspicious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.8#The President, an attentive and benevolent man, raised his voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.9#He reminded “the gentlemen of the jury” that “the sieur Baloup, formerly a aster-wheelwright, with whom the accused stated that he had served, had been ummoned in vain. He had become bankrupt, and was not to be found.” Then turning o the accused, he enjoined him to listen to what he was about to say, and dded: “You are in a position where reflection is necessary. The gravest resumptions rest upon you, and may induce vital results. Prisoner, in your own nterests, I summon you for the last time to explain yourself clearly on two oints. In the first place, did you or did you not climb the wall of the Pierron rchard, break the branch, and steal the apples; that is to say, commit the rime of breaking in and theft? In the second place, are you the discharged onvict, Jean Valjean—yes or no?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.10#The prisoner shook his head with a capable air, like a man who has horoughly understood, and who knows what answer he is going to make. He opened is mouth, turned towards the President, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.11#“In the first place—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.12#Then he stared at his cap, stared at the ceiling, and held his peace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.13#“Prisoner,” said the district-attorney, in a severe voice; “pay attention. ou are not answering anything that has been asked of you. Your embarrassment ondemns you. It is evident that your name is not Champmathieu; that you are the onvict, Jean Valjean, concealed first under the name of Jean Mathieu, which was he name of his mother; that you went to Auvergne; that you were born at averolles, where you were a pruner of trees. It is evident that you have been uilty of entering, and of the theft of ripe apples from the Pierron orchard. he gentlemen of the jury will form their own opinion.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.14#The prisoner had finally resumed his seat; he arose abruptly when the istrict-attorney had finished, and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.15#“You are very wicked; that you are! This what I wanted to say; I could not ind words for it at first. I have stolen nothing. I am a man who does not have omething to eat every day. I was coming from Ailly; I was walking through the ountry after a shower, which had made the whole country yellow: even the ponds ere overflowed, and nothing sprang from the sand any more but the little blades f grass at the wayside. I found a broken branch with apples on the ground; I icked up the branch without knowing that it would get me into trouble. I have een in prison, and they have been dragging me about for the last three months; ore than that I cannot say; people talk against me, they tell me, ‘Answer!’ The endarme, who is a good fellow, nudges my elbow, and says to me in a low voice, Come, answer!’ I don’t know how to explain; I have no education; I am a poor an; that is where they wrong me, because they do not see this. I have not tolen; I picked up from the ground things that were lying there. You say, Jean aljean, Jean Mathieu! I don’t know those persons; they are villagers. I worked or M. Baloup, Boulevard de l’Hôpital; my name is Champmathieu. You are very lever to tell me where I was born; I don’t know myself: it’s not everybody who as a house in which to come into the world; that would be too convenient. I hink that my father and mother were people who strolled along the highways; I now nothing different. When I was a child, they called me _young fellow_; now hey call me _old Fellow_; those are my baptismal names; take that as you like. have been in Auvergne; I have been at Faverolles. Pardi. Well! can’t a man ave been in Auvergne, or at Faverolles, without having been in the galleys? I ell you that I have not stolen, and that I am Father Champmathieu; I have been ith M. Baloup; I have had a settled residence. You worry me with your nonsense, here! Why is everybody pursuing me so furiously?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.16#The district-attorney had remained standing; he addressed the resident:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.17#“Monsieur le Président, in view of the confused but exceedingly clever enials of the prisoner, who would like to pass himself off as an idiot, but who ill not succeed in so doing,—we shall attend to that,—we demand that it shall lease you and that it shall please the court to summon once more into this lace the convicts Brevet, Cochepaille, and Chenildieu, and Police-Inspector avert, and question them for the last time as to the identity of the prisoner ith the convict Jean Valjean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.18#“I would remind the district-attorney,” said the President, “that olice-Inspector Javert, recalled by his duties to the capital of a neighboring rrondissement, left the court-room and the town as soon as he had made his eposition; we have accorded him permission, with the consent of the istrict-attorney and of the counsel for the prisoner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.19#“That is true, Mr. President,” responded the district-attorney. “In the bsence of sieur Javert, I think it my duty to remind the gentlemen of the jury f what he said here a few hours ago. Javert is an estimable man, who does honor y his rigorous and strict probity to inferior but important functions. These re the terms of his deposition: ‘I do not even stand in need of circumstantial roofs and moral presumptions to give the lie to the prisoner’s denial. I ecognize him perfectly. The name of this man is not Champmathieu; he is an x-convict named Jean Valjean, and is very vicious and much to be feared. It is nly with extreme regret that he was released at the expiration of his term. He nderwent nineteen years of penal servitude for theft. He made five or six ttempts to escape. Besides the theft from Little Gervais, and from the Pierron rchard, I suspect him of a theft committed in the house of His Grace the late ishop of D—— I often saw him at the time when I was adjutant of the alley-guard at the prison in Toulon. I repeat that I recognize him erfectly.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.20#This extremely precise statement appeared to produce a vivid impression on he public and on the jury. The district-attorney concluded by insisting, that n default of Javert, the three witnesses Brevet, Chenildieu, and Cochepaille hould be heard once more and solemnly interrogated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.21#The President transmitted the order to an usher, and, a moment later, the oor of the witnesses’ room opened. The usher, accompanied by a gendarme ready o lend him armed assistance, introduced the convict Brevet. The audience was in uspense; and all breasts heaved as though they had contained but one soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.22#The ex-convict Brevet wore the black and gray waistcoat of the central risons. Brevet was a person sixty years of age, who had a sort of business an’s face, and the air of a rascal. The two sometimes go together. In prison, hither fresh misdeeds had led him, he had become something in the nature of a urnkey. He was a man of whom his superiors said, “He tries to make himself of se.” The chaplains bore good testimony as to his religious habits. It must not e forgotten that this passed under the Restoration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.23#“Brevet,” said the President, “you have undergone an ignominious sentence, nd you cannot take an oath.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.24#Brevet dropped his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.25#“Nevertheless,” continued the President, “even in the man whom the law has egraded, there may remain, when the divine mercy permits it, a sentiment of onor and of equity. It is to this sentiment that I appeal at this decisive our. If it still exists in you,—and I hope it does,—reflect before replying to e: consider on the one hand, this man, whom a word from you may ruin; on the ther hand, justice, which a word from you may enlighten. The instant is solemn; here is still time to retract if you think you have been mistaken. Rise, risoner. Brevet, take a good look at the accused, recall your souvenirs, and ell us on your soul and conscience, if you persist in recognizing this man as our former companion in the galleys, Jean Valjean?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.26#Brevet looked at the prisoner, then turned towards the court.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.27#“Yes, Mr. President, I was the first to recognize him, and I stick to it; hat man is Jean Valjean, who entered at Toulon in 1796, and left in 1815. I eft a year later. He has the air of a brute now; but it must be because age has rutalized him; he was sly at the galleys: I recognize him positively.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.28#“Take your seat,” said the President. “Prisoner, remain standing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.29#Chenildieu was brought in, a prisoner for life, as was indicated by his ed cassock and his green cap. He was serving out his sentence at the galleys of oulon, whence he had been brought for this case. He was a small man of about ifty, brisk, wrinkled, frail, yellow, brazen-faced, feverish, who had a sort of ickly feebleness about all his limbs and his whole person, and an immense force n his glance. His companions in the galleys had nicknamed him _I-deny-God_ _Je-nie Dieu_, Chenildieu).
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.30#The President addressed him in nearly the same words which he had used to revet. At the moment when he reminded him of his infamy which deprived him of he right to take an oath, Chenildieu raised his head and looked the crowd in he face. The President invited him to reflection, and asked him as he had asked revet, if he persisted in recognition of the prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.31#Chenildieu burst out laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.32#“Pardieu, as if I didn’t recognize him! We were attached to the same chain or five years. So you are sulking, old fellow?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.33#“Go take your seat,” said the President.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.34#The usher brought in Cochepaille. He was another convict for life, who had ome from the galleys, and was dressed in red, like Chenildieu, was a peasant rom Lourdes, and a half-bear of the Pyrenees. He had guarded the flocks among he mountains, and from a shepherd he had slipped into a brigand. Cochepaille as no less savage and seemed even more stupid than the prisoner. He was one of hose wretched men whom nature has sketched out for wild beasts, and on whom ociety puts the finishing touches as convicts in the galleys.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.35#The President tried to touch him with some grave and pathetic words, and sked him, as he had asked the other two, if he persisted, without hesitation or rouble, in recognizing the man who was standing before him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.36#“He is Jean Valjean,” said Cochepaille. “He was even called ean-the-Screw, because he was so strong.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.37#Each of these affirmations from these three men, evidently sincere and in ood faith, had raised in the audience a murmur of bad augury for the risoner,—a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time that a fresh eclaration was added to the proceeding.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.38#The prisoner had listened to them, with that astounded face which was, ccording to the accusation, his principal means of defence; at the first, the endarmes, his neighbors, had heard him mutter between his teeth: “Ah, well, e’s a nice one!” after the second, he said, a little louder, with an air that as almost that of satisfaction, “Good!” at the third, he cried, “Famous!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.39#The President addressed him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.40#“Have you heard, prisoner? What have you to say?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.41#He replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.42#“I say, ‘Famous!’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.43#An uproar broke out among the audience, and was communicated to the jury; t was evident that the man was lost.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.44#“Ushers,” said the President, “enforce silence! I am going to sum up the rguments.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.45#At that moment there was a movement just beside the President; a voice was eard crying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.46#“Brevet! Chenildieu! Cochepaille! look here!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.47#All who heard that voice were chilled, so lamentable and terrible was it; ll eyes were turned to the point whence it had proceeded. A man, placed among he privileged spectators who were seated behind the court, had just risen, had ushed open the half-door which separated the tribunal from the audience, and as standing in the middle of the hall; the President, the district-attorney, M. amatabois, twenty persons, recognized him, and exclaimed in concert:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.10.48#“M. Madeleine!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.head#CHAPTER XI—CHAMPMATHIEU MORE AND MORE ASTONISHED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.1#It was he, in fact. The clerk’s lamp illumined his countenance. He held his at in his hand; there was no disorder in his clothing; his coat was carefully uttoned; he was very pale, and he trembled slightly; his hair, which had still een gray on his arrival in Arras, was now entirely white: it had turned white uring the hour he had sat there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.2#All heads were raised: the sensation was indescribable; there was a omentary hesitation in the audience, the voice had been so heart-rending; the an who stood there appeared so calm that they did not understand at first. They sked themselves whether he had indeed uttered that cry; they could not believe hat that tranquil man had been the one to give that terrible outcry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.3#This indecision only lasted a few seconds. Even before the President and he district-attorney could utter a word, before the ushers and the gendarmes ould make a gesture, the man whom all still called, at that moment, M. adeleine, had advanced towards the witnesses Cochepaille, Brevet, and henildieu.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.4#“Do you not recognize me?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.5#All three remained speechless, and indicated by a sign of the head that hey did not know him. Cochepaille, who was intimidated, made a military salute. . Madeleine turned towards the jury and the court, and said in a gentle oice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.6#“Gentlemen of the jury, order the prisoner to be released! Mr. President, ave me arrested. He is not the man whom you are in search of; it is I: I am ean Valjean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.7#Not a mouth breathed; the first commotion of astonishment had been followed y a silence like that of the grave; those within the hall experienced that sort f religious terror which seizes the masses when something grand has been one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.8#In the meantime, the face of the President was stamped with sympathy and adness; he had exchanged a rapid sign with the district-attorney and a few ow-toned words with the assistant judges; he addressed the public, and asked in ccents which all understood:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.9#“Is there a physician present?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.10#The district-attorney took the word:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.11#“Gentlemen of the jury, the very strange and unexpected incident which isturbs the audience inspires us, like yourselves, only with a sentiment which t is unnecessary for us to express. You all know, by reputation at least, the onorable M. Madeleine, mayor of M. sur M.; if there is a physician in the udience, we join the President in requesting him to attend to M. Madeleine, and o conduct him to his home.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.12#M. Madeleine did not allow the district-attorney to finish; he interrupted im in accents full of suavity and authority. These are the words which he ttered; here they are literally, as they were written down, immediately after he trial by one of the witnesses to this scene, and as they now ring in the ars of those who heard them nearly forty years ago:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.13#“I thank you, Mr. District-Attorney, but I am not mad; you shall see; you ere on the point of committing a great error; release this man! I am fulfilling duty; I am that miserable criminal. I am the only one here who sees the matter learly, and I am telling you the truth. God, who is on high, looks down on what am doing at this moment, and that suffices. You can take me, for here I am: ut I have done my best; I concealed myself under another name; I have become ich; I have become a mayor; I have tried to re-enter the ranks of the honest. t seems that that is not to be done. In short, there are many things which I annot tell. I will not narrate the story of my life to you; you will hear it ne of these days. I robbed Monseigneur the Bishop, it is true; it is true that robbed Little Gervais; they were right in telling you that Jean Valjean was a ery vicious wretch. Perhaps it was not altogether his fault. Listen, honorable udges! a man who has been so greatly humbled as I have has neither any emonstrances to make to Providence, nor any advice to give to society; but, you ee, the infamy from which I have tried to escape is an injurious thing; the alleys make the convict what he is; reflect upon that, if you please. Before oing to the galleys, I was a poor peasant, with very little intelligence, a ort of idiot; the galleys wrought a change in me. I was stupid; I became icious: I was a block of wood; I became a firebrand. Later on, indulgence and indness saved me, as severity had ruined me. But, pardon me, you cannot nderstand what I am saying. You will find at my house, among the ashes in the ireplace, the forty-sou piece which I stole, seven years ago, from Little ervais. I have nothing farther to add; take me. Good God! the district-attorney hakes his head; you say, ‘M. Madeleine has gone mad!’ you do not believe me! hat is distressing. Do not, at least, condemn this man! What! these men do not ecognize me! I wish Javert were here; he would recognize me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.14#Nothing can reproduce the sombre and kindly melancholy of tone which ccompanied these words.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.15#He turned to the three convicts, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.16#“Well, I recognize you; do you remember, Brevet?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.17#He paused, hesitated for an instant, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.18#“Do you remember the knitted suspenders with a checked pattern which you ore in the galleys?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.19#Brevet gave a start of surprise, and surveyed him from head to foot with a rightened air. He continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.20#“Chenildieu, you who conferred on yourself the name of ‘Jenie-Dieu,’ your hole right shoulder bears a deep burn, because you one day laid your shoulder gainst the chafing-dish full of coals, in order to efface the three letters T. . P., which are still visible, nevertheless; answer, is this true?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.21#“It is true,” said Chenildieu.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.22#He addressed himself to Cochepaille:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.23#“Cochepaille, you have, near the bend in your left arm, a date stamped in lue letters with burnt powder; the date is that of the landing of the Emperor t Cannes, March 1, 1815; pull up your sleeve!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.24#Cochepaille pushed up his sleeve; all eyes were focused on him and on his are arm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.25#A gendarme held a light close to it; there was the date.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.26#The unhappy man turned to the spectators and the judges with a smile which till rends the hearts of all who saw it whenever they think of it. It was a mile of triumph; it was also a smile of despair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.27#“You see plainly,” he said, “that I am Jean Valjean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.28#In that chamber there were no longer either judges, accusers, nor endarmes; there was nothing but staring eyes and sympathizing hearts. No one ecalled any longer the part that each might be called upon to play; the istrict-attorney forgot he was there for the purpose of prosecuting, the resident that he was there to preside, the counsel for the defence that he was here to defend. It was a striking circumstance that no question was put, that o authority intervened. The peculiarity of sublime spectacles is, that they apture all souls and turn witnesses into spectators. No one, probably, could ave explained what he felt; no one, probably, said to himself that he was itnessing the splendid outburst of a grand light: all felt themselves inwardly azzled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.29#It was evident that they had Jean Valjean before their eyes. That was lear. The appearance of this man had sufficed to suffuse with light that matter hich had been so obscure but a moment previously, without any further xplanation: the whole crowd, as by a sort of electric revelation, understood nstantly and at a single glance the simple and magnificent history of a man who as delivering himself up so that another man might not be condemned in his tead. The details, the hesitations, little possible oppositions, were swallowed p in that vast and luminous fact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.30#It was an impression which vanished speedily, but which was irresistible t the moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.31#“I do not wish to disturb the court further,” resumed Jean Valjean. “I hall withdraw, since you do not arrest me. I have many things to do. The istrict-attorney knows who I am; he knows whither I am going; he can have me rrested when he likes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.32#He directed his steps towards the door. Not a voice was raised, not an arm xtended to hinder him. All stood aside. At that moment there was about him that ivine something which causes multitudes to stand aside and make way for a man. e traversed the crowd slowly. It was never known who opened the door, but it is ertain that he found the door open when he reached it. On arriving there he urned round and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.33#“I am at your command, Mr. District-Attorney.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.34#Then he addressed the audience:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.35#“All of you, all who are present—consider me worthy of pity, do you not? ood God! When I think of what I was on the point of doing, I consider that I am o be envied. Nevertheless, I should have preferred not to have had this ccur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.36#He withdrew, and the door closed behind him as it had opened, for those ho do certain sovereign things are always sure of being served by some one in he crowd.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.7.11.37#Less than an hour after this, the verdict of the jury freed the said hampmathieu from all accusations; and Champmathieu, being at once released, ent off in a state of stupefaction, thinking that all men were fools, and omprehending nothing of this vision.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.head#BOOK EIGHTH—A COUNTER-BLOW
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.head#CHAPTER I—IN WHAT MIRROR M. MADELEINE CONTEMPLATES HIS HAIR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.1#The day had begun to dawn. Fantine had passed a sleepless and feverish ight, filled with happy visions; at daybreak she fell asleep. Sister Simplice, ho had been watching with her, availed herself of this slumber to go and repare a new potion of chinchona. The worthy sister had been in the laboratory f the infirmary but a few moments, bending over her drugs and phials, and crutinizing things very closely, on account of the dimness which the half-light f dawn spreads over all objects. Suddenly she raised her head and uttered a aint shriek. M. Madeleine stood before her; he had just entered silently.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.2#“Is it you, Mr. Mayor?” she exclaimed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.3#He replied in a low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.4#“How is that poor woman?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.5#“Not so bad just now; but we have been very uneasy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.6#She explained to him what had passed: that Fantine had been very ill the ay before, and that she was better now, because she thought that the mayor had one to Montfermeil to get her child. The sister dared not question the mayor; ut she perceived plainly from his air that he had not come from there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.7#“All that is good,” said he; “you were right not to undeceive her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.8#“Yes,” responded the sister; “but now, Mr. Mayor, she will see you and will ot see her child. What shall we say to her?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.9#He reflected for a moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.10#“God will inspire us,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.11#“But we cannot tell a lie,” murmured the sister, half aloud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.12#It was broad daylight in the room. The light fell full on M. Madeleine’s ace. The sister chanced to raise her eyes to it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.13#“Good God, sir!” she exclaimed; “what has happened to you? Your hair is erfectly white!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.14#“White!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.15#Sister Simplice had no mirror. She rummaged in a drawer, and pulled out he little glass which the doctor of the infirmary used to see whether a patient as dead and whether he no longer breathed. M. Madeleine took the mirror, looked t his hair, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.16#“Well!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.17#He uttered the word indifferently, and as though his mind were on omething else.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.18#The sister felt chilled by something strange of which she caught a glimpse n all this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.19#He inquired:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.20#“Can I see her?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.21#“Is not Monsieur le Maire going to have her child brought back to her?” aid the sister, hardly venturing to put the question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.22#“Of course; but it will take two or three days at least.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.23#“If she were not to see Monsieur le Maire until that time,” went on the ister, timidly, “she would not know that Monsieur le Maire had returned, and it ould be easy to inspire her with patience; and when the child arrived, she ould naturally think Monsieur le Maire had just come with the child. We should ot have to enact a lie.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.24#M. Madeleine seemed to reflect for a few moments; then he said with his alm gravity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.25#“No, sister, I must see her. I may, perhaps, be in haste.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.26#The nun did not appear to notice this word “perhaps,” which communicated n obscure and singular sense to the words of the mayor’s speech. She replied, owering her eyes and her voice respectfully:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.27#“In that case, she is asleep; but Monsieur le Maire may enter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.28#He made some remarks about a door which shut badly, and the noise of which ight awaken the sick woman; then he entered Fantine’s chamber, approached the ed and drew aside the curtains. She was asleep. Her breath issued from her reast with that tragic sound which is peculiar to those maladies, and which reaks the hearts of mothers when they are watching through the night beside heir sleeping child who is condemned to death. But this painful respiration ardly troubled a sort of ineffable serenity which overspread her countenance, nd which transfigured her in her sleep. Her pallor had become whiteness; her heeks were crimson; her long golden lashes, the only beauty of her youth and er virginity which remained to her, palpitated, though they remained closed and rooping. Her whole person was trembling with an indescribable unfolding of ings, all ready to open wide and bear her away, which could be felt as they ustled, though they could not be seen. To see her thus, one would never have reamed that she was an invalid whose life was almost despaired of. She esembled rather something on the point of soaring away than something on the oint of dying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.29#The branch trembles when a hand approaches it to pluck a flower, and seems o both withdraw and to offer itself at one and the same time. The human body as something of this tremor when the instant arrives in which the mysterious ingers of Death are about to pluck the soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.30#M. Madeleine remained for some time motionless beside that bed, gazing in urn upon the sick woman and the crucifix, as he had done two months before, on he day when he had come for the first time to see her in that asylum. They were oth still there in the same attitude—she sleeping, he praying; only now, after he lapse of two months, her hair was gray and his was white.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.31#The sister had not entered with him. He stood beside the bed, with his inger on his lips, as though there were some one in the chamber whom he must njoin to silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.32#She opened her eyes, saw him, and said quietly, with a smile:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.1.33#“And Cosette?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.head#CHAPTER II—FANTINE HAPPY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.1#She made no movement of either surprise or of joy; she was joy itself. That imple question, “And Cosette?” was put with so profound a faith, with so much ertainty, with such a complete absence of disquiet and of doubt, that he found ot a word of reply. She continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.2#“I knew that you were there. I was asleep, but I saw you. I have seen you or a long, long time. I have been following you with my eyes all night long. ou were in a glory, and you had around you all sorts of celestial forms.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.3#He raised his glance to the crucifix.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.4#“But,” she resumed, “tell me where Cosette is. Why did not you place her on y bed against the moment of my waking?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.5#He made some mechanical reply which he was never afterwards able to ecall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.6#Fortunately, the doctor had been warned, and he now made his appearance. He ame to the aid of M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.7#“Calm yourself, my child,” said the doctor; “your child is here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.8#Fantine’s eyes beamed and filled her whole face with light. She clasped her ands with an expression which contained all that is possible to prayer in the ay of violence and tenderness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.9#“Oh!” she exclaimed, “bring her to me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.10#Touching illusion of a mother! Cosette was, for her, still the little hild who is carried.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.11#“Not yet,” said the doctor, “not just now. You still have some fever. The ight of your child would agitate you and do you harm. You must be cured irst.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.12#She interrupted him impetuously:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.13#“But I am cured! Oh, I tell you that I am cured! What an ass that doctor s! The idea! I want to see my child!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.14#“You see,” said the doctor, “how excited you become. So long as you are in his state I shall oppose your having your child. It is not enough to see her; t is necessary that you should live for her. When you are reasonable, I will ring her to you myself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.15#The poor mother bowed her head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.16#“I beg your pardon, doctor, I really beg your pardon. Formerly I should ever have spoken as I have just done; so many misfortunes have happened to me, hat I sometimes do not know what I am saying. I understand you; you fear the motion. I will wait as long as you like, but I swear to you that it would not ave harmed me to see my daughter. I have been seeing her; I have not taken my yes from her since yesterday evening. Do you know? If she were brought to me ow, I should talk to her very gently. That is all. Is it not quite natural that should desire to see my daughter, who has been brought to me expressly from ontfermeil? I am not angry. I know well that I am about to be happy. All night ong I have seen white things, and persons who smiled at me. When Monsieur le octeur pleases, he shall bring me Cosette. I have no longer any fever; I am ell. I am perfectly conscious that there is nothing the matter with me any ore; but I am going to behave as though I were ill, and not stir, to please hese ladies here. When it is seen that I am very calm, they will say, ‘She must ave her child.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.17#M. Madeleine was sitting on a chair beside the bed. She turned towards im; she was making a visible effort to be calm and “very good,” as she xpressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy, in order hat, seeing her so peaceable, they might make no difficulty about bringing osette to her. But while she controlled herself she could not refrain from uestioning M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.18#“Did you have a pleasant trip, Monsieur le Maire? Oh! how good you were to o and get her for me! Only tell me how she is. Did she stand the journey well? las! she will not recognize me. She must have forgotten me by this time, poor arling! Children have no memories. They are like birds. A child sees one thing o-day and another thing to-morrow, and thinks of nothing any longer. And did he have white linen? Did those Thénardiers keep her clean? How have they fed er? Oh! if you only knew how I have suffered, putting such questions as that to yself during all the time of my wretchedness. Now, it is all past. I am happy. h, how I should like to see her! Do you think her pretty, Monsieur le Maire? Is ot my daughter beautiful? You must have been very cold in that diligence! Could he not be brought for just one little instant? She might be taken away directly fterwards. Tell me; you are the master; it could be so if you chose!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.19#He took her hand. “Cosette is beautiful,” he said, “Cosette is well. You hall see her soon; but calm yourself; you are talking with too much vivacity, nd you are throwing your arms out from under the clothes, and that makes you ough.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.20#In fact, fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.21#Fantine did not murmur; she feared that she had injured by her too assionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of inspiring, and he began to talk of indifferent things.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.22#“Montfermeil is quite pretty, is it not? People go there on pleasure arties in summer. Are the Thénardiers prosperous? There are not many travellers n their parts. That inn of theirs is a sort of a cook-shop.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.23#M. Madeleine was still holding her hand, and gazing at her with anxiety; t was evident that he had come to tell her things before which his mind now esitated. The doctor, having finished his visit, retired. Sister Simplice emained alone with them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.24#But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.25#“I hear her! mon Dieu, I hear her!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.26#She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her, held her breath, nd began to listen with rapture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.27#There was a child playing in the yard—the child of the portress or of some ork-woman. It was one of those accidents which are always occurring, and which eem to form a part of the mysterious stage-setting of mournful scenes. The hild—a little girl—was going and coming, running to warm herself, laughing, inging at the top of her voice. Alas! in what are the plays of children not ntermingled. It was this little girl whom Fantine heard singing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.28#“Oh!” she resumed, “it is my Cosette! I recognize her voice.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.29#The child retreated as it had come; the voice died away. Fantine listened or a while longer, then her face clouded over, and M. Madeleine heard her say, n a low voice: “How wicked that doctor is not to allow me to see my daughter! hat man has an evil countenance, that he has.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.30#But the smiling background of her thoughts came to the front again. She ontinued to talk to herself, with her head resting on the pillow: “How happy we re going to be! We shall have a little garden the very first thing; M. adeleine has promised it to me. My daughter will play in the garden. She must now her letters by this time. I will make her spell. She will run over the rass after butterflies. I will watch her. Then she will take her first ommunion. Ah! when will she take her first communion?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.31#She began to reckon on her fingers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.32#“One, two, three, four—she is seven years old. In five years she will have white veil, and openwork stockings; she will look like a little woman. O my ood sister, you do not know how foolish I become when I think of my daughter’s irst communion!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.33#She began to laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.34#He had released Fantine’s hand. He listened to her words as one listens to he sighing of the breeze, with his eyes on the ground, his mind absorbed in eflection which had no bottom. All at once she ceased speaking, and this caused im to raise his head mechanically. Fantine had become terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.35#She no longer spoke, she no longer breathed; she had raised herself to a itting posture, her thin shoulder emerged from her chemise; her face, which had een radiant but a moment before, was ghastly, and she seemed to have fixed her yes, rendered large with terror, on something alarming at the other extremity f the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.36#“Good God!” he exclaimed; “what ails you, Fantine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.37#She made no reply; she did not remove her eyes from the object which she eemed to see. She removed one hand from his arm, and with the other made him a ign to look behind him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.2.38#He turned, and beheld Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.head#CHAPTER III—JAVERT SATISFIED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.1#This is what had taken place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.2#The half-hour after midnight had just struck when M. Madeleine quitted the all of Assizes in Arras. He regained his inn just in time to set out again by he mail-wagon, in which he had engaged his place. A little before six o’clock n the morning he had arrived at M. sur M., and his first care had been to post letter to M. Laffitte, then to enter the infirmary and see Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.3#However, he had hardly quitted the audience hall of the Court of Assizes, hen the district-attorney, recovering from his first shock, had taken the word o deplore the mad deed of the honorable mayor of M. sur M., to declare that his onvictions had not been in the least modified by that curious incident, which ould be explained thereafter, and to demand, in the meantime, the condemnation f that Champmathieu, who was evidently the real Jean Valjean. The istrict-attorney’s persistence was visibly at variance with the sentiments of very one, of the public, of the court, and of the jury. The counsel for the efence had some difficulty in refuting this harangue and in establishing that, n consequence of the revelations of M. Madeleine, that is to say, of the real ean Valjean, the aspect of the matter had been thoroughly altered, and that the ury had before their eyes now only an innocent man. Thence the lawyer had drawn ome epiphonemas, not very fresh, unfortunately, upon judicial errors, etc., tc.; the President, in his summing up, had joined the counsel for the defence, nd in a few minutes the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.4#Nevertheless, the district-attorney was bent on having a Jean Valjean; and s he had no longer Champmathieu, he took Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.5#Immediately after Champmathieu had been set at liberty, the istrict-attorney shut himself up with the President. They conferred “as to the ecessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M.” This phrase, in hich there was a great deal of _of_, is the district-attorney’s, written with is own hand, on the minutes of his report to the attorney-general. His first motion having passed off, the President did not offer many objections. Justice ust, after all, take its course. And then, when all was said, although the resident was a kindly and a tolerably intelligent man, he was, at the same ime, a devoted and almost an ardent royalist, and he had been shocked to hear he Mayor of M. sur M. say the _Emperor_, and not _Bonaparte_, when alluding to he landing at Cannes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.6#The order for his arrest was accordingly despatched. The district-attorney orwarded it to M. sur M. by a special messenger, at full speed, and entrusted ts execution to Police Inspector Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.7#The reader knows that Javert had returned to M. sur M. immediately after aving given his deposition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.8#Javert was just getting out of bed when the messenger handed him the order f arrest and the command to produce the prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.9#The messenger himself was a very clever member of the police, who, in two ords, informed Javert of what had taken place at Arras. The order of arrest, igned by the district-attorney, was couched in these words: “Inspector Javert ill apprehend the body of the Sieur Madeleine, mayor of M. sur M., who, in this ay’s session of the court, was recognized as the liberated convict, Jean aljean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.10#Any one who did not know Javert, and who had chanced to see him at the oment when he penetrated the antechamber of the infirmary, could have divined othing of what had taken place, and would have thought his air the most rdinary in the world. He was cool, calm, grave, his gray hair was perfectly mooth upon his temples, and he had just mounted the stairs with his habitual eliberation. Any one who was thoroughly acquainted with him, and who had xamined him attentively at the moment, would have shuddered. The buckle of his eather stock was under his left ear instead of at the nape of his neck. This etrayed unwonted agitation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.11#Javert was a complete character, who never had a wrinkle in his duty or in is uniform; methodical with malefactors, rigid with the buttons of his oat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.12#That he should have set the buckle of his stock awry, it was indispensable hat there should have taken place in him one of those emotions which may be esignated as internal earthquakes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.13#He had come in a simple way, had made a requisition on the neighboring ost for a corporal and four soldiers, had left the soldiers in the courtyard, ad had Fantine’s room pointed out to him by the portress, who was utterly nsuspicious, accustomed as she was to seeing armed men inquiring for the ayor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.14#On arriving at Fantine’s chamber, Javert turned the handle, pushed the oor open with the gentleness of a sick-nurse or a police spy, and entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.15#Properly speaking, he did not enter. He stood erect in the half-open door, is hat on his head and his left hand thrust into his coat, which was buttoned p to the chin. In the bend of his elbow the leaden head of his enormous cane, hich was hidden behind him, could be seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.16#Thus he remained for nearly a minute, without his presence being erceived. All at once Fantine raised her eyes, saw him, and made M. Madeleine urn round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.17#The instant that Madeleine’s glance encountered Javert’s glance, Javert, ithout stirring, without moving from his post, without approaching him, became errible. No human sentiment can be as terrible as joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.18#It was the visage of a demon who has just found his damned soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.19#The satisfaction of at last getting hold of Jean Valjean caused all that as in his soul to appear in his countenance. The depths having been stirred up, ounted to the surface. The humiliation of having, in some slight degree, lost he scent, and of having indulged, for a few moments, in an error with regard to hampmathieu, was effaced by pride at having so well and accurately divined in he first place, and of having for so long cherished a just instinct. Javert’s ontent shone forth in his sovereign attitude. The deformity of triumph verspread that narrow brow. All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfied ace can afford were there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.20#Javert was in heaven at that moment. Without putting the thing clearly to imself, but with a confused intuition of the necessity of his presence and of is success, he, Javert, personified justice, light, and truth in their elestial function of crushing out evil. Behind him and around him, at an nfinite distance, he had authority, reason, the case judged, the legal onscience, the public prosecution, all the stars; he was protecting order, he as causing the law to yield up its thunders, he was avenging society, he was ending a helping hand to the absolute, he was standing erect in the midst of a lory. There existed in his victory a remnant of defiance and of combat. Erect, aughty, brilliant, he flaunted abroad in open day the superhuman bestiality of ferocious archangel. The terrible shadow of the action which he was ccomplishing caused the vague flash of the social sword to be visible in his lenched fist; happy and indignant, he held his heel upon crime, vice, ebellion, perdition, hell; he was radiant, he exterminated, he smiled, and here was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous Saint Michael.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.21#Javert, though frightful, had nothing ignoble about him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.3.22#Probity, sincerity, candor, conviction, the sense of duty, are things hich may become hideous when wrongly directed; but which, even when hideous, emain grand: their majesty, the majesty peculiar to the human conscience, lings to them in the midst of horror; they are virtues which have one ice,—error. The honest, pitiless joy of a fanatic in the full flood of his trocity preserves a certain lugubriously venerable radiance. Without himself uspecting the fact, Javert in his formidable happiness was to be pitied, as is very ignorant man who triumphs. Nothing could be so poignant and so terrible as his face, wherein was displayed all that may be designated as the evil of the ood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.head#CHAPTER IV—AUTHORITY REASSERTS ITS RIGHTS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.1#Fantine had not seen Javert since the day on which the mayor had torn her rom the man. Her ailing brain comprehended nothing, but the only thing which he did not doubt was that he had come to get her. She could not endure that errible face; she felt her life quitting her; she hid her face in both hands, nd shrieked in her anguish:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.2#“Monsieur Madeleine, save me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.3#Jean Valjean—we shall henceforth not speak of him otherwise—had risen. He aid to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.4#“Be at ease; it is not for you that he is come.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.5#Then he addressed Javert, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.6#“I know what you want.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.7#Javert replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.8#“Be quick about it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.9#There lay in the inflection of voice which accompanied these words omething indescribably fierce and frenzied. Javert did not say, “Be quick about t!” he said “Bequiabouit.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.10#No orthography can do justice to the accent with which it was uttered: it as no longer a human word: it was a roar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.11#He did not proceed according to his custom, he did not enter into the atter, he exhibited no warrant of arrest. In his eyes, Jean Valjean was a sort f mysterious combatant, who was not to be laid hands upon, a wrestler in the ark whom he had had in his grasp for the last five years, without being able to hrow him. This arrest was not a beginning, but an end. He confined himself to aying, “Be quick about it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.12#As he spoke thus, he did not advance a single step; he hurled at Jean aljean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook, and with which he was ccustomed to draw wretches violently to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.13#It was this glance which Fantine had felt penetrating to the very marrow f her bones two months previously.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.14#At Javert’s exclamation, Fantine opened her eyes once more. But the mayor as there; what had she to fear?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.15#Javert advanced to the middle of the room, and cried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.16#“See here now! Art thou coming?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.17#The unhappy woman glanced about her. No one was present excepting the nun nd the mayor. To whom could that abject use of “thou” be addressed? To her nly. She shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.18#Then she beheld a most unprecedented thing, a thing so unprecedented that othing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackest deliriums of ever.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.19#She beheld Javert, the police spy, seize the mayor by the collar; she saw he mayor bow his head. It seemed to her that the world was coming to an nd.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.20#Javert had, in fact, grasped Jean Valjean by the collar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.21#“Monsieur le Maire!” shrieked Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.22#Javert burst out laughing with that frightful laugh which displayed all is gums.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.23#“There is no longer any Monsieur le Maire here!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.24#Jean Valjean made no attempt to disengage the hand which grasped the ollar of his coat. He said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.25#“Javert—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.26#Javert interrupted him: “Call me Mr. Inspector.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.27#“Monsieur,” said Jean Valjean, “I should like to say a word to you in rivate.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.28#“Aloud! Say it aloud!” replied Javert; “people are in the habit of talking loud to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.29#Jean Valjean went on in a lower tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.30#“I have a request to make of you—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.31#“I tell you to speak loud.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.32#“But you alone should hear it—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.33#“What difference does that make to me? I shall not listen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.34#Jean Valjean turned towards him and said very rapidly and in a very low oice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.35#“Grant me three days’ grace! three days in which to go and fetch the child f this unhappy woman. I will pay whatever is necessary. You shall accompany me f you choose.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.36#“You are making sport of me!” cried Javert. “Come now, I did not think you uch a fool! You ask me to give you three days in which to run away! You say hat it is for the purpose of fetching that creature’s child! Ah! Ah! That’s ood! That’s really capital!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.37#Fantine was seized with a fit of trembling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.38#“My child!” she cried, “to go and fetch my child! She is not here, then! nswer me, sister; where is Cosette? I want my child! Monsieur Madeleine! onsieur le Maire!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.39#Javert stamped his foot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.40#“And now there’s the other one! Will you hold your tongue, you hussy? It’s pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates, and where women of the own are cared for like countesses! Ah! But we are going to change all that; it s high time!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.41#He stared intently at Fantine, and added, once more taking into his grasp ean Valjean’s cravat, shirt and collar:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.42#“I tell you that there is no Monsieur Madeleine and that there is no onsieur le Maire. There is a thief, a brigand, a convict named Jean Valjean! nd I have him in my grasp! That’s what there is!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.43#Fantine raised herself in bed with a bound, supporting herself on her tiffened arms and on both hands: she gazed at Jean Valjean, she gazed at avert, she gazed at the nun, she opened her mouth as though to speak; a rattle roceeded from the depths of her throat, her teeth chattered; she stretched out er arms in her agony, opening her hands convulsively, and fumbling about her ike a drowning person; then suddenly fell back on her pillow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.44#Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on her breast, ith gaping mouth and staring, sightless eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.45#She was dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.46#Jean Valjean laid his hand upon the detaining hand of Javert, and opened t as he would have opened the hand of a baby; then he said to Javert:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.47#“You have murdered that woman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.48#“Let’s have an end of this!” shouted Javert, in a fury; “I am not here to isten to argument. Let us economize all that; the guard is below; march on nstantly, or you’ll get the thumb-screws!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.49#In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead, which was in a ecidedly decrepit state, and which served the sisters as a camp-bed when they ere watching with the sick. Jean Valjean stepped up to this bed, in a twinkling renched off the head-piece, which was already in a dilapidated condition, an asy matter to muscles like his, grasped the principal rod like a bludgeon, and lanced at Javert. Javert retreated towards the door. Jean Valjean, armed with is bar of iron, walked slowly up to Fantine’s couch. When he arrived there he urned and said to Javert, in a voice that was barely audible:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.50#“I advise you not to disturb me at this moment.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.51#One thing is certain, and that is, that Javert trembled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.52#It did occur to him to summon the guard, but Jean Valjean might avail imself of that moment to effect his escape; so he remained, grasped his cane by he small end, and leaned against the door-post, without removing his eyes from ean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.53#Jean Valjean rested his elbow on the knob at the head of the bed, and his row on his hand, and began to contemplate the motionless body of Fantine, which ay extended there. He remained thus, mute, absorbed, evidently with no further hought of anything connected with this life. Upon his face and in his attitude here was nothing but inexpressible pity. After a few moments of this meditation e bent towards Fantine, and spoke to her in a low voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.54#What did he say to her? What could this man, who was reproved, say to that oman, who was dead? What words were those? No one on earth heard them. Did the ead woman hear them? There are some touching illusions which are, perhaps, ublime realities. The point as to which there exists no doubt is, that Sister implice, the sole witness of the incident, often said that at the moment that ean Valjean whispered in Fantine’s ear, she distinctly beheld an ineffable mile dawn on those pale lips, and in those dim eyes, filled with the amazement f the tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.55#Jean Valjean took Fantine’s head in both his hands, and arranged it on the illow as a mother might have done for her child; then he tied the string of her hemise, and smoothed her hair back under her cap. That done, he closed her yes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.56#Fantine’s face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.57#Death, that signifies entrance into the great light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.58#Fantine’s hand was hanging over the side of the bed. Jean Valjean knelt own before that hand, lifted it gently, and kissed it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.59#Then he rose, and turned to Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.4.60#“Now,” said he, “I am at your disposal.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.head#CHAPTER V—A SUITABLE TOMB
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.1#Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.2#The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation, or rather, an xtraordinary commotion in M. sur M. We are sorry that we cannot conceal the act, that at the single word, “He was a convict,” nearly every one deserted im. In less than two hours all the good that he had done had been forgotten, nd he was nothing but a “convict from the galleys.” It is just to add that the etails of what had taken place at Arras were not yet known. All day long onversations like the following were to be heard in all quarters of the own:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.3#“You don’t know? He was a liberated convict!” “Who?” “The mayor.” “Bah! M. adeleine?” “Yes.” “Really?” “His name was not Madeleine at all; he had a rightful name, Béjean, Bojean, Boujean.” “Ah! Good God!” “He has been rrested.” “Arrested!” “In prison, in the city prison, while waiting to be ransferred.” “Until he is transferred!” “He is to be transferred!” “Where is he o be taken?” “He will be tried at the Assizes for a highway robbery which he ommitted long ago.” “Well! I suspected as much. That man was too good, too erfect, too affected. He refused the cross; he bestowed sous on all the little camps he came across. I always thought there was some evil history back of all hat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.4#The “drawing-rooms” particularly abounded in remarks of this nature.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.5#One old lady, a subscriber to the _Drapeau Blanc_, made the following emark, the depth of which it is impossible to fathom:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.6#“I am not sorry. It will be a lesson to the Bonapartists!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.7#It was thus that the phantom which had been called M. Madeleine vanished rom M. sur M. Only three or four persons in all the town remained faithful to is memory. The old portress who had served him was among the number.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.8#On the evening of that day the worthy old woman was sitting in her lodge, till in a thorough fright, and absorbed in sad reflections. The factory had een closed all day, the carriage gate was bolted, the street was deserted. here was no one in the house but the two nuns, Sister Perpétue and Sister implice, who were watching beside the body of Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.9#Towards the hour when M. Madeleine was accustomed to return home, the good ortress rose mechanically, took from a drawer the key of M. Madeleine’s hamber, and the flat candlestick which he used every evening to go up to his uarters; then she hung the key on the nail whence he was accustomed to take it, nd set the candlestick on one side, as though she was expecting him. Then she at down again on her chair, and became absorbed in thought once more. The poor, ood old woman had done all this without being conscious of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.10#It was only at the expiration of two hours that she roused herself from er reverie, and exclaimed, “Hold! My good God Jesus! And I hung his key on the ail!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.11#At that moment the small window in the lodge opened, a hand passed hrough, seized the key and the candlestick, and lighted the taper at the candle hich was burning there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.12#The portress raised her eyes, and stood there with gaping mouth, and a hriek which she confined to her throat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.13#She knew that hand, that arm, the sleeve of that coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.14#It was M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.15#It was several seconds before she could speak; she had a _seizure_, as she aid herself, when she related the adventure afterwards.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.16#“Good God, Monsieur le Maire,” she cried at last, “I thought you ere—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.17#She stopped; the conclusion of her sentence would have been lacking in espect towards the beginning. Jean Valjean was still Monsieur le Maire to er.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.18#He finished her thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.19#“In prison,” said he. “I was there; I broke a bar of one of the windows; I et myself drop from the top of a roof, and here I am. I am going up to my room; o and find Sister Simplice for me. She is with that poor woman, no doubt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.20#The old woman obeyed in all haste.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.21#He gave her no orders; he was quite sure that she would guard him better han he should guard himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.22#No one ever found out how he had managed to get into the courtyard without pening the big gates. He had, and always carried about him, a pass-key which pened a little side-door; but he must have been searched, and his latch-key ust have been taken from him. This point was never explained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.23#He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber. On arriving at the top, e left his candle on the top step of his stairs, opened his door with very ittle noise, went and closed his window and his shutters by feeling, then eturned for his candle and re-entered his room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.24#It was a useful precaution; it will be recollected that his window could e seen from the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.25#He cast a glance about him, at his table, at his chair, at his bed which ad not been disturbed for three days. No trace of the disorder of the night efore last remained. The portress had “done up” his room; only she had picked ut of the ashes and placed neatly on the table the two iron ends of the cudgel nd the forty-sou piece which had been blackened by the fire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.26#He took a sheet of paper, on which he wrote: “These are the two tips of my ron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais, which I entioned at the Court of Assizes,” and he arranged this piece of paper, the its of iron, and the coin in such a way that they were the first things to be een on entering the room. From a cupboard he pulled out one of his old shirts, hich he tore in pieces. In the strips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two ilver candlesticks. He betrayed neither haste nor agitation; and while he was rapping up the Bishop’s candlesticks, he nibbled at a piece of black bread. It as probably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.27#This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the room hen the authorities made an examination later on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.28#There came two taps at the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.29#“Come in,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.30#It was Sister Simplice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.31#She was pale; her eyes were red; the candle which she carried trembled in er hand. The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is, that however olished or cool we may be, they wring human nature from our very bowels, and orce it to reappear on the surface. The emotions of that day had turned the nun nto a woman once more. She had wept, and she was trembling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.32#Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper, which he anded to the nun, saying, “Sister, you will give this to Monsieur le Curé.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.33#The paper was not folded. She cast a glance upon it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.34#“You can read it,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.35#She read:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.36#“I beg Monsieur le Curé to keep an eye on all that I leave behind me. He ill be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial, and of the funeral f the woman who died yesterday. The rest is for the poor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.37#The sister tried to speak, but she only managed to stammer a few narticulate sounds. She succeeded in saying, however:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.38#“Does not Monsieur le Maire desire to take a last look at that poor, nhappy woman?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.39#“No,” said he; “I am pursued; it would only end in their arresting me in hat room, and that would disturb her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.40#He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on the staircase. hey heard a tumult of ascending footsteps, and the old portress saying in her oudest and most piercing tones:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.41#“My good sir, I swear to you by the good God, that not a soul has entered his house all day, nor all the evening, and that I have not even left the oor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.42#A man responded:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.43#“But there is a light in that room, nevertheless.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.44#They recognized Javert’s voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.45#The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the corner of he wall on the right. Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed himself in his angle. Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.46#The door opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.47#Javert entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.48#The whispers of many men and the protestations of the portress were udible in the corridor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.49#The nun did not raise her eyes. She was praying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.50#The candle was on the chimney-piece, and gave but very little light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.51#Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.52#It will be remembered that the fundamental point in Javert, his element, he very air he breathed, was veneration for all authority. This was mpregnable, and admitted of neither objection nor restriction. In his eyes, of ourse, the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all; he was religious, uperficial and correct on this point as on all others. In his eyes, a priest as a mind, who never makes a mistake; a nun was a creature who never sins; they ere souls walled in from this world, with a single door which never opened xcept to allow the truth to pass through.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.53#On perceiving the sister, his first movement was to retire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.54#But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled him mperiously in the opposite direction. His second movement was to remain and to enture on at least one question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.55#This was Sister Simplice, who had never told a lie in her life. Javert new it, and held her in special veneration in consequence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.56#“Sister,” said he, “are you alone in this room?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.57#A terrible moment ensued, during which the poor portress felt as though he should faint.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.58#The sister raised her eyes and answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.59#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.60#“Then,” resumed Javert, “you will excuse me if I persist; it is my duty; ou have not seen a certain person—a man—this evening? He has escaped; we are in earch of him—that Jean Valjean; you have not seen him?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.61#The sister replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.62#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.63#She lied. She had lied twice in succession, one after the other, without esitation, promptly, as a person does when sacrificing herself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.64#“Pardon me,” said Javert, and he retired with a deep bow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.65#O sainted maid! you left this world many years ago; you have rejoined your isters, the virgins, and your brothers, the angels, in the light; may this lie e counted to your credit in paradise!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.66#The sister’s affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did ot even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just been xtinguished, and which was still smoking on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.67#An hour later, a man, marching amid trees and mists, was rapidly departing rom M. sur M. in the direction of Paris. That man was Jean Valjean. It has been stablished by the testimony of two or three carters who met him, that he was arrying a bundle; that he was dressed in a blouse. Where had he obtained that louse? No one ever found out. But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of he factory a few days before, leaving behind him nothing but his blouse. erhaps that was the one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.68#One last word about Fantine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.69#We all have a mother,—the earth. Fantine was given back to that other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.70#The curé thought that he was doing right, and perhaps he really was, in eserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left for the oor. Who was concerned, after all? A convict and a woman of the town. That is hy he had a very simple funeral for Fantine, and reduced it to that strictly ecessary form known as the pauper’s grave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.71#So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongs to nybody and everybody, and where the poor are lost. Fortunately, God knows where o find the soul again. Fantine was laid in the shade, among the first bones hat came to hand; she was subjected to the promiscuousness of ashes. She was hrown into the public grave. Her grave resembled her bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.72#[THE END OF VOLUME I “FANTINE”] Enlarge
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:1.8.5.73#Frontispiece Volume Two 2frontispiece
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.head#VOLUME II—COSETTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.head#BOOK FIRST—WATERLOO
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.head#CHAPTER I—WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.1#Last year (1861), on a beautiful May morning, a traveller, the person who s telling this story, was coming from Nivelles, and directing his course owards La Hulpe. He was on foot. He was pursuing a broad paved road, which ndulated between two rows of trees, over the hills which succeed each other, aise the road and let it fall again, and produce something in the nature of normous waves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.2#He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac. In the west he perceived the late-roofed tower of Braine-l’Alleud, which has the form of a reversed vase. He ad just left behind a wood upon an eminence; and at the angle of the crossroad, y the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription _Ancient Barrier o. 4_, a public house, bearing on its front this sign: _At the Four Winds_ (Aux uatre Vents). _Échabeau, Private Café_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.3#A quarter of a league further on, he arrived at the bottom of a little alley, where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through the mbankment of the road. The clump of sparsely planted but very green trees, hich fills the valley on one side of the road, is dispersed over the meadows on he other, and disappears gracefully and as in order in the direction of raine-l’Alleud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.4#On the right, close to the road, was an inn, with a four-wheeled cart at he door, a large bundle of hop-poles, a plough, a heap of dried brushwood near flourishing hedge, lime smoking in a square hole, and a ladder suspended along n old penthouse with straw partitions. A young girl was weeding in a field, here a huge yellow poster, probably of some outside spectacle, such as a parish estival, was fluttering in the wind. At one corner of the inn, beside a pool in hich a flotilla of ducks was navigating, a badly paved path plunged into the ushes. The wayfarer struck into this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.5#After traversing a hundred paces, skirting a wall of the fifteenth century, urmounted by a pointed gable, with bricks set in contrast, he found himself efore a large door of arched stone, with a rectilinear impost, in the sombre tyle of Louis XIV., flanked by two flat medallions. A severe façade rose above his door; a wall, perpendicular to the façade, almost touched the door, and lanked it with an abrupt right angle. In the meadow before the door lay three arrows, through which, in disorder, grew all the flowers of May. The door was losed. The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old usty knocker.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.6#The sun was charming; the branches had that soft shivering of May, which eems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind. A brave little bird, robably a lover, was carolling in a distracted manner in a large tree.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.7#The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation, esembling the hollow of a sphere, in the stone on the left, at the foot of the ier of the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.8#At this moment the leaves of the door parted, and a peasant woman merged.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.9#She saw the wayfarer, and perceived what he was looking at.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.10#“It was a French cannon-ball which made that,” she said to him. And she dded:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.11#“That which you see there, higher up in the door, near a nail, is the hole f a big iron bullet as large as an egg. The bullet did not pierce the ood.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.12#“What is the name of this place?” inquired the wayfarer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.13#“Hougomont,” said the peasant woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.14#The traveller straightened himself up. He walked on a few paces, and went ff to look over the tops of the hedges. On the horizon through the trees, he erceived a sort of little elevation, and on this elevation something which at hat distance resembled a lion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.1.15#He was on the battle-field of Waterloo.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.head#CHAPTER II—HOUGOMONT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.1#Hougomont,—this was a funereal spot, the beginning of the obstacle, the irst resistance, which that great wood-cutter of Europe, called Napoleon, ncountered at Waterloo, the first knot under the blows of his axe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.2#It was a château; it is no longer anything but a farm. For the antiquary, ougomont is _Hugomons_. This manor was built by Hugo, Sire of Somerel, the same ho endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of Villiers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.3#The traveller pushed open the door, elbowed an ancient calash under the orch, and entered the courtyard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.4#The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the ixteenth century, which here simulates an arcade, everything else having fallen rostrate around it. A monumental aspect often has its birth in ruin. In a wall ear the arcade opens another arched door, of the time of Henry IV., permitting glimpse of the trees of an orchard; beside this door, a manure-hole, some ickaxes, some shovels, some carts, an old well, with its flagstone and its iron eel, a chicken jumping, and a turkey spreading its tail, a chapel surmounted by small bell-tower, a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier against the wall f the chapel—behold the court, the conquest of which was one of Napoleon’s reams. This corner of earth, could he but have seized it, would, perhaps, have iven him the world likewise. Chickens are scattering its dust abroad with their eaks. A growl is audible; it is a huge dog, who shows his teeth and replaces he English.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.5#The English behaved admirably there. Cooke’s four companies of guards there eld out for seven hours against the fury of an army.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.6#Hougomont viewed on the map, as a geometrical plan, comprising buildings nd enclosures, presents a sort of irregular rectangle, one angle of which is icked out. It is this angle which contains the southern door, guarded by this all, which commands it only a gun’s length away. Hougomont has two doors,—the outhern door, that of the château; and the northern door, belonging to the arm. Napoleon sent his brother Jérôme against Hougomont; the divisions of Foy, uilleminot, and Bachelu hurled themselves against it; nearly the entire corps f Reille was employed against it, and miscarried; Kellermann’s balls were xhausted on this heroic section of wall. Bauduin’s brigade was not strong nough to force Hougomont on the north, and the brigade of Soye could not do ore than effect the beginning of a breach on the south, but without taking t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.7#The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south. A bit of the north oor, broken by the French, hangs suspended to the wall. It consists of four lanks nailed to two cross-beams, on which the scars of the attack are isible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.8#The northern door, which was beaten in by the French, and which has had a iece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall, stands half-open t the bottom of the paddock; it is cut squarely in the wall, built of stone elow, of brick above which closes in the courtyard on the north. It is a simple oor for carts, such as exist in all farms, with the two large leaves made of ustic planks: beyond lie the meadows. The dispute over this entrance was urious. For a long time, all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible on he door-posts. It was there that Bauduin was killed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.9#The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard; its horror is isible there; the confusion of the fray was petrified there; it lives and it ies there; it was only yesterday. The walls are in the death agony, the stones all; the breaches cry aloud; the holes are wounds; the drooping, quivering rees seem to be making an effort to flee.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.10#This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day. Buildings hich have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.11#The English barricaded themselves there; the French made their way in, but ould not stand their ground. Beside the chapel, one wing of the château, the nly ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont, rises in a crumbling tate,—disembowelled, one might say. The château served for a dungeon, the hapel for a block-house. There men exterminated each other. The French, fired n from every point,—from behind the walls, from the summits of the garrets, rom the depths of the cellars, through all the casements, through all the ir-holes, through every crack in the stones,—fetched fagots and set fire to alls and men; the reply to the grape-shot was a conflagration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.12#In the ruined wing, through windows garnished with bars of iron, the ismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible; the English uards were in ambush in these rooms; the spiral of the staircase, cracked from he ground floor to the very roof, appears like the inside of a broken shell. he staircase has two stories; the English, besieged on the staircase, and assed on its upper steps, had cut off the lower steps. These consisted of large labs of blue stone, which form a heap among the nettles. Half a score of steps till cling to the wall; on the first is cut the figure of a trident. These naccessible steps are solid in their niches. All the rest resembles a jaw which as been denuded of its teeth. There are two old trees there: one is dead; the ther is wounded at its base, and is clothed with verdure in April. Since 1815 t has taken to growing through the staircase.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.13#A massacre took place in the chapel. The interior, which has recovered its alm, is singular. The mass has not been said there since the carnage. evertheless, the altar has been left there—an altar of unpolished wood, placed gainst a background of roughhewn stone. Four whitewashed walls, a door opposite he altar, two small arched windows; over the door a large wooden crucifix, elow the crucifix a square air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay; on the round, in one corner, an old window-frame with the glass all broken to ieces—such is the chapel. Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of aint Anne, of the fifteenth century; the head of the infant Jesus has been arried off by a large ball. The French, who were masters of the chapel for a oment, and were then dislodged, set fire to it. The flames filled this uilding; it was a perfect furnace; the door was burned, the floor was burned, he wooden Christ was not burned. The fire preyed upon his feet, of which only he blackened stumps are now to be seen; then it stopped,—a miracle, according o the assertion of the people of the neighborhood. The infant Jesus, ecapitated, was less fortunate than the Christ.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.14#The walls are covered with inscriptions. Near the feet of Christ this name s to be read: _Henquinez_. Then these others: _Conde de Rio Maior Marques y arquesa de Almagro (Habana)_. There are French names with exclamation points,—a ign of wrath. The wall was freshly whitewashed in 1849. The nations insulted ach other there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.15#It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up which held n axe in its hand; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.16#On emerging from the chapel, a well is visible on the left. There are two n this courtyard. One inquires, Why is there no bucket and pulley to this? It s because water is no longer drawn there. Why is water not drawn there? Because t is full of skeletons.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.17#The last person who drew water from the well was named Guillaume van ylsom. He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont, and was gardener there. On the 8th of June, 1815, his family fled and concealed themselves in the woods.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.18#The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered these unfortunate eople who had been scattered abroad, for many days and nights. There are at his day certain traces recognizable, such as old boles of burned trees, which ark the site of these poor bivouacs trembling in the depths of the hickets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.19#Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont, “to guard the château,” and oncealed himself in the cellar. The English discovered him there. They tore him rom his hiding-place, and the combatants forced this frightened man to serve hem, by administering blows with the flats of their swords. They were thirsty; his Guillaume brought them water. It was from this well that he drew it. Many rank there their last draught. This well where drank so many of the dead was estined to die itself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.20#After the engagement, they were in haste to bury the dead bodies. Death as a fashion of harassing victory, and she causes the pest to follow glory. The yphus is a concomitant of triumph. This well was deep, and it was turned into a epulchre. Three hundred dead bodies were cast into it. With too much haste erhaps. Were they all dead? Legend says they were not. It seems that on the ight succeeding the interment, feeble voices were heard calling from the ell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.21#This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard. Three walls, part tone, part brick, and simulating a small, square tower, and folded like the eaves of a screen, surround it on all sides. The fourth side is open. It is here that the water was drawn. The wall at the bottom has a sort of shapeless oophole, possibly the hole made by a shell. This little tower had a platform, f which only the beams remain. The iron supports of the well on the right form cross. On leaning over, the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is illed with a heaped-up mass of shadows. The base of the walls all about the ell is concealed in a growth of nettles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.22#This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms the able for all wells in Belgium. The slab has here been replaced by a cross-beam, gainst which lean five or six shapeless fragments of knotty and petrified wood hich resemble huge bones. There is no longer either pail, chain, or pulley; but here is still the stone basin which served the overflow. The rain-water ollects there, and from time to time a bird of the neighboring forests comes hither to drink, and then flies away. One house in this ruin, the farmhouse, is till inhabited. The door of this house opens on the courtyard. Upon this door, eside a pretty Gothic lock-plate, there is an iron handle with trefoils placed lanting. At the moment when the Hanoverian lieutenant, Wilda, grasped this andle in order to take refuge in the farm, a French sapper hewed off his hand ith an axe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.23#The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume van ylsom, the old gardener, dead long since. A woman with gray hair said to us: “I as there. I was three years old. My sister, who was older, was terrified and ept. They carried us off to the woods. I went there in my mother’s arms. We lued our ears to the earth to hear. I imitated the cannon, and went _boum! oum!_”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.24#A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard, so we ere told. The orchard is terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.25#It is in three parts; one might almost say, in three acts. The first part s a garden, the second is an orchard, the third is a wood. These three parts ave a common enclosure: on the side of the entrance, the buildings of the hâteau and the farm; on the left, a hedge; on the right, a wall; and at the nd, a wall. The wall on the right is of brick, the wall at the bottom is of tone. One enters the garden first. It slopes downwards, is planted with ooseberry bushes, choked with a wild growth of vegetation, and terminated by a onumental terrace of cut stone, with balustrade with a double curve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.26#It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which preceded Le ôtre; to-day it is ruins and briars. The pilasters are surmounted by globes hich resemble cannon-balls of stone. Forty-three balusters can still be counted n their sockets; the rest lie prostrate in the grass. Almost all bear scratches f bullets. One broken baluster is placed on the pediment like a fractured eg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.27#It was in this garden, further down than the orchard, that six ight-infantry men of the 1st, having made their way thither, and being unable o escape, hunted down and caught like bears in their dens, accepted the combat ith two Hanoverian companies, one of which was armed with carbines. The anoverians lined this balustrade and fired from above. The infantry men, eplying from below, six against two hundred, intrepid and with no shelter save he currant-bushes, took a quarter of an hour to die.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.28#One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard, roperly speaking. There, within the limits of those few square fathoms, fifteen undred men fell in less than an hour. The wall seems ready to renew the combat. hirty-eight loopholes, pierced by the English at irregular heights, are there till. In front of the sixth are placed two English tombs of granite. There are oopholes only in the south wall, as the principal attack came from that uarter. The wall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge; the French came up, hinking that they had to deal only with a hedge, crossed it, and found the wall oth an obstacle and an ambuscade, with the English guards behind it, the hirty-eight loopholes firing at once a shower of grape-shot and balls, and oye’s brigade was broken against it. Thus Waterloo began.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.29#Nevertheless, the orchard was taken. As they had no ladders, the French caled it with their nails. They fought hand to hand amid the trees. All this rass has been soaked in blood. A battalion of Nassau, seven hundred strong, was verwhelmed there. The outside of the wall, against which Kellermann’s two atteries were trained, is gnawed by grape-shot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.30#This orchard is sentient, like others, in the month of May. It has its uttercups and its daisies; the grass is tall there; the cart-horses browse here; cords of hair, on which linen is drying, traverse the spaces between the rees and force the passer-by to bend his head; one walks over this uncultivated and, and one’s foot dives into mole-holes. In the middle of the grass one bserves an uprooted tree-bole which lies there all verdant. Major Blackmann eaned against it to die. Beneath a great tree in the neighborhood fell the erman general, Duplat, descended from a French family which fled on the evocation of the Edict of Nantes. An aged and falling apple-tree leans far over o one side, its wound dressed with a bandage of straw and of clayey loam. early all the apple-trees are falling with age. There is not one which has not ad its bullet or its biscayan.6 The skeletons of dead trees abound in this rchard. Crows fly through their branches, and at the end of it is a wood full f violets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.2.31#Bauduin killed, Foy wounded, conflagration, massacre, carnage, a rivulet ormed of English blood, French blood, German blood mingled in fury, a well rammed with corpses, the regiment of Nassau and the regiment of Brunswick estroyed, Duplat killed, Blackmann killed, the English Guards mutilated, twenty rench battalions, besides the forty from Reille’s corps, decimated, three housand men in that hovel of Hougomont alone cut down, slashed to pieces, shot, urned, with their throats cut,—and all this so that a peasant can say to-day to he traveller: _Monsieur, give me three francs, and if you like, I will explain o you the affair of Waterloo!_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE, 1815
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.1#Let us turn back,—that is one of the story-teller’s rights,—and put urselves once more in the year 1815, and even a little earlier than the epoch hen the action narrated in the first part of this book took place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.2#If it had not rained in the night between the 17th and the 18th of June, 815, the fate of Europe would have been different. A few drops of water, more r less, decided the downfall of Napoleon. All that Providence required in order o make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz was a little more rain, and a cloud raversing the sky out of season sufficed to make a world crumble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.3#The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleven o’clock, nd that gave Blücher time to come up. Why? Because the ground was wet. The rtillery had to wait until it became a little firmer before they could anœuvre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.4#Napoleon was an artillery officer, and felt the effects of this. The oundation of this wonderful captain was the man who, in the report to the irectory on Aboukir, said: _Such a one of our balls killed six men_. All his lans of battle were arranged for projectiles. The key to his victory was to ake the artillery converge on one point. He treated the strategy of the hostile eneral like a citadel, and made a breach in it. He overwhelmed the weak point ith grape-shot; he joined and dissolved battles with cannon. There was omething of the sharpshooter in his genius. To beat in squares, to pulverize egiments, to break lines, to crush and disperse masses,—for him everything lay n this, to strike, strike, strike incessantly,—and he intrusted this task to he cannon-ball. A redoubtable method, and one which, united with genius, endered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for the space of ifteen years.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.5#On the 18th of June, 1815, he relied all the more on his artillery, because e had numbers on his side. Wellington had only one hundred and fifty-nine ouths of fire; Napoleon had two hundred and forty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.6#Suppose the soil dry, and the artillery capable of moving, the action would ave begun at six o’clock in the morning. The battle would have been won and nded at two o’clock, three hours before the change of fortune in favor of the russians. What amount of blame attaches to Napoleon for the loss of this attle? Is the shipwreck due to the pilot?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.7#Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated this epoch y an inward diminution of force? Had the twenty years of war worn out the blade s it had worn the scabbard, the soul as well as the body? Did the veteran make imself disastrously felt in the leader? In a word, was this genius, as many istorians of note have thought, suffering from an eclipse? Did he go into a renzy in order to disguise his weakened powers from himself? Did he begin to aver under the delusion of a breath of adventure? Had he become—a grave matter n a general—unconscious of peril? Is there an age, in this class of material reat men, who may be called the giants of action, when genius grows hort-sighted? Old age has no hold on the geniuses of the ideal; for the Dantes nd Michael Angelos to grow old is to grow in greatness; is it to grow less for he Hannibals and the Bonapartes? Had Napoleon lost the direct sense of victory? ad he reached the point where he could no longer recognize the reef, could no onger divine the snare, no longer discern the crumbling brink of abysses? Had e lost his power of scenting out catastrophes? He who had in former days known ll the roads to triumph, and who, from the summit of his chariot of lightning, ointed them out with a sovereign finger, had he now reached that state of inister amazement when he could lead his tumultuous legions harnessed to it, to he precipice? Was he seized at the age of forty-six with a supreme madness? Was hat titanic charioteer of destiny no longer anything more than an immense are-devil?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.8#We do not think so.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.9#His plan of battle was, by the confession of all, a masterpiece. To go traight to the centre of the Allies’ line, to make a breach in the enemy, to ut them in two, to drive the British half back on Hal, and the Prussian half on ongres, to make two shattered fragments of Wellington and Blücher, to carry ont-Saint-Jean, to seize Brussels, to hurl the German into the Rhine, and the nglishman into the sea. All this was contained in that battle, according to apoleon. Afterwards people would see.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.10#Of course, we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle of aterloo; one of the scenes of the foundation of the story which we are relating s connected with this battle, but this history is not our subject; this istory, moreover, has been finished, and finished in a masterly manner, from ne point of view by Napoleon, and from another point of view by a whole pleiad f historians.7
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.3.11#As for us, we leave the historians at loggerheads; we are but a distant itness, a passer-by on the plain, a seeker bending over that soil all made of uman flesh, taking appearances for realities, perchance; we have no right to ppose, in the name of science, a collection of facts which contain illusions, o doubt; we possess neither military practice nor strategic ability which uthorize a system; in our opinion, a chain of accidents dominated the two eaders at Waterloo; and when it becomes a question of destiny, that mysterious ulprit, we judge like that ingenious judge, the populace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.head#CHAPTER IV—A
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.1#Those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of Waterloo have nly to place, mentally, on the ground, a capital A. The left limb of the A is he road to Nivelles, the right limb is the road to Genappe, the tie of the A is he hollow road to Ohain from Braine-l’Alleud. The top of the A is ont-Saint-Jean, where Wellington is; the lower left tip is Hougomont, where eille is stationed with Jérôme Bonaparte; the right tip is the Belle-Alliance, here Napoleon was. At the centre of this chord is the precise point where the inal word of the battle was pronounced. It was there that the lion has been laced, the involuntary symbol of the supreme heroism of the Imperial Guard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.2#The triangle included in the top of the A, between the two limbs and the ie, is the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean. The dispute over this plateau onstituted the whole battle. The wings of the two armies extended to the right nd left of the two roads to Genappe and Nivelles; d’Erlon facing Picton, Reille acing Hill.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.3#Behind the tip of the A, behind the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean, is the orest of Soignes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.4#As for the plain itself, let the reader picture to himself a vast ndulating sweep of ground; each rise commands the next rise, and all the ndulations mount towards Mont-Saint-Jean, and there end in the forest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.5#Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers. It is a question f seizing the opponent round the waist. The one seeks to trip up the other. hey clutch at everything: a bush is a point of support; an angle of the wall ffers them a rest to the shoulder; for the lack of a hovel under whose cover hey can draw up, a regiment yields its ground; an unevenness in the ground, a hance turn in the landscape, a cross-path encountered at the right moment, a rove, a ravine, can stay the heel of that colossus which is called an army, and revent its retreat. He who quits the field is beaten; hence the necessity evolving on the responsible leader, of examining the most insignificant clump f trees, and of studying deeply the slightest relief in the ground.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.6#The two generals had attentively studied the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean, now alled the plain of Waterloo. In the preceding year, Wellington, with the agacity of foresight, had examined it as the possible seat of a great battle. pon this spot, and for this duel, on the 18th of June, Wellington had the good ost, Napoleon the bad post. The English army was stationed above, the French rmy below.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.7#It is almost superfluous here to sketch the appearance of Napoleon on orseback, glass in hand, upon the heights of Rossomme, at daybreak, on June 18, 815. All the world has seen him before we can show him. That calm profile under he little three-cornered hat of the school of Brienne, that green uniform, the hite revers concealing the star of the Legion of Honor, his great coat hiding is epaulets, the corner of red ribbon peeping from beneath his vest, his eather trousers, the white horse with the saddle-cloth of purple velvet bearing n the corners crowned N’s and eagles, Hessian boots over silk stockings, silver purs, the sword of Marengo,—that whole figure of the last of the Cæsars is resent to all imaginations, saluted with acclamations by some, severely egarded by others.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.8#That figure stood for a long time wholly in the light; this arose from a ertain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes, and which always eils the truth for a longer or shorter time; but to-day history and daylight ave arrived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.4.9#That light called history is pitiless; it possesses this peculiar and ivine quality, that, pure light as it is, and precisely because it is wholly ight, it often casts a shadow in places where people had hitherto beheld rays; rom the same man it constructs two different phantoms, and the one attacks the ther and executes justice on it, and the shadows of the despot contend with the rilliancy of the leader. Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive udgments of nations. Babylon violated lessens Alexander, Rome enchained lessens æsar, Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus, tyranny follows the tyrant. It is a isfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which bears his form.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.head#CHAPTER V—THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.1#Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle; a beginning hich was troubled, uncertain, hesitating, menacing to both armies, but still ore so for the English than for the French.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.2#It had rained all night, the earth had been cut up by the downpour, the ater had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain as if in casks; t some points the gear of the artillery carriages was buried up to the axles, he circingles of the horses were dripping with liquid mud. If the wheat and rye rampled down by this cohort of transports on the march had not filled in the uts and strewn a litter beneath the wheels, all movement, particularly in the alleys, in the direction of Papelotte would have been impossible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.3#The affair began late. Napoleon, as we have already explained, was in the abit of keeping all his artillery well in hand, like a pistol, aiming it now at ne point, now at another, of the battle; and it had been his wish to wait until he horse batteries could move and gallop freely. In order to do that it was ecessary that the sun should come out and dry the soil. But the sun did not ake its appearance. It was no longer the rendezvous of Austerlitz. When the irst cannon was fired, the English general, Colville, looked at his watch, and oted that it was thirty-five minutes past eleven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.4#The action was begun furiously, with more fury, perhaps, than the Emperor ould have wished, by the left wing of the French resting on Hougomont. At the ame time Napoleon attacked the centre by hurling Quiot’s brigade on La aie-Sainte, and Ney pushed forward the right wing of the French against the eft wing of the English, which rested on Papelotte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.5#The attack on Hougomont was something of a feint; the plan was to draw ellington thither, and to make him swerve to the left. This plan would have ucceeded if the four companies of the English guards and the brave Belgians of erponcher’s division had not held the position solidly, and Wellington, instead f massing his troops there, could confine himself to despatching thither, as einforcements, only four more companies of guards and one battalion from runswick.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.6#The attack of the right wing of the French on Papelotte was calculated, in act, to overthrow the English left, to cut off the road to Brussels, to bar the assage against possible Prussians, to force Mont-Saint-Jean, to turn Wellington ack on Hougomont, thence on Braine-l’Alleud, thence on Hal; nothing easier. ith the exception of a few incidents this attack succeeded. Papelotte was aken; La Haie-Sainte was carried.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.7#A detail to be noted. There was in the English infantry, particularly in empt’s brigade, a great many raw recruits. These young soldiers were valiant in he presence of our redoubtable infantry; their inexperience extricated them ntrepidly from the dilemma; they performed particularly excellent service as kirmishers: the soldier skirmisher, left somewhat to himself, becomes, so to peak, his own general. These recruits displayed some of the French ingenuity nd fury. This novice of an infantry had dash. This displeased Wellington.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.8#After the taking of La Haie-Sainte the battle wavered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.9#There is in this day an obscure interval, from midday to four o’clock; the iddle portion of this battle is almost indistinct, and participates in the ombreness of the hand-to-hand conflict. Twilight reigns over it. We perceive ast fluctuations in that fog, a dizzy mirage, paraphernalia of war almost nknown to-day, pendant colbacks, floating sabre-taches, cross-belts, artridge-boxes for grenades, hussar dolmans, red boots with a thousand rinkles, heavy shakos garlanded with torsades, the almost black infantry of runswick mingled with the scarlet infantry of England, the English soldiers ith great, white circular pads on the slopes of their shoulders for epaulets, he Hanoverian light-horse with their oblong casques of leather, with brass ands and red horse-tails, the Scotch with their bare knees and plaids, the reat white gaiters of our grenadiers; pictures, not strategic lines—what alvator Rosa requires, not what is suited to the needs of Gribeauval.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.10#A certain amount of tempest is always mingled with a battle. _Quid bscurum, quid divinum_. Each historian traces, to some extent, the particular eature which pleases him amid this pell-mell. Whatever may be the combinations f the generals, the shock of armed masses has an incalculable ebb. During the ction the plans of the two leaders enter into each other and become mutually hrown out of shape. Such a point of the field of battle devours more combatants han such another, just as more or less spongy soils soak up more or less uickly the water which is poured on them. It becomes necessary to pour out more oldiers than one would like; a series of expenditures which are the unforeseen. he line of battle waves and undulates like a thread, the trails of blood gush llogically, the fronts of the armies waver, the regiments form capes and gulfs s they enter and withdraw; all these reefs are continually moving in front of ach other. Where the infantry stood the artillery arrives, the cavalry rushes n where the artillery was, the battalions are like smoke. There was something here; seek it. It has disappeared; the open spots change place, the sombre olds advance and retreat, a sort of wind from the sepulchre pushes forward, urls back, distends, and disperses these tragic multitudes. What is a fray? an scillation? The immobility of a mathematical plan expresses a minute, not a ay. In order to depict a battle, there is required one of those powerful ainters who have chaos in their brushes. Rembrandt is better than Vandermeulen; andermeulen, exact at noon, lies at three o’clock. Geometry is deceptive; the urricane alone is trustworthy. That is what confers on Folard the right to ontradict Polybius. Let us add, that there is a certain instant when the battle egenerates into a combat, becomes specialized, and disperses into innumerable etailed feats, which, to borrow the expression of Napoleon himself, “belong ather to the biography of the regiments than to the history of the army.” The istorian has, in this case, the evident right to sum up the whole. He cannot do ore than seize the principal outlines of the struggle, and it is not given to ny one narrator, however conscientious he may be, to fix, absolutely, the form f that horrible cloud which is called a battle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.11#This, which is true of all great armed encounters, is particularly pplicable to Waterloo.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.5.12#Nevertheless, at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came to a oint.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.head#CHAPTER VI—FOUR O’CLOCK IN THE AFTERNOON
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.1#Towards four o’clock the condition of the English army was serious. The rince of Orange was in command of the centre, Hill of the right wing, Picton of he left wing. The Prince of Orange, desperate and intrepid, shouted to the ollando-Belgians: “Nassau! Brunswick! Never retreat!” Hill, having been eakened, had come up to the support of Wellington; Picton was dead. At the very oment when the English had captured from the French the flag of the 105th of he line, the French had killed the English general, Picton, with a bullet hrough the head. The battle had, for Wellington, two bases of action, Hougomont nd La Haie-Sainte; Hougomont still held out, but was on fire; La Haie-Sainte as taken. Of the German battalion which defended it, only forty-two men urvived; all the officers, except five, were either dead or captured. Three housand combatants had been massacred in that barn. A sergeant of the English uards, the foremost boxer in England, reputed invulnerable by his companions, ad been killed there by a little French drummer-boy. Baring had been dislodged, lten put to the sword. Many flags had been lost, one from Alten’s division, and ne from the battalion of Lunenburg, carried by a prince of the house of eux-Ponts. The Scotch Grays no longer existed; Ponsonby’s great dragoons had een hacked to pieces. That valiant cavalry had bent beneath the lancers of Bro nd beneath the cuirassiers of Travers; out of twelve hundred horses, six undred remained; out of three lieutenant-colonels, two lay on the arth,—Hamilton wounded, Mater slain. Ponsonby had fallen, riddled by seven ance-thrusts. Gordon was dead. Marsh was dead. Two divisions, the fifth and the ixth, had been annihilated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.2#Hougomont injured, La Haie-Sainte taken, there now existed but one allying-point, the centre. That point still held firm. Wellington reinforced t. He summoned thither Hill, who was at Merle-Braine; he summoned Chassé, who as at Braine-l’Alleud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.3#The centre of the English army, rather concave, very dense, and very ompact, was strongly posted. It occupied the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean, having ehind it the village, and in front of it the slope, which was tolerably steep hen. It rested on that stout stone dwelling which at that time belonged to the omain of Nivelles, and which marks the intersection of the roads—a pile of the ixteenth century, and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from it without njuring it. All about the plateau the English had cut the hedges here and here, made embrasures in the hawthorn-trees, thrust the throat of a cannon etween two branches, embattled the shrubs. There artillery was ambushed in the rushwood. This punic labor, incontestably authorized by war, which permits raps, was so well done, that Haxo, who had been despatched by the Emperor at ine o’clock in the morning to reconnoitre the enemy’s batteries, had discovered othing of it, and had returned and reported to Napoleon that there were no bstacles except the two barricades which barred the road to Nivelles and to enappe. It was at the season when the grain is tall; on the edge of the plateau battalion of Kempt’s brigade, the 95th, armed with carabines, was concealed in he tall wheat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.4#Thus assured and buttressed, the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army was well osted. The peril of this position lay in the forest of Soignes, then adjoining he field of battle, and intersected by the ponds of Groenendael and Boitsfort. n army could not retreat thither without dissolving; the regiments would have roken up immediately there. The artillery would have been lost among the orasses. The retreat, according to many a man versed in the art,—though it is isputed by others,—would have been a disorganized flight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.5#To this centre, Wellington added one of Chassé‘s brigades taken from the ight wing, and one of Wincke’s brigades taken from the left wing, plus linton’s division. To his English, to the regiments of Halkett, to the brigades f Mitchell, to the guards of Maitland, he gave as reinforcements and aids, the nfantry of Brunswick, Nassau’s contingent, Kielmansegg’s Hanoverians, and mpteda’s Germans. This placed twenty-six battalions under his hand. _The right ing_, as Charras says, _was thrown back on the centre_. An enormous battery was asked by sacks of earth at the spot where there now stands what is called the Museum of Waterloo.” Besides this, Wellington had, behind a rise in the ground, omerset’s Dragoon Guards, fourteen hundred horse strong. It was the remaining alf of the justly celebrated English cavalry. Ponsonby destroyed, Somerset emained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.6#The battery, which, if completed, would have been almost a redoubt, was anged behind a very low garden wall, backed up with a coating of bags of sand nd a large slope of earth. This work was not finished; there had been no time o make a palisade for it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.7#Wellington, uneasy but impassive, was on horseback, and there remained the hole day in the same attitude, a little in advance of the old mill of ont-Saint-Jean, which is still in existence, beneath an elm, which an nglishman, an enthusiastic vandal, purchased later on for two hundred francs, ut down, and carried off. Wellington was coldly heroic. The bullets rained bout him. His aide-de-camp, Gordon, fell at his side. Lord Hill, pointing to a hell which had burst, said to him: “My lord, what are your orders in case you re killed?” “To do like me,” replied Wellington. To Clinton he said aconically, “To hold this spot to the last man.” The day was evidently turning ut ill. Wellington shouted to his old companions of Talavera, of Vittoria, of alamanca: “Boys, can retreat be thought of? Think of old England!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.6.8#Towards four o’clock, the English line drew back. Suddenly nothing was isible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery and the sharpshooters; he rest had disappeared: the regiments, dislodged by the shells and the French ullets, retreated into the bottom, now intersected by the back road of the farm f Mont-Saint-Jean; a retrograde movement took place, the English front hid tself, Wellington drew back. “The beginning of retreat!” cried Napoleon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.head#CHAPTER VII—NAPOLEON IN A GOOD HUMOR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.1#The Emperor, though ill and discommoded on horseback by a local trouble, ad never been in a better humor than on that day. His impenetrability had been miling ever since the morning. On the 18th of June, that profound soul masked y marble beamed blindly. The man who had been gloomy at Austerlitz was gay at aterloo. The greatest favorites of destiny make mistakes. Our joys are composed f shadow. The supreme smile is God’s alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.2#_Ridet Cæsar, Pompeius flebit_, said the legionaries of the Fulminatrix egion. Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion, but it is certain that æsar laughed. While exploring on horseback at one o’clock on the preceding ight, in storm and rain, in company with Bertrand, the communes in the eighborhood of Rossomme, satisfied at the sight of the long line of the English amp-fires illuminating the whole horizon from Frischemont to Braine-l’Alleud, t had seemed to him that fate, to whom he had assigned a day on the field of aterloo, was exact to the appointment; he stopped his horse, and remained for ome time motionless, gazing at the lightning and listening to the thunder; and his fatalist was heard to cast into the darkness this mysterious saying, “We re in accord.” Napoleon was mistaken. They were no longer in accord.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.3#He took not a moment for sleep; every instant of that night was marked by a oy for him. He traversed the line of the principal outposts, halting here and here to talk to the sentinels. At half-past two, near the wood of Hougomont, he eard the tread of a column on the march; he thought at the moment that it was a etreat on the part of Wellington. He said: “It is the rear-guard of the English etting under way for the purpose of decamping. I will take prisoners the six housand English who have just arrived at Ostend.” He conversed expansively; he egained the animation which he had shown at his landing on the first of March, hen he pointed out to the Grand-Marshal the enthusiastic peasant of the Gulf uan, and cried, “Well, Bertrand, here is a reinforcement already!” On the night f the 17th to the 18th of June he rallied Wellington. “That little Englishman eeds a lesson,” said Napoleon. The rain redoubled in violence; the thunder olled while the Emperor was speaking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.4#At half-past three o’clock in the morning, he lost one illusion; officers ho had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him that the enemy was not aking any movement. Nothing was stirring; not a bivouac-fire had been xtinguished; the English army was asleep. The silence on earth was profound; he only noise was in the heavens. At four o’clock, a peasant was brought in to im by the scouts; this peasant had served as guide to a brigade of English avalry, probably Vivian’s brigade, which was on its way to take up a position n the village of Ohain, at the extreme left. At five o’clock, two Belgian eserters reported to him that they had just quitted their regiment, and that he English army was ready for battle. “So much the better!” exclaimed Napoleon. I prefer to overthrow them rather than to drive them back.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.5#In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms an angle ith the Plancenoit road, had a kitchen table and a peasant’s chair brought to im from the farm of Rossomme, seated himself, with a truss of straw for a arpet, and spread out on the table the chart of the battle-field, saying to oult as he did so, “A pretty checker-board.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.6#In consequence of the rains during the night, the transports of provisions, mbedded in the soft roads, had not been able to arrive by morning; the soldiers ad had no sleep; they were wet and fasting. This did not prevent Napoleon from xclaiming cheerfully to Ney, “We have ninety chances out of a hundred.” At ight o’clock the Emperor’s breakfast was brought to him. He invited many enerals to it. During breakfast, it was said that Wellington had been to a ball wo nights before, in Brussels, at the Duchess of Richmond’s; and Soult, a rough an of war, with a face of an archbishop, said, “The ball takes place to-day.” he Emperor jested with Ney, who said, “Wellington will not be so simple as to ait for Your Majesty.” That was his way, however. “He was fond of jesting,” ays Fleury de Chaboulon. “A merry humor was at the foundation of his haracter,” says Gourgaud. “He abounded in pleasantries, which were more eculiar than witty,” says Benjamin Constant. These gayeties of a giant are orthy of insistence. It was he who called his grenadiers “his grumblers”; he inched their ears; he pulled their moustaches. “The Emperor did nothing but lay pranks on us,” is the remark of one of them. During the mysterious trip rom the island of Elba to France, on the 27th of February, on the open sea, the rench brig of war, _Le Zéphyr_, having encountered the brig _L’Inconstant_, on hich Napoleon was concealed, and having asked the news of Napoleon from L’Inconstant_, the Emperor, who still wore in his hat the white and amaranthine ockade sown with bees, which he had adopted at the isle of Elba, laughingly eized the speaking-trumpet, and answered for himself, “The Emperor is well.” A an who laughs like that is on familiar terms with events. Napoleon indulged in any fits of this laughter during the breakfast at Waterloo. After breakfast he editated for a quarter of an hour; then two generals seated themselves on the russ of straw, pen in hand and their paper on their knees, and the Emperor ictated to them the order of battle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.7#At nine o’clock, at the instant when the French army, ranged in echelons nd set in motion in five columns, had deployed—the divisions in two lines, the rtillery between the brigades, the music at their head; as they beat the march, ith rolls on the drums and the blasts of trumpets, mighty, vast, joyous, a sea f casques, of sabres, and of bayonets on the horizon, the Emperor was touched, nd twice exclaimed, “Magnificent! Magnificent!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.8#Between nine o’clock and half-past ten the whole army, incredible as it may ppear, had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines, forming, to epeat the Emperor’s expression, “the figure of six V’s.” A few moments after he formation of the battle-array, in the midst of that profound silence, like hat which heralds the beginning of a storm, which precedes engagements, the mperor tapped Haxo on the shoulder, as he beheld the three batteries of welve-pounders, detached by his orders from the corps of Erlon, Reille, and obau, and destined to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean, which was ituated at the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads, and said to im, “There are four and twenty handsome maids, General.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.9#Sure of the issue, he encouraged with a smile, as they passed before him, he company of sappers of the first corps, which he had appointed to barricade ont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried. All this serenity had een traversed by but a single word of haughty pity; perceiving on his left, at spot where there now stands a large tomb, those admirable Scotch Grays, with heir superb horses, massing themselves, he said, “It is a pity.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.10#Then he mounted his horse, advanced beyond Rossomme, and selected for his ost of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of the road from enappe to Brussels, which was his second station during the battle. The third tation, the one adopted at seven o’clock in the evening, between La elle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte, is formidable; it is a rather elevated knoll, hich still exists, and behind which the guard was massed on a slope of the lain. Around this knoll the balls rebounded from the pavements of the road, up o Napoleon himself. As at Brienne, he had over his head the shriek of the ullets and of the heavy artillery. Mouldy cannon-balls, old sword-blades, and hapeless projectiles, eaten up with rust, were picked up at the spot where his orse’s feet stood. _Scabra rubigine_. A few years ago, a shell of sixty pounds, till charged, and with its fuse broken off level with the bomb, was unearthed. t was at this last post that the Emperor said to his guide, Lacoste, a hostile nd terrified peasant, who was attached to the saddle of a hussar, and who urned round at every discharge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon: Fool, it is shameful! You’ll get yourself killed with a ball in the back.” He ho writes these lines has himself found, in the friable soil of this knoll, on urning over the sand, the remains of the neck of a bomb, disintegrated, by the xidization of six and forty years, and old fragments of iron which parted like lder-twigs between the fingers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.11#Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the plains, here the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place, are no longer hat they were on June 18, 1815. By taking from this mournful field the herewithal to make a monument to it, its real relief has been taken away, and istory, disconcerted, no longer finds her bearings there. It has been isfigured for the sake of glorifying it. Wellington, when he beheld Waterloo nce more, two years later, exclaimed, “They have altered my field of battle!” here the great pyramid of earth, surmounted by the lion, rises to-day, there as a hillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road, but hich was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe. The levation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height of the two nolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from Genappe to russels: one, the English tomb, is on the left; the other, the German tomb, is n the right. There is no French tomb. The whole of that plain is a sepulchre or France. Thanks to the thousands upon thousands of cartloads of earth mployed in the hillock one hundred and fifty feet in height and half a mile in ircumference, the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy lope. On the day of battle, particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte, it was brupt and difficult of approach. The slope there is so steep that the English annon could not see the farm, situated in the bottom of the valley, which was he centre of the combat. On the 18th of June, 1815, the rains had still farther ncreased this acclivity, the mud complicated the problem of the ascent, and the en not only slipped back, but stuck fast in the mire. Along the crest of the lateau ran a sort of trench whose presence it was impossible for the distant bserver to divine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.12#What was this trench? Let us explain. Braine-l’Alleud is a Belgian illage; Ohain is another. These villages, both of them concealed in curves of he landscape, are connected by a road about a league and a half in length, hich traverses the plain along its undulating level, and often enters and uries itself in the hills like a furrow, which makes a ravine of this road in ome places. In 1815, as at the present day, this road cut the crest of the lateau of Mont-Saint-Jean between the two highways from Genappe and Nivelles; nly, it is now on a level with the plain; it was then a hollow way. Its two lopes have been appropriated for the monumental hillock. This road was, and till is, a trench throughout the greater portion of its course; a hollow rench, sometimes a dozen feet in depth, and whose banks, being too steep, rumbled away here and there, particularly in winter, under driving rains. ccidents happened here. The road was so narrow at the Braine-l’Alleud entrance hat a passer-by was crushed by a cart, as is proved by a stone cross which tands near the cemetery, and which gives the name of the dead, _Monsieur ernard Debrye, Merchant of Brussels_, and the date of the accident, _February, 637_.8 It was so deep on the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant, athieu Nicaise, was crushed there, in 1783, by a slide from the slope, as is tated on another stone cross, the top of which has disappeared in the process f clearing the ground, but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on the rassy slope to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte and the farm of ont-Saint-Jean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.7.13#On the day of battle, this hollow road whose existence was in no way ndicated, bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean, a trench at the summit of the scarpment, a rut concealed in the soil, was invisible; that is to say, errible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.1#So, on the morning of Waterloo, Napoleon was content.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.2#He was right; the plan of battle conceived by him was, as we have seen, eally admirable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.3#The battle once begun, its very various changes,—the resistance of ougomont; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte; the killing of Bauduin; the disabling f Foy; the unexpected wall against which Soye’s brigade was shattered; uilleminot’s fatal heedlessness when he had neither petard nor powder sacks; he miring of the batteries; the fifteen unescorted pieces overwhelmed in a ollow way by Uxbridge; the small effect of the bombs falling in the English ines, and there embedding themselves in the rain-soaked soil, and only ucceeding in producing volcanoes of mud, so that the canister was turned into a plash; the uselessness of Piré‘s demonstration on Braine-l’Alleud; all that avalry, fifteen squadrons, almost exterminated; the right wing of the English adly alarmed, the left wing badly cut into; Ney’s strange mistake in massing, nstead of echelonning the four divisions of the first corps; men delivered over o grape-shot, arranged in ranks twenty-seven deep and with a frontage of two undred; the frightful holes made in these masses by the cannon-balls; attacking olumns disorganized; the side-battery suddenly unmasked on their flank; ourgeois, Donzelot, and Durutte compromised; Quiot repulsed; Lieutenant Vieux, hat Hercules graduated at the Polytechnic School, wounded at the moment when he as beating in with an axe the door of La Haie-Sainte under the downright fire f the English barricade which barred the angle of the road from Genappe to russels; Marcognet’s division caught between the infantry and the cavalry, shot own at the very muzzle of the guns amid the grain by Best and Pack, put to the word by Ponsonby; his battery of seven pieces spiked; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar olding and guarding, in spite of the Comte d’Erlon, both Frischemont and mohain; the flag of the 105th taken, the flag of the 45th captured; that black russian hussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three hundred light avalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit; the alarming things that had een said by prisoners; Grouchy’s delay; fifteen hundred men killed in the rchard of Hougomont in less than an hour; eighteen hundred men overthrown in a till shorter time about La Haie-Sainte,—all these stormy incidents passing like he clouds of battle before Napoleon, had hardly troubled his gaze and had not vershadowed that face of imperial certainty. Napoleon was accustomed to gaze teadily at war; he never added up the heart-rending details, cipher by cipher; iphers mattered little to him, provided that they furnished the total—victory; e was not alarmed if the beginnings did go astray, since he thought himself the aster and the possessor at the end; he knew how to wait, supposing himself to e out of the question, and he treated destiny as his equal: he seemed to say to ate, Thou wilt not dare.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.4#Composed half of light and half of shadow, Napoleon thought himself rotected in good and tolerated in evil. He had, or thought that he had, a onnivance, one might almost say a complicity, of events in his favor, which was quivalent to the invulnerability of antiquity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.5#Nevertheless, when one has Bérésina, Leipzig, and Fontainebleau behind one, t seems as though one might distrust Waterloo. A mysterious frown becomes erceptible in the depths of the heavens.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.6#At the moment when Wellington retreated, Napoleon shuddered. He suddenly eheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared, and the van of the English rmy disappear. It was rallying, but hiding itself. The Emperor half rose in his tirrups. The lightning of victory flashed from his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.7#Wellington, driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes and estroyed—that was the definitive conquest of England by France; it was Crécy, oitiers, Malplaquet, and Ramillies avenged. The man of Marengo was wiping out gincourt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.8#So the Emperor, meditating on this terrible turn of fortune, swept his lass for the last time over all the points of the field of battle. His guard, tanding behind him with grounded arms, watched him from below with a sort of eligion. He pondered; he examined the slopes, noted the declivities, crutinized the clumps of trees, the square of rye, the path; he seemed to be ounting each bush. He gazed with some intentness at the English barricades of he two highways,—two large abatis of trees, that on the road to Genappe above a Haie-Sainte, armed with two cannon, the only ones out of all the English rtillery which commanded the extremity of the field of battle, and that on the oad to Nivelles where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chassé‘s brigade. Near this arricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas, painted white, which tands at the angle of the crossroad near Braine-l’Alleud; he bent down and poke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste. The guide made a negative sign with is head, which was probably perfidious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.9#The Emperor straightened himself up and fell to thinking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.10#Wellington had drawn back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.11#All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.12#Napoleon turning round abruptly, despatched an express at full speed to aris to announce that the battle was won.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.13#Napoleon was one of those geniuses from whom thunder darts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.14#He had just found his clap of thunder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.8.15#He gave orders to Milhaud’s cuirassiers to carry the table-land of ont-Saint-Jean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.head#CHAPTER IX—THE UNEXPECTED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.1#There were three thousand five hundred of them. They formed a front a uarter of a league in extent. They were giant men, on colossal horses. There ere six and twenty squadrons of them; and they had behind them to support them efebvre-Desnouettes’s division,—the one hundred and six picked gendarmes, the ight cavalry of the Guard, eleven hundred and ninety-seven men, and the lancers f the guard of eight hundred and eighty lances. They wore casques without orse-tails, and cuirasses of beaten iron, with horse-pistols in their holsters, nd long sabre-swords. That morning the whole army had admired them, when, at ine o’clock, with braying of trumpets and all the music playing “Let us watch ’er the Safety of the Empire,” they had come in a solid column, with one of heir batteries on their flank, another in their centre, and deployed in two anks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont, and taken up their position or battle in that powerful second line, so cleverly arranged by Napoleon, hich, having on its extreme left Kellermann’s cuirassiers and on its extreme ight Milhaud’s cuirassiers, had, so to speak, two wings of iron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.2#Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor’s orders. Ney drew his sword nd placed himself at their head. The enormous squadrons were set in motion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.3#Then a formidable spectacle was seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.4#All their cavalry, with upraised swords, standards and trumpets flung to he breeze, formed in columns by divisions, descended, by a simultaneous ovement and like one man, with the precision of a brazen battering-ram which is ffecting a breach, the hill of La Belle Alliance, plunged into the terrible epths in which so many men had already fallen, disappeared there in the smoke, hen emerging from that shadow, reappeared on the other side of the valley, till compact and in close ranks, mounting at a full trot, through a storm of rape-shot which burst upon them, the terrible muddy slope of the table-land of ont-Saint-Jean. They ascended, grave, threatening, imperturbable; in the ntervals between the musketry and the artillery, their colossal trampling was udible. Being two divisions, there were two columns of them; Wathier’s division eld the right, Delort’s division was on the left. It seemed as though two mmense adders of steel were to be seen crawling towards the crest of the able-land. It traversed the battle like a prodigy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.5#Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt of the uskowa by the heavy cavalry; Murat was lacking here, but Ney was again present. t seemed as though that mass had become a monster and had but one soul. Each olumn undulated and swelled like the ring of a polyp. They could be seen hrough a vast cloud of smoke which was rent here and there. A confusion of elmets, of cries, of sabres, a stormy heaving of the cruppers of horses amid he cannons and the flourish of trumpets, a terrible and disciplined tumult; ver all, the cuirasses like the scales on the hydra.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.6#These narrations seemed to belong to another age. Something parallel to his vision appeared, no doubt, in the ancient Orphic epics, which told of the entaurs, the old hippanthropes, those Titans with human heads and equestrian hests who scaled Olympus at a gallop, horrible, invulnerable, sublime—gods and easts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.7#Odd numerical coincidence,—twenty-six battalions rode to meet twenty-six attalions. Behind the crest of the plateau, in the shadow of the masked attery, the English infantry, formed into thirteen squares, two battalions to he square, in two lines, with seven in the first line, six in the second, the tocks of their guns to their shoulders, taking aim at that which was on the oint of appearing, waited, calm, mute, motionless. They did not see the uirassiers, and the cuirassiers did not see them. They listened to the rise of his flood of men. They heard the swelling noise of three thousand horse, the lternate and symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot, the jingling of the uirasses, the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand and savage breathing. here ensued a most terrible silence; then, all at once, a long file of uplifted rms, brandishing sabres, appeared above the crest, and casques, trumpets, and tandards, and three thousand heads with gray moustaches, shouting, “Vive ’Empereur!” All this cavalry debouched on the plateau, and it was like the ppearance of an earthquake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.8#All at once, a tragic incident; on the English left, on our right, the head f the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor. On arriving at he culminating point of the crest, ungovernable, utterly given over to fury and heir course of extermination of the squares and cannon, the cuirassiers had ust caught sight of a trench,—a trench between them and the English. It was the ollow road of Ohain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.9#It was a terrible moment. The ravine was there, unexpected, yawning, irectly under the horses’ feet, two fathoms deep between its double slopes; the econd file pushed the first into it, and the third pushed on the second; the orses reared and fell backward, landed on their haunches, slid down, all four eet in the air, crushing and overwhelming the riders; and there being no means f retreat,—the whole column being no longer anything more than a rojectile,—the force which had been acquired to crush the English crushed the rench; the inexorable ravine could only yield when filled; horses and riders olled there pell-mell, grinding each other, forming but one mass of flesh in his gulf: when this trench was full of living men, the rest marched over them nd passed on. Almost a third of Dubois’s brigade fell into that abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.10#This began the loss of the battle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.11#A local tradition, which evidently exaggerates matters, says that two housand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow road of Ohain. his figure probably comprises all the other corpses which were flung into this avine the day after the combat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.12#Let us note in passing that it was Dubois’s sorely tried brigade which, an our previously, making a charge to one side, had captured the flag of the unenburg battalion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.13#Napoleon, before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud’s uirassiers, had scrutinized the ground, but had not been able to see that ollow road, which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface of the plateau. arned, nevertheless, and put on the alert by the little white chapel which arks its angle of junction with the Nivelles highway, he had probably put a uestion as to the possibility of an obstacle, to the guide Lacoste. The guide ad answered No. We might almost affirm that Napoleon’s catastrophe originated n that sign of a peasant’s head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.14#Other fatalities were destined to arise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.15#Was it possible that Napoleon should have won that battle? We answer No. hy? Because of Wellington? Because of Blücher? No. Because of God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.16#Bonaparte victor at Waterloo; that does not come within the law of the ineteenth century. Another series of facts was in preparation, in which there as no longer any room for Napoleon. The ill will of events had declared itself ong before.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.17#It was time that this vast man should fall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.18#The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed the balance. his individual alone counted for more than a universal group. These plethoras f all human vitality concentrated in a single head; the world mounting to the rain of one man,—this would be mortal to civilization were it to last. The oment had arrived for the incorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan. robably the principles and the elements, on which the regular gravitations of he moral, as of the material, world depend, had complained. Smoking blood, ver-filled cemeteries, mothers in tears,—these are formidable pleaders. When he earth is suffering from too heavy a burden, there are mysterious groanings f the shades, to which the abyss lends an ear.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.19#Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been decided n.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.20#He embarrassed God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.9.21#Waterloo is not a battle; it is a change of front on the part of the niverse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.head#CHAPTER X—THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.1#The battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.2#Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank on the uirassiers. The intrepid General Delort made the military salute to the English attery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.3#The whole of the flying artillery of the English had re-entered the squares t a gallop. The cuirassiers had not had even the time for a halt. The disaster f the hollow road had decimated, but not discouraged them. They belonged to hat class of men who, when diminished in number, increase in courage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.4#Wathier’s column alone had suffered in the disaster; Delort’s column, which ey had deflected to the left, as though he had a presentiment of an ambush, had rrived whole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.5#The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.6#At full speed, with bridles loose, swords in their teeth, pistols in ist,—such was the attack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.7#There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man until the oldier is changed into a statue, and when all this flesh turns into granite. he English battalions, desperately assaulted, did not stir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.8#Then it was terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.9#All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once. A frenzied hirl enveloped them. That cold infantry remained impassive. The first rank nelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets, the second ranks shot them own; behind the second rank the cannoneers charged their guns, the front of the quare parted, permitted the passage of an eruption of grape-shot, and closed gain. The cuirassiers replied by crushing them. Their great horses reared, trode across the ranks, leaped over the bayonets and fell, gigantic, in the idst of these four living wells. The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these uirassiers; the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares. Files of men isappeared, ground to dust under the horses. The bayonets plunged into the ellies of these centaurs; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably ever been seen anywhere else. The squares, wasted by this mad cavalry, closed p their ranks without flinching. Inexhaustible in the matter of grape-shot, hey created explosions in their assailants’ midst. The form of this combat was onstrous. These squares were no longer battalions, they were craters; those uirassiers were no longer cavalry, they were a tempest. Each square was a olcano attacked by a cloud; lava contended with lightning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.10#The square on the extreme right, the most exposed of all, being in the ir, was almost annihilated at the very first shock. lt was formed of the 75th egiment of Highlanders. The bagpipe-player in the centre dropped his melancholy yes, filled with the reflections of the forests and the lakes, in profound nattention, while men were being exterminated around him, and seated on a drum, ith his pibroch under his arm, played the Highland airs. These Scotchmen died hinking of Ben Lothian, as did the Greeks recalling Argos. The sword of a uirassier, which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it, put an end o the song by killing the singer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.11#The cuirassiers, relatively few in number, and still further diminished by he catastrophe of the ravine, had almost the whole English army against them, ut they multiplied themselves so that each man of them was equal to ten. evertheless, some Hanoverian battalions yielded. Wellington perceived it, and hought of his cavalry. Had Napoleon at that same moment thought of his nfantry, he would have won the battle. This forgetfulness was his great and atal mistake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.12#All at once, the cuirassiers, who had been the assailants, found hemselves assailed. The English cavalry was at their back. Before them two quares, behind them Somerset; Somerset meant fourteen hundred dragoons of the uard. On the right, Somerset had Dornberg with the German light-horse, and on is left, Trip with the Belgian carabineers; the cuirassiers attacked on the lank and in front, before and in the rear, by infantry and cavalry, had to face ll sides. What mattered it to them? They were a whirlwind. Their valor was omething indescribable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.13#In addition to this, they had behind them the battery, which was still hundering. It was necessary that it should be so, or they could never have been ounded in the back. One of their cuirasses, pierced on the shoulder by a ball rom a biscayan,9 is in the collection of the Waterloo Museum.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.14#For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed. It was no onger a hand-to-hand conflict; it was a shadow, a fury, a dizzy transport of ouls and courage, a hurricane of lightning swords. In an instant the fourteen undred dragoon guards numbered only eight hundred. Fuller, their ieutenant-colonel, fell dead. Ney rushed up with the lancers and efebvre-Desnouettes’s light-horse. The plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean was captured, ecaptured, captured again. The cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the nfantry; or, to put it more exactly, the whole of that formidable rout collared ach other without releasing the other. The squares still held firm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.15#There were a dozen assaults. Ney had four horses killed under him. Half he cuirassiers remained on the plateau. This conflict lasted two hours.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.16#The English army was profoundly shaken. There is no doubt that, had they ot been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of the hollow road the uirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre and decided the victory. This xtraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton, who had seen Talavera and Badajoz. ellington, three-quarters vanquished, admired heroically. He said in an ndertone, “Sublime!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.17#The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen, took or spiked ixty pieces of ordnance, and captured from the English regiments six flags, hich three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of the Guard bore to the Emperor, in ront of the farm of La Belle Alliance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.18#Wellington’s situation had grown worse. This strange battle was like a uel between two raging, wounded men, each of whom, still fighting and still esisting, is expending all his blood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.19#Which of the two will be the first to fall?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.20#The conflict on the plateau continued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.21#What had become of the cuirassiers? No one could have told. One thing is ertain, that on the day after the battle, a cuirassier and his horse were found ead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles at Mont-Saint-Jean, at the ery point where the four roads from Nivelles, Genappe, La Hulpe, and Brussels eet and intersect each other. This horseman had pierced the English lines. One f the men who picked up the body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean. His name is ehaze. He was eighteen years old at that time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.22#Wellington felt that he was yielding. The crisis was at hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.23#The cuirassiers had not succeeded, since the centre was not broken hrough. As every one was in possession of the plateau, no one held it, and in act it remained, to a great extent, with the English. Wellington held the illage and the culminating plain; Ney had only the crest and the slope. They eemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.24#But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable. The bleeding of that rmy was horrible. Kempt, on the left wing, demanded reinforcements. “There are one,” replied Wellington; “he must let himself be killed!” Almost at that same oment, a singular coincidence which paints the exhaustion of the two armies, ey demanded infantry from Napoleon, and Napoleon exclaimed, “Infantry! Where oes he expect me to get it? Does he think I can make it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.25#Nevertheless, the English army was in the worse case of the two. The urious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron and breasts of teel had ground the infantry to nothing. A few men clustered round a flag arked the post of a regiment; such and such a battalion was commanded only by a aptain or a lieutenant; Alten’s division, already so roughly handled at La aie-Sainte, was almost destroyed; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze’s brigade trewed the rye-fields all along the Nivelles road; hardly anything was left of hose Dutch grenadiers, who, intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks in 1811, ought against Wellington; and who, in 1815, rallied to the English standard, ought against Napoleon. The loss in officers was considerable. Lord Uxbridge, ho had his leg buried on the following day, had his knee shattered. If, on the rench side, in that tussle of the cuirassiers, Delort, l’Héritier, Colbert, nop, Travers, and Blancard were disabled, on the side of the English there was lten wounded, Barne wounded, Delancey killed, Van Meeren killed, Ompteda illed, the whole of Wellington’s staff decimated, and England had the worse of t in that bloody scale. The second regiment of foot-guards had lost five ieutenant-colonels, four captains, and three ensigns; the first battalion of he 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200 soldiers; the 79th Highlanders ad lost 24 officers wounded, 18 officers killed, 450 soldiers killed. The anoverian hussars of Cumberland, a whole regiment, with Colonel Hacke at its ead, who was destined to be tried later on and cashiered, had turned bridle in he presence of the fray, and had fled to the forest of Soignes, sowing defeat ll the way to Brussels. The transports, ammunition-wagons, the baggage-wagons, he wagons filled with wounded, on perceiving that the French were gaining round and approaching the forest, rushed headlong thither. The Dutch, mowed own by the French cavalry, cried, “Alarm!” From Vert-Coucou to Groenendael, for distance of nearly two leagues in the direction of Brussels, according to the estimony of eye-witnesses who are still alive, the roads were encumbered with ugitives. This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Condé at Mechlin, nd Louis XVIII. at Ghent. With the exception of the feeble reserve echelonned ehind the ambulance established at the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean, and of Vivian’s nd Vandeleur’s brigades, which flanked the left wing, Wellington had no cavalry eft. A number of batteries lay unhorsed. These facts are attested by Siborne; nd Pringle, exaggerating the disaster, goes so far as to say that the nglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men. The Iron Duke remained alm, but his lips blanched. Vincent, the Austrian commissioner, Alava, the panish commissioner, who were present at the battle in the English staff, hought the Duke lost. At five o’clock Wellington drew out his watch, and he was eard to murmur these sinister words, “Blücher, or night!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.26#It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed on the eights in the direction of Frischemont.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.10.27#Here comes the change of face in this giant drama.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.head#CHAPTER XI—A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON; A GOOD GUIDE TO BÜLOW
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.1#The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known. Grouchy hoped for, Blücher rriving. Death instead of life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.2#Fate has these turns; the throne of the world was expected; it was Saint elena that was seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.3#If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bülow, Blücher’s lieutenant, ad advised him to debouch from the forest above Frischemont, instead of below lancenoit, the form of the nineteenth century might, perhaps, have been ifferent. Napoleon would have won the battle of Waterloo. By any other route han that below Plancenoit, the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine mpassable for artillery, and Bülow would not have arrived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.4#Now the Prussian general, Muffling, declares that one hour’s delay, and lücher would not have found Wellington on his feet. “The battle was lost.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.5#It was time that Bülow should arrive, as will be seen. He had, moreover, een very much delayed. He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont, and had set out at aybreak; but the roads were impassable, and his divisions stuck fast in the ire. The ruts were up to the hubs of the cannons. Moreover, he had been obliged o pass the Dyle on the narrow bridge of Wavre; the street leading to the bridge ad been fired by the French, so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not ass between two rows of burning houses, and had been obliged to wait until the onflagration was extinguished. It was midday before Bülow’s vanguard had been ble to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.6#Had the action been begun two hours earlier, it would have been over at our o’clock, and Blücher would have fallen on the battle won by Napoleon. Such re these immense risks proportioned to an infinite which we cannot omprehend.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.7#The Emperor had been the first, as early as midday, to descry with his ield-glass, on the extreme horizon, something which had attracted his ttention. He had said, “I see yonder a cloud, which seems to me to be troops.” hen he asked the Duc de Dalmatie, “Soult, what do you see in the direction of hapelle-Saint-Lambert?” The marshal, levelling his glass, answered, “Four or ive thousand men, Sire; evidently Grouchy.” But it remained motionless in the ist. All the glasses of the staff had studied “the cloud” pointed out by the mperor. Some said: “It is trees.” The truth is, that the cloud did not move. he Emperor detached Domon’s division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that uarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.8#Bülow had not moved, in fact. His vanguard was very feeble, and could ccomplish nothing. He was obliged to wait for the body of the army corps, and e had received orders to concentrate his forces before entering into line; but t five o’clock, perceiving Wellington’s peril, Blücher ordered Bülow to attack, nd uttered these remarkable words: “We must give air to the English army.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.11.9#A little later, the divisions of Losthin, Hiller, Hacke, and Ryssel eployed before Lobau’s corps, the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia ebouched from the forest of Paris, Plancenoit was in flames, and the Prussian annon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in reserve behind apoleon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.12.head#CHAPTER XII—THE GUARD
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.12.1#Every one knows the rest,—the irruption of a third army; the battle broken o pieces; eighty-six mouths of fire thundering simultaneously; Pirch the first oming up with Bülow; Zieten’s cavalry led by Blücher in person, the French riven back; Marcognet swept from the plateau of Ohain; Durutte dislodged from apelotte; Donzelot and Quiot retreating; Lobau caught on the flank; a fresh attle precipitating itself on our dismantled regiments at nightfall; the whole nglish line resuming the offensive and thrust forward; the gigantic breach made n the French army; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding ach other; the extermination; disaster in front; disaster on the flank; the uard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all hings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.12.2#Conscious that they were about to die, they shouted, “Vive l’Empereur!” istory records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth in cclamations.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.12.3#The sky had been overcast all day long. All of a sudden, at that very oment,—it was eight o’clock in the evening—the clouds on the horizon parted, nd allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun to pass through, thwart the elms on the Nivelles road. They had seen it rise at Austerlitz.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.12.4#Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this final atastrophe. Friant, Michel, Roguet, Harlet, Mallet, Poret de Morvan, were here. When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard, with their large laques bearing the eagle appeared, symmetrical, in line, tranquil, in the midst f that combat, the enemy felt a respect for France; they thought they beheld wenty victories entering the field of battle, with wings outspread, and those ho were the conquerors, believing themselves to be vanquished, retreated; but ellington shouted, “Up, Guards, and aim straight!” The red regiment of English uards, lying flat behind the hedges, sprang up, a cloud of grape-shot riddled he tricolored flag and whistled round our eagles; all hurled themselves orwards, and the final carnage began. In the darkness, the Imperial Guard felt he army losing ground around it, and in the vast shock of the rout it heard the esperate flight which had taken the place of the “Vive l’Empereur!” and, with light behind it, it continued to advance, more crushed, losing more men at very step that it took. There were none who hesitated, no timid men in its anks. The soldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general. Not a man as missing in that suicide.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.12.5#Ney, bewildered, great with all the grandeur of accepted death, offered imself to all blows in that tempest. He had his fifth horse killed under him here. Perspiring, his eyes aflame, foaming at the mouth, with uniform nbuttoned, one of his epaulets half cut off by a sword-stroke from a orseguard, his plaque with the great eagle dented by a bullet; bleeding, emired, magnificent, a broken sword in his hand, he said, “Come and see how a arshal of France dies on the field of battle!” But in vain; he did not die. He as haggard and angry. At Drouet d’Erlon he hurled this question, “Are you not oing to get yourself killed?” In the midst of all that artillery engaged in rushing a handful of men, he shouted: “So there is nothing for me! Oh! I should ike to have all these English bullets enter my bowels!” Unhappy man, thou wert eserved for French bullets!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.13.head#CHAPTER XIII—THE CATASTROPHE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.13.1#The rout behind the Guard was melancholy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.13.2#The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once,—Hougomont, La Haie-Sainte, apelotte, Plancenoit. The cry “Treachery!” was followed by a cry of “Save ourselves who can!” An army which is disbanding is like a thaw. All yields, plits, cracks, floats, rolls, falls, jostles, hastens, is precipitated. The isintegration is unprecedented. Ney borrows a horse, leaps upon it, and without at, cravat, or sword, places himself across the Brussels road, stopping both nglish and French. He strives to detain the army, he recalls it to its duty, he nsults it, he clings to the rout. He is overwhelmed. The soldiers fly from him, houting, “Long live Marshal Ney!” Two of Durutte’s regiments go and come in ffright as though tossed back and forth between the swords of the Uhlans and he fusillade of the brigades of Kempt, Best, Pack, and Rylandt; the worst of and-to-hand conflicts is the defeat; friends kill each other in order to scape; squadrons and battalions break and disperse against each other, like the remendous foam of battle. Lobau at one extremity, and Reille at the other, are rawn into the tide. In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him f his Guard; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable quadrons. Quiot retreats before Vivian, Kellermann before Vandeleur, Lobau efore Bülow, Morand before Pirch, Domon and Subervic before Prince William of russia; Guyot, who led the Emperor’s squadrons to the charge, falls beneath the eet of the English dragoons. Napoleon gallops past the line of fugitives, arangues, urges, threatens, entreats them. All the mouths which in the morning ad shouted, “Long live the Emperor!” remain gaping; they hardly recognize him. he Prussian cavalry, newly arrived, dashes forwards, flies, hews, slashes, ills, exterminates. Horses lash out, the cannons flee; the soldiers of the rtillery-train unharness the caissons and use the horses to make their escape; ransports overturned, with all four wheels in the air, clog the road and ccasion massacres. Men are crushed, trampled down, others walk over the dead nd the living. Arms are lost. A dizzy multitude fills the roads, the paths, the ridges, the plains, the hills, the valleys, the woods, encumbered by this nvasion of forty thousand men. Shouts despair, knapsacks and guns flung among he rye, passages forced at the point of the sword, no more comrades, no more fficers, no more generals, an inexpressible terror. Zieten putting France to he sword at its leisure. Lions converted into goats. Such was the flight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.13.3#At Genappe, an effort was made to wheel about, to present a battle front, o draw up in line. Lobau rallied three hundred men. The entrance to the village as barricaded, but at the first volley of Prussian canister, all took to flight gain, and Lobau was taken. That volley of grape-shot can be seen to-day mprinted on the ancient gable of a brick building on the right of the road at a ew minutes’ distance before you enter Genappe. The Prussians threw themselves nto Genappe, furious, no doubt, that they were not more entirely the onquerors. The pursuit was stupendous. Blücher ordered extermination. Roguet ad set the lugubrious example of threatening with death any French grenadier ho should bring him a Prussian prisoner. Blücher outdid Roguet. Duhesme, the eneral of the Young Guard, hemmed in at the doorway of an inn at Genappe, urrendered his sword to a huzzar of death, who took the sword and slew the risoner. The victory was completed by the assassination of the vanquished. Let s inflict punishment, since we are history: old Blücher disgraced himself. This erocity put the finishing touch to the disaster. The desperate route traversed enappe, traversed Quatre-Bras, traversed Gosselies, traversed Frasnes, raversed Charleroi, traversed Thuin, and only halted at the frontier. Alas! and ho, then, was fleeing in that manner? The Grand Army.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.13.4#This vertigo, this terror, this downfall into ruin of the loftiest bravery hich ever astounded history,—is that causeless? No. The shadow of an enormous ight is projected athwart Waterloo. It is the day of destiny. The force which s mightier than man produced that day. Hence the terrified wrinkle of those rows; hence all those great souls surrendering their swords. Those who had onquered Europe have fallen prone on the earth, with nothing left to say nor to o, feeling the present shadow of a terrible presence. _Hoc erat in fatis_. That ay the perspective of the human race underwent a change. Waterloo is the hinge f the nineteenth century. The disappearance of the great man was necessary to he advent of the great century. Some one, a person to whom one replies not, ook the responsibility on himself. The panic of heroes can be explained. In the attle of Waterloo there is something more than a cloud, there is something of he meteor. God has passed by.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.13.5#At nightfall, in a meadow near Genappe, Bernard and Bertrand seized by the kirt of his coat and detained a man, haggard, pensive, sinister, gloomy, who, ragged to that point by the current of the rout, had just dismounted, had assed the bridle of his horse over his arm, and with wild eye was returning lone to Waterloo. It was Napoleon, the immense somnambulist of this dream which ad crumbled, essaying once more to advance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.14.head#CHAPTER XIV—THE LAST SQUARE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.14.1#Several squares of the Guard, motionless amid this stream of the defeat, as ocks in running water, held their own until night. Night came, death also; they waited that double shadow, and, invincible, allowed themselves to be enveloped herein. Each regiment, isolated from the rest, and having no bond with the rmy, now shattered in every part, died alone. They had taken up position for his final action, some on the heights of Rossomme, others on the plain of ont-Saint-Jean. There, abandoned, vanquished, terrible, those gloomy squares ndured their death-throes in formidable fashion. Ulm, Wagram, Jena, Friedland, ied with them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.14.2#At twilight, towards nine o’clock in the evening, one of them was left at he foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean. In that fatal valley, at the foot of hat declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended, now inundated by the masses f the English, under the converging fires of the victorious hostile cavalry, nder a frightful density of projectiles, this square fought on. It was ommanded by an obscure officer named Cambronne. At each discharge, the square iminished and replied. It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade, ontinually contracting its four walls. The fugitives pausing breathless for a oment in the distance, listened in the darkness to that gloomy and ver-decreasing thunder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.14.3#When this legion had been reduced to a handful, when nothing was left of heir flag but a rag, when their guns, the bullets all gone, were no longer nything but clubs, when the heap of corpses was larger than the group of urvivors, there reigned among the conquerors, around those men dying so ublimely, a sort of sacred terror, and the English artillery, taking breath, ecame silent. This furnished a sort of respite. These combatants had around hem something in the nature of a swarm of spectres, silhouettes of men on orseback, the black profiles of cannon, the white sky viewed through wheels and un-carriages, the colossal death’s-head, which the heroes saw constantly hrough the smoke, in the depths of the battle, advanced upon them and gazed at hem. Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces being loaded; he matches all lighted, like the eyes of tigers at night, formed a circle round heir heads; all the lintstocks of the English batteries approached the cannons, nd then, with emotion, holding the supreme moment suspended above these men, an nglish general, Colville according to some, Maitland according to others, houted to them, “Surrender, brave Frenchmen!” Cambronne replied, “——.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.14.4#{EDITOR’S COMMENTARY: Another edition of this book has the word “Merde!” in ieu of the —— above.}
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.head#CHAPTER XV—CAMBRONNE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.1#If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended, one ould have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is perhaps the finest eply that a Frenchman ever made. This would enjoin us from consigning something ublime to History.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.2#At our own risk and peril, let us violate this injunction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.3#Now, then, among those giants there was one Titan,—Cambronne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.4#To make that reply and then perish, what could be grander? For being illing to die is the same as to die; and it was not this man’s fault if he urvived after he was shot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.5#The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon, who was put to light; nor Wellington, giving way at four o’clock, in despair at five; nor lücher, who took no part in the engagement. The winner of Waterloo was ambronne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.6#To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you is to onquer!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.7#Thus to answer the Catastrophe, thus to speak to Fate, to give this edestal to the future lion, to hurl such a challenge to the midnight rainstorm, o the treacherous wall of Hougomont, to the sunken road of Ohain, to Grouchy’s elay, to Blücher’s arrival, to be Irony itself in the tomb, to act so as to tand upright though fallen, to drown in two syllables the European coalition, o offer kings privies which the Cæsars once knew, to make the lowest of words he most lofty by entwining with it the glory of France, insolently to end aterloo with Mardigras, to finish Leonidas with Rabellais, to set the crown on his victory by a word impossible to speak, to lose the field and preserve istory, to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage,—this is mmense!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.8#It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl! It reaches the randeur of Æschylus!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.9#Cambronne’s reply produces the effect of a violent break. ‘Tis like the reaking of a heart under a weight of scorn. ‘Tis the overflow of agony bursting orth. Who conquered? Wellington? No! Had it not been for Blücher, he was lost. as it Blücher? No! If Wellington had not begun, Blücher could not have inished. This Cambronne, this man spending his last hour, this unknown soldier, his infinitesimal of war, realizes that here is a falsehood, a falsehood in a atastrophe, and so doubly agonizing; and at the moment when his rage is ursting forth because of it, he is offered this mockery,—life! How could he estrain himself? Yonder are all the kings of Europe, the general’s flushed with ictory, the Jupiter’s darting thunderbolts; they have a hundred thousand ictorious soldiers, and back of the hundred thousand a million; their cannon tand with yawning mouths, the match is lighted; they grind down under their eels the Imperial guards, and the grand army; they have just crushed Napoleon, nd only Cambronne remains,—only this earthworm is left to protest. He will rotest. Then he seeks for the appropriate word as one seeks for a sword. His outh froths, and the froth is the word. In face of this mean and mighty ictory, in face of this victory which counts none victorious, this desperate oldier stands erect. He grants its overwhelming immensity, but he establishes ts triviality; and he does more than spit upon it. Borne down by numbers, by uperior force, by brute matter, he finds in his soul an expression: “Excrément!”_ We repeat it,—to use that word, to do thus, to invent such an xpression, is to be the conqueror!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.10#The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent on hat unknown man. Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rouget invents the Marseillaise,” under the visitation of a breath from on high. An emanation from he divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes sweeping over these men, and they hake, and one of them sings the song supreme, and the other utters the rightful cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.11#This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe in the ame of the Empire,—that would be a trifle: he hurls it at the past in the name f the Revolution. It is heard, and Cambronne is recognized as possessed by the ncient spirit of the Titans. Danton seems to be speaking! Kléber seems to be ellowing!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.15.12#At that word from Cambronne, the English voice responded, “Fire!” The atteries flamed, the hill trembled, from all those brazen mouths belched a last errible gush of grape-shot; a vast volume of smoke, vaguely white in the light f the rising moon, rolled out, and when the smoke dispersed, there was no onger anything there. That formidable remnant had been annihilated; the Guard as dead. The four walls of the living redoubt lay prone, and hardly was there iscernible, here and there, even a quiver in the bodies; it was thus that the rench legions, greater than the Roman legions, expired on Mont-Saint-Jean, on he soil watered with rain and blood, amid the gloomy grain, on the spot where owadays Joseph, who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles, passes whistling, and heerfully whipping up his horse at four o’clock in the morning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.head#CHAPTER XVI—QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.1#The battle of Waterloo is an enigma. It is as obscure to those who won it s to those who lost it. For Napoleon it was a panic;10 Blücher sees nothing in t but fire; Wellington understands nothing in regard to it. Look at the eports. The bulletins are confused, the commentaries involved. Some stammer, thers lisp. Jomini divides the battle of Waterloo into four moments; Muffling uts it up into three changes; Charras alone, though we hold another judgment han his on some points, seized with his haughty glance the characteristic utlines of that catastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance. All he other historians suffer from being somewhat dazzled, and in this dazzled tate they fumble about. It was a day of lightning brilliancy; in fact, a rumbling of the military monarchy which, to the vast stupefaction of kings, rew all the kingdoms after it—the fall of force, the defeat of war.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.2#In this event, stamped with superhuman necessity, the part played by men mounts to nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.3#If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blücher, do we thereby deprive ngland and Germany of anything? No. Neither that illustrious England nor that ugust Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo. Thank Heaven, nations are reat, independently of the lugubrious feats of the sword. Neither England, nor ermany, nor France is contained in a scabbard. At this epoch when Waterloo is nly a clashing of swords, above Blücher, Germany has Schiller; above ellington, England has Byron. A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our entury, and in that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance. hey are majestic because they think. The elevation of level which they ontribute to civilization is intrinsic with them; it proceeds from themselves nd not from an accident. The aggrandizement which they have brought to the ineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source. It is only barbarous peoples ho undergo rapid growth after a victory. That is the temporary vanity of orrents swelled by a storm. Civilized people, especially in our day, are either elevated nor abased by the good or bad fortune of a captain. Their pecific gravity in the human species results from something more than a combat. heir honor, thank God! their dignity, their intelligence, their genius, are not umbers which those gamblers, heroes and conquerors, can put in the lottery of attles. Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered. There is less glory nd more liberty. The drum holds its peace; reason takes the word. It is a game n which he who loses wins. Let us, therefore, speak of Waterloo coldly from oth sides. Let us render to chance that which is due to chance, and to God that hich is due to God. What is Waterloo? A victory? No. The winning number in the ottery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.4#The quine 11 won by Europe, paid by France.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.5#It was not worthwhile to place a lion there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.6#Waterloo, moreover, is the strangest encounter in history. Napoleon and ellington. They are not enemies; they are opposites. Never did God, who is fond f antitheses, make a more striking contrast, a more extraordinary comparison. n one side, precision, foresight, geometry, prudence, an assured retreat, eserves spared, with an obstinate coolness, an imperturbable method, strategy, hich takes advantage of the ground, tactics, which preserve the equilibrium of attalions, carnage, executed according to rule, war regulated, watch in hand, othing voluntarily left to chance, the ancient classic courage, absolute egularity; on the other, intuition, divination, military oddity, superhuman nstinct, a flaming glance, an indescribable something which gazes like an agle, and which strikes like the lightning, a prodigious art in disdainful mpetuosity, all the mysteries of a profound soul, associated with destiny; the tream, the plain, the forest, the hill, summoned, and in a manner, forced to bey, the despot going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle; aith in a star mingled with strategic science, elevating but perturbing it. ellington was the Barême of war; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo; and on this ccasion, genius was vanquished by calculation. On both sides some one was waited. It was the exact calculator who succeeded. Napoleon was waiting for rouchy; he did not come. Wellington expected Blücher; he came.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.7#Wellington is classic war taking its revenge. Bonaparte, at his dawning, ad encountered him in Italy, and beaten him superbly. The old owl had fled efore the young vulture. The old tactics had been not only struck as by ightning, but disgraced. Who was that Corsican of six and twenty? What ignified that splendid ignoramus, who, with everything against him, nothing in is favor, without provisions, without ammunition, without cannon, without hoes, almost without an army, with a mere handful of men against masses, hurled imself on Europe combined, and absurdly won victories in the impossible? Whence ad issued that fulminating convict, who almost without taking breath, and with he same set of combatants in hand, pulverized, one after the other, the five rmies of the emperor of Germany, upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi, Wurmser on eaulieu, Mélas on Wurmser, Mack on Mélas? Who was this novice in war with the ffrontery of a luminary? The academical military school excommunicated him, and s it lost its footing; hence, the implacable rancor of the old Cæsarism against he new; of the regular sword against the flaming sword; and of the exchequer gainst genius. On the 18th of June, 1815, that rancor had the last word, and eneath Lodi, Montebello, Montenotte, Mantua, Arcola, it wrote: Waterloo. A riumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority. Destiny consented to his irony. In his decline, Napoleon found Wurmser, the younger, again in front f him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.8#In fact, to get Wurmser, it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.9#Waterloo is a battle of the first order, won by a captain of the econd.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.10#That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo, is England; the nglish firmness, the English resolution, the English blood; the superb thing bout England there, no offence to her, was herself. It was not her captain; it as her army.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.11#Wellington, oddly ungrateful, declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst, that is army, the army which fought on the 18th of June, 1815, was a “detestable rmy.” What does that sombre intermingling of bones buried beneath the furrows f Waterloo think of that?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.12#England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington. To make ellington so great is to belittle England. Wellington is nothing but a hero ike many another. Those Scotch Grays, those Horse Guards, those regiments of aitland and of Mitchell, that infantry of Pack and Kempt, that cavalry of onsonby and Somerset, those Highlanders playing the pibroch under the shower of rape-shot, those battalions of Rylandt, those utterly raw recruits, who hardly new how to handle a musket holding their own against Essling’s and Rivoli’s old roops,—that is what was grand. Wellington was tenacious; in that lay his merit, nd we are not seeking to lessen it: but the least of his foot-soldiers and of is cavalry would have been as solid as he. The iron soldier is worth as much as he Iron Duke. As for us, all our glorification goes to the English soldier, to he English army, to the English people. If trophy there be, it is to England hat the trophy is due. The column of Waterloo would be more just, if, instead f the figure of a man, it bore on high the statue of a people.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.13#But this great England will be angry at what we are saying here. She still herishes, after her own 1688 and our 1789, the feudal illusion. She believes in eredity and hierarchy. This people, surpassed by none in power and glory, egards itself as a nation, and not as a people. And as a people, it willingly ubordinates itself and takes a lord for its head. As a workman, it allows tself to be disdained; as a soldier, it allows itself to be flogged.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.14#It will be remembered, that at the battle of Inkermann a sergeant who had, t appears, saved the army, could not be mentioned by Lord Paglan, as the nglish military hierarchy does not permit any hero below the grade of an fficer to be mentioned in the reports.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.15#That which we admire above all, in an encounter of the nature of Waterloo, s the marvellous cleverness of chance. A nocturnal rain, the wall of Hougomont, he hollow road of Ohain, Grouchy deaf to the cannon, Napoleon’s guide deceiving im, Bülow’s guide enlightening him,—the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully onducted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.16#On the whole, let us say it plainly, it was more of a massacre than of a attle at Waterloo.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.17#Of all pitched battles, Waterloo is the one which has the smallest front or such a number of combatants. Napoleon three-quarters of a league; ellington, half a league; seventy-two thousand combatants on each side. From his denseness the carnage arose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.18#The following calculation has been made, and the following proportion stablished: Loss of men: at Austerlitz, French, fourteen per cent; Russians, hirty per cent; Austrians, forty-four per cent. At Wagram, French, thirteen per ent; Austrians, fourteen. At the Moskowa, French, thirty-seven per cent; ussians, forty-four. At Bautzen, French, thirteen per cent; Russians and russians, fourteen. At Waterloo, French, fifty-six per cent; the Allies, hirty-one. Total for Waterloo, forty-one per cent; one hundred and forty-four housand combatants; sixty thousand dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.19#To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth, the mpassive support of man, and it resembles all plains.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.16.20#At night, moreover, a sort of visionary mist arises from it; and if a raveller strolls there, if he listens, if he watches, if he dreams like Virgil n the fatal plains of Philippi, the hallucination of the catastrophe takes ossession of him. The frightful 18th of June lives again; the false monumental illock disappears, the lion vanishes in air, the battle-field resumes its eality, lines of infantry undulate over the plain, furious gallops traverse the orizon; the frightened dreamer beholds the flash of sabres, the gleam of ayonets, the flare of bombs, the tremendous interchange of thunders; he hears, s it were, the death rattle in the depths of a tomb, the vague clamor of the attle phantom; those shadows are grenadiers, those lights are cuirassiers; that keleton Napoleon, that other skeleton is Wellington; all this no longer exists, nd yet it clashes together and combats still; and the ravines are empurpled, nd the trees quiver, and there is fury even in the clouds and in the shadows; ll those terrible heights, Hougomont, Mont-Saint-Jean, Frischemont, Papelotte, lancenoit, appear confusedly crowned with whirlwinds of spectres engaged in xterminating each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.17.head#CHAPTER XVII—IS WATERLOO TO BE CONSIDERED GOOD?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.17.1#There exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hate aterloo. We do not belong to it. To us, Waterloo is but the stupefied date of iberty. That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg is certainly nexpected.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.17.2#If one places one’s self at the culminating point of view of the question, aterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory. It is Europe against rance; it is Petersburg, Berlin, and Vienna against Paris; it is the _statu uo_ against the initiative; it is the 14th of July, 1789, attacked through the 0th of March, 1815; it is the monarchies clearing the decks in opposition to he indomitable French rioting. The final extinction of that vast people which ad been in eruption for twenty-six years—such was the dream. The solidarity of he Brunswicks, the Nassaus, the Romanoffs, the Hohenzollerns, the Hapsburgs ith the Bourbons. Waterloo bears divine right on its crupper. It is true, that he Empire having been despotic, the kingdom by the natural reaction of things, as forced to be liberal, and that a constitutional order was the unwilling esult of Waterloo, to the great regret of the conquerors. It is because evolution cannot be really conquered, and that being providential and bsolutely fatal, it is always cropping up afresh: before Waterloo, in Bonaparte verthrowing the old thrones; after Waterloo, in Louis XVIII. granting and onforming to the charter. Bonaparte places a postilion on the throne of Naples, nd a sergeant on the throne of Sweden, employing inequality to demonstrate quality; Louis XVIII. at Saint-Ouen countersigns the declaration of the rights f man. If you wish to gain an idea of what revolution is, call it Progress; and f you wish to acquire an idea of the nature of progress, call it To-morrow. o-morrow fulfils its work irresistibly, and it is already fulfilling it to-day. t always reaches its goal strangely. It employs Wellington to make of Foy, who as only a soldier, an orator. Foy falls at Hougomont and rises again in the ribune. Thus does progress proceed. There is no such thing as a bad tool for hat workman. It does not become disconcerted, but adjusts to its divine work he man who has bestridden the Alps, and the good old tottering invalid of ather Élysée. It makes use of the gouty man as well as of the conqueror; of the onqueror without, of the gouty man within. Waterloo, by cutting short the emolition of European thrones by the sword, had no other effect than to cause he revolutionary work to be continued in another direction. The slashers have inished; it was the turn of the thinkers. The century that Waterloo was ntended to arrest has pursued its march. That sinister victory was vanquished y liberty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.17.3#In short, and incontestably, that which triumphed at Waterloo; that which miled in Wellington’s rear; that which brought him all the marshals’ staffs of urope, including, it is said, the staff of a marshal of France; that which oyously trundled the barrows full of bones to erect the knoll of the lion; that hich triumphantly inscribed on that pedestal the date “_June_ 18, 1815”; that hich encouraged Blücher, as he put the flying army to the sword; that which, rom the heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean, hovered over France as over ts prey, was the counter-revolution. It was the counter-revolution which urmured that infamous word “dismemberment.” On arriving in Paris, it beheld the rater close at hand; it felt those ashes which scorched its feet, and it hanged its mind; it returned to the stammer of a charter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.17.4#Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo. Of intentional iberty there is none. The counter-revolution was involuntarily liberal, in the ame manner as, by a corresponding phenomenon, Napoleon was involuntarily evolutionary. On the 18th of June, 1815, the mounted Robespierre was hurled rom his saddle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.head#CHAPTER XVIII—A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.1#End of the dictatorship. A whole European system crumbled away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.2#The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world as it xpired. Again we behold the abyss, as in the days of the barbarians; only the arbarism of 1815, which must be called by its pet name of the ounter-revolution, was not long breathed, soon fell to panting, and halted hort. The Empire was bewept,—let us acknowledge the fact,—and bewept by heroic yes. If glory lies in the sword converted into a sceptre, the Empire had been lory in person. It had diffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can ive—a sombre light. We will say more; an obscure light. Compared to the true aylight, it is night. This disappearance of night produces the effect of an clipse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.3#Louis XVIII. re-entered Paris. The circling dances of the 8th of July ffaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March. The Corsican became the antithesis f the Bearnese. The flag on the dome of the Tuileries was white. The exile eigned. Hartwell’s pine table took its place in front of the leur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV. Bouvines and Fontenoy were mentioned as hough they had taken place on the preceding day, Austerlitz having become ntiquated. The altar and the throne fraternized majestically. One of the most ndisputed forms of the health of society in the nineteenth century was stablished over France, and over the continent. Europe adopted the white ockade. Trestaillon was celebrated. The device _non pluribus impar_ reappeared n the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on the Quai ’Orsay. Where there had been an Imperial Guard, there was now a red house. The rc du Carrousel, all laden with badly borne victories, thrown out of its lement among these novelties, a little ashamed, it may be, of Marengo and rcola, extricated itself from its predicament with the statue of the Duc ’Angoulême. The cemetery of the Madeleine, a terrible pauper’s grave in 1793, as covered with jasper and marble, since the bones of Louis XVI. and Marie ntoinette lay in that dust.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.4#In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth, ecalling the fact that the Duc d’Enghien had perished in the very month when apoleon was crowned. Pope Pius VII., who had performed the coronation very near his death, tranquilly bestowed his blessing on the fall as he had bestowed it n the elevation. At Schoenbrunn there was a little shadow, aged four, whom it as seditious to call the King of Rome. And these things took place, and the ings resumed their thrones, and the master of Europe was put in a cage, and the ld regime became the new regime, and all the shadows and all the light of the arth changed place, because, on the afternoon of a certain summer’s day, a hepherd said to a Prussian in the forest, “Go this way, and not that!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.5#This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April. Ancient unhealthy and poisonous ealities were covered with new appearances. A lie wedded 1789; the right divine as masked under a charter; fictions became constitutional; prejudices, uperstitions and mental reservations, with Article 14 in the heart, were arnished over with liberalism. It was the serpent’s change of skin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.6#Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon. Under this eign of splendid matter, the ideal had received the strange name of ideology! t is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the future into derision. The opulace, however, that food for cannon which is so fond of the cannoneer, ought him with its glance. Where is he? What is he doing? “Napoleon is dead,” aid a passer-by to a veteran of Marengo and Waterloo. “He dead!” cried the oldier; “you don’t know him.” Imagination distrusted this man, even when verthrown. The depths of Europe were full of darkness after Waterloo. Something normous remained long empty through Napoleon’s disappearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.7#The kings placed themselves in this void. Ancient Europe profited by it to ndertake reforms. There was a Holy Alliance; _Belle-Alliance_, Beautiful lliance, the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.8#In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed, the features f a new France were sketched out. The future, which the Emperor had rallied, ade its entry. On its brow it bore the star, Liberty. The glowing eyes of all oung generations were turned on it. Singular fact! people were, at one and the ame time, in love with the future, Liberty, and the past, Napoleon. Defeat had endered the vanquished greater. Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than apoleon erect. Those who had triumphed were alarmed. England had him guarded by udson Lowe, and France had him watched by Montchenu. His folded arms became a ource of uneasiness to thrones. Alexander called him “my sleeplessness.” This error was the result of the quantity of revolution which was contained in him. hat is what explains and excuses Bonapartist liberalism. This phantom caused he old world to tremble. The kings reigned, but ill at their ease, with the ock of Saint Helena on the horizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.9#While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood, the ixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo were quietly rotting, nd something of their peace was shed abroad over the world. The Congress of ienna made the treaties in 1815, and Europe called this the Restoration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.10#This is what Waterloo was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.18.11#But what matters it to the Infinite? all that tempest, all that cloud, hat war, then that peace? All that darkness did not trouble for a moment the ight of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from one blade of grass o another equals the eagle soaring from belfry to belfry on the towers of Notre ame.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.head#CHAPTER XIX—THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.1#Let us return—it is a necessity in this book—to that fatal attle-field.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.2#On the 18th of June the moon was full. Its light favored Blücher’s erocious pursuit, betrayed the traces of the fugitives, delivered up that isastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry, and aided the massacre. Such ragic favors of the night do occur sometimes during catastrophes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.3#After the last cannon-shot had been fired, the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean emained deserted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.4#The English occupied the encampment of the French; it is the usual sign of ictory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished. They established their bivouac eyond Rossomme. The Prussians, let loose on the retreating rout, pushed orward. Wellington went to the village of Waterloo to draw up his report to ord Bathurst.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.5#If ever the _sic vos non vobis_ was applicable, it certainly is to that illage of Waterloo. Waterloo took no part, and lay half a league from the scene f action. Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded, Hougomont was burned, La Haie-Sainte as taken by assault, Papelotte was burned, Plancenoit was burned, La elle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the two conquerors; these names are hardly nown, and Waterloo, which worked not in the battle, bears off all the onor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.6#We are not of the number of those who flatter war; when the occasion resents itself, we tell the truth about it. War has frightful beauties which we ave not concealed; it has also, we acknowledge, some hideous features. One of he most surprising is the prompt stripping of the bodies of the dead after the ictory. The dawn which follows a battle always rises on naked corpses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.7#Who does this? Who thus soils the triumph? What hideous, furtive hand is hat which is slipped into the pocket of victory? What pickpockets are they who ly their trade in the rear of glory? Some philosophers—Voltaire among the umber—affirm that it is precisely those persons who have made the glory. It is he same men, they say; there is no relief corps; those who are erect pillage hose who are prone on the earth. The hero of the day is the vampire of the ight. One has assuredly the right, after all, to strip a corpse a bit when one s the author of that corpse. For our own part, we do not think so; it seems to s impossible that the same hand should pluck laurels and purloin the shoes from dead man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.8#One thing is certain, which is, that generally after conquerors follow hieves. But let us leave the soldier, especially the contemporary soldier, out f the question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.9#Every army has a rear-guard, and it is that which must be blamed. Bat-like reatures, half brigands and lackeys; all the sorts of vespertillos that that wilight called war engenders; wearers of uniforms, who take no part in the ighting; pretended invalids; formidable limpers; interloping sutlers, trotting long in little carts, sometimes accompanied by their wives, and stealing things hich they sell again; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers; oldiers’ servants; marauders; armies on the march in days gone by,—we are not peaking of the present,—dragged all this behind them, so that in the special anguage they are called “stragglers.” No army, no nation, was responsible for hose beings; they spoke Italian and followed the Germans, then spoke French and ollowed the English. It was by one of these wretches, a Spanish straggler who poke French, that the Marquis of Fervacques, deceived by his Picard jargon, and aking him for one of our own men, was traitorously slain and robbed on the attle-field itself, in the course of the night which followed the victory of erisoles. The rascal sprang from this marauding. The detestable maxim, _Live on he enemy!_ produced this leprosy, which a strict discipline alone could heal. here are reputations which are deceptive; one does not always know why certain enerals, great in other directions, have been so popular. Turenne was adored by is soldiers because he tolerated pillage; evil permitted constitutes part of oodness. Turenne was so good that he allowed the Palatinate to be delivered ver to fire and blood. The marauders in the train of an army were more or less n number, according as the chief was more or less severe. Hoche and Marceau had o stragglers; Wellington had few, and we do him the justice to mention it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.10#Nevertheless, on the night from the 18th to the 19th of June, the dead ere robbed. Wellington was rigid; he gave orders that any one caught in the act hould be shot; but rapine is tenacious. The marauders stole in one corner of he battlefield while others were being shot in another.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.11#The moon was sinister over this plain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.12#Towards midnight, a man was prowling about, or rather, climbing in the irection of the hollow road of Ohain. To all appearance he was one of those hom we have just described,—neither English nor French, neither peasant nor oldier, less a man than a ghoul attracted by the scent of the dead bodies aving theft for his victory, and come to rifle Waterloo. He was clad in a louse that was something like a great coat; he was uneasy and audacious; he alked forwards and gazed behind him. Who was this man? The night probably knew ore of him than the day. He had no sack, but evidently he had large pockets nder his coat. From time to time he halted, scrutinized the plain around him as hough to see whether he were observed, bent over abruptly, disturbed something ilent and motionless on the ground, then rose and fled. His sliding motion, his ttitudes, his mysterious and rapid gestures, caused him to resemble those wilight larvæ which haunt ruins, and which ancient Norman legends call the lleurs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.13#Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among the arshes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.14#A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have perceived at ome distance a sort of little sutler’s wagon with a fluted wicker hood, arnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass across its bit as it alted, hidden, as it were, behind the hovel which adjoins the highway to ivelles, at the angle of the road from Mont-Saint-Jean to Braine l’Alleud; and n the wagon, a sort of woman seated on coffers and packages. Perhaps there was ome connection between that wagon and that prowler.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.15#The darkness was serene. Not a cloud in the zenith. What matters it if the arth be red! the moon remains white; these are the indifferences of the sky. In he fields, branches of trees broken by grape-shot, but not fallen, upheld by heir bark, swayed gently in the breeze of night. A breath, almost a espiration, moved the shrubbery. Quivers which resembled the departure of souls an through the grass.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.16#In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general rounds of he English camp were audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.17#Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn, forming, one in the west, he other in the east, two great flames which were joined by the cordon of ivouac fires of the English, like a necklace of rubies with two carbuncles at he extremities, as they extended in an immense semicircle over the hills along he horizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.18#We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain. The heart is errified at the thought of what that death must have been to so many brave en.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.19#If there is anything terrible, if there exists a reality which surpasses reams, it is this: to live, to see the sun; to be in full possession of virile orce; to possess health and joy; to laugh valiantly; to rush towards a glory hich one sees dazzling in front of one; to feel in one’s breast lungs which reathe, a heart which beats, a will which reasons; to speak, think, hope, love; o have a mother, to have a wife, to have children; to have the light—and all at nce, in the space of a shout, in less than a minute, to sink into an abyss; to all, to roll, to crush, to be crushed; to see ears of wheat, flowers, leaves, ranches; not to be able to catch hold of anything; to feel one’s sword useless, en beneath one, horses on top of one; to struggle in vain, since one’s bones ave been broken by some kick in the darkness; to feel a heel which makes one’s yes start from their sockets; to bite horses’ shoes in one’s rage; to stifle, o yell, to writhe; to be beneath, and to say to one’s self, “But just a little hile ago I was a living man!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.20#There, where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle, all as silence now. The edges of the hollow road were encumbered with horses and iders, inextricably heaped up. Terrible entanglement! There was no longer any lope, for the corpses had levelled the road with the plain, and reached the rim like a well-filled bushel of barley. A heap of dead bodies in the upper art, a river of blood in the lower part—such was that road on the evening of he 18th of June, 1815. The blood ran even to the Nivelles highway, and there verflowed in a large pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way, t a spot which is still pointed out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.21#It will be remembered that it was at the opposite point, in the direction f the Genappe road, that the destruction of the cuirassiers had taken place. he thickness of the layer of bodies was proportioned to the depth of the hollow oad. Towards the middle, at the point where it became level, where Delort’s ivision had passed, the layer of corpses was thinner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.22#The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader was going in hat direction. He was searching that vast tomb. He gazed about. He passed the ead in some sort of hideous review. He walked with his feet in the blood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.23#All at once he paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.24#A few paces in front of him, in the hollow road, at the point where the ile of dead came to an end, an open hand, illumined by the moon, projected from eneath that heap of men. That hand had on its finger something sparkling, which as a ring of gold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.25#The man bent over, remained in a crouching attitude for a moment, and when e rose there was no longer a ring on the hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.26#He did not precisely rise; he remained in a stooping and frightened ttitude, with his back turned to the heap of dead, scanning the horizon on his nees, with the whole upper portion of his body supported on his two orefingers, which rested on the earth, and his head peering above the edge of he hollow road. The jackal’s four paws suit some actions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.27#Then coming to a decision, he rose to his feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.28#At that moment, he gave a terrible start. He felt some one clutch him from ehind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.29#He wheeled round; it was the open hand, which had closed, and had seized he skirt of his coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.30#An honest man would have been terrified; this man burst into a laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.31#“Come,” said he, “it’s only a dead body. I prefer a spook to a endarme.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.32#But the hand weakened and released him. Effort is quickly exhausted in the rave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.33#“Well now,” said the prowler, “is that dead fellow alive? Let’s see.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.34#He bent down again, fumbled among the heap, pushed aside everything that as in his way, seized the hand, grasped the arm, freed the head, pulled out the ody, and a few moments later he was dragging the lifeless, or at least the nconscious, man, through the shadows of hollow road. He was a cuirassier, an fficer, and even an officer of considerable rank; a large gold epaulette peeped rom beneath the cuirass; this officer no longer possessed a helmet. A furious word-cut had scarred his face, where nothing was discernible but blood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.35#However, he did not appear to have any broken limbs, and, by some happy hance, if that word is permissible here, the dead had been vaulted above him in uch a manner as to preserve him from being crushed. His eyes were still losed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.36#On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.37#The prowler tore off this cross, which disappeared into one of the gulfs hich he had beneath his great coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.38#Then he felt of the officer’s fob, discovered a watch there, and took ossession of it. Next he searched his waistcoat, found a purse and pocketed t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.39#When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administering to his dying man, the officer opened his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.40#“Thanks,” he said feebly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.41#The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him, the reshness of the night, the air which he could inhale freely, had roused him rom his lethargy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.42#The prowler made no reply. He raised his head. A sound of footsteps was udible in the plain; some patrol was probably approaching.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.43#The officer murmured, for the death agony was still in his voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.44#“Who won the battle?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.45#“The English,” answered the prowler.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.46#The officer went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.47#“Look in my pockets; you will find a watch and a purse. Take them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.48#It was already done.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.49#The prowler executed the required feint, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.50#“There is nothing there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.51#“I have been robbed,” said the officer; “I am sorry for that. You should ave had them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.52#The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.53#“Some one is coming,” said the prowler, with the movement of a man who is aking his departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.54#The officer raised his arm feebly, and detained him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.55#“You have saved my life. Who are you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.56#The prowler answered rapidly, and in a low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.57#“Like yourself, I belonged to the French army. I must leave you. If they ere to catch me, they would shoot me. I have saved your life. Now get out of he scrape yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.58#“What is your rank?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.59#“Sergeant.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.60#“What is your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.61#“Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.1.19.62#“I shall not forget that name,” said the officer; “and do you remember ine. My name is Pontmercy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.head#BOOK SECOND—THE SHIP ORION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.head#CHAPTER I—NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.1#Jean Valjean had been recaptured.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.2#The reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over the sad details. e will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphs published by the ournals of that day, a few months after the surprising events which had taken lace at M. sur M.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.3#These articles are rather summary. It must be remembered, that at that poch the _Gazette des Tribunaux_ was not yet in existence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.4#We borrow the first from the _Drapeau Blanc_. It bears the date of July 25, 823.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.5#An arrondissement of the Pas de Calais has just been the theatre of an vent quite out of the ordinary course. A man, who was a stranger in the epartment, and who bore the name of M. Madeleine, had, thanks to the new ethods, resuscitated some years ago an ancient local industry, the manufacture f jet and of black glass trinkets. He had made his fortune in the business, and hat of the arrondissement as well, we will admit. He had been appointed mayor, n recognition of his services. The police discovered that M. Madeleine was no ther than an ex-convict who had broken his ban, condemned in 1796 for theft, nd named Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison. It appears hat previous to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing from the hands of M. affitte, a sum of over half a million which he had lodged there, and which he ad, moreover, and by perfectly legitimate means, acquired in his business. No ne has been able to discover where Jean Valjean has concealed this money since is return to prison at Toulon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.6#The second article, which enters a little more into detail, is an extract rom the _Journal de Paris_, of the same date.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.7#A former convict, who had been liberated, named Jean Valjean, has just ppeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var, under circumstances calculated o attract attention. This wretch had succeeded in escaping the vigilance of the olice, he had changed his name, and had succeeded in getting himself appointed ayor of one of our small northern towns; in this town he had established a onsiderable commerce. He has at last been unmasked and arrested, thanks to the ndefatigable zeal of the public prosecutor. He had for his concubine a woman of he town, who died of a shock at the moment of his arrest. This scoundrel, who s endowed with Herculean strength, found means to escape; but three or four ays after his flight the police laid their hands on him once more, in Paris tself, at the very moment when he was entering one of those little vehicles hich run between the capital and the village of Montfermeil (Seine-et-Oise). He s said to have profited by this interval of three or four days of liberty, to ithdraw a considerable sum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers. his sum has been estimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs. If the ndictment is to be trusted, he has hidden it in some place known to himself lone, and it has not been possible to lay hands on it. However that may be, the aid Jean Valjean has just been brought before the Assizes of the Department of he Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied with violence, about eight ears ago, on the person of one of those honest children who, as the patriarch f Ferney has said, in immortal verse,
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.8#“. . . Arrive from Savoy every year, And who, with gentle hands, do clear hose long canals choked up with soot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.9#This bandit refused to defend himself. It was proved by the skilful and loquent representative of the public prosecutor, that the theft was committed n complicity with others, and that Jean Valjean was a member of a band of obbers in the south. Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty and was condemned to he death penalty in consequence. This criminal refused to lodge an appeal. The ing, in his inexhaustible clemency, has deigned to commute his penalty to that f penal servitude for life. Jean Valjean was immediately taken to the prison at oulon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.10#The reader has not forgotten that Jean Valjean had religious habits at M. ur M. Some papers, among others the _Constitutional_, presented this ommutation as a triumph of the priestly party.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.11#Jean Valjean changed his number in the galleys. He was called 9,430.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.12#However, and we will mention it at once in order that we may not be bliged to recur to the subject, the prosperity of M. sur M. vanished with M. adeleine; all that he had foreseen during his night of fever and hesitation was ealized; lacking him, there actually was _a soul lacking_. After this fall, here took place at M. sur M. that egotistical division of great existences hich have fallen, that fatal dismemberment of flourishing things which is ccomplished every day, obscurely, in the human community, and which history has oted only once, because it occurred after the death of Alexander. Lieutenants re crowned kings; superintendents improvise manufacturers out of themselves. nvious rivalries arose. M. Madeleine’s vast workshops were shut; his buildings ell to ruin, his workmen were scattered. Some of them quitted the country, thers abandoned the trade. Thenceforth, everything was done on a small scale, nstead of on a grand scale; for lucre instead of the general good. There was no onger a centre; everywhere there was competition and animosity. M. Madeleine ad reigned over all and directed all. No sooner had he fallen, than each pulled hings to himself; the spirit of combat succeeded to the spirit of organization, itterness to cordiality, hatred of one another to the benevolence of the ounder towards all; the threads which M. Madeleine had set were tangled and roken, the methods were adulterated, the products were debased, confidence was illed; the market diminished, for lack of orders; salaries were reduced, the orkshops stood still, bankruptcy arrived. And then there was nothing more for he poor. All had vanished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.1.13#The state itself perceived that some one had been crushed somewhere. Less han four years after the judgment of the Court of Assizes establishing the dentity of Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine, for the benefit of the galleys, the ost of collecting taxes had doubled in the arrondissement of M. sur M.; and M. e Villèle called attention to the fact in the rostrum, in the month of ebruary, 1827.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.head#CHAPTER II—IN WHICH THE READER WILL PERUSE TWO VERSES, WHICH ARE OF HE DEVIL’S COMPOSITION, POSSIBLY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.1#Before proceeding further, it will be to the purpose to narrate in some etail, a singular occurrence which took place at about the same epoch, in ontfermeil, and which is not lacking in coincidence with certain conjectures of he indictment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.2#There exists in the region of Montfermeil a very ancient superstition, hich is all the more curious and all the more precious, because a popular uperstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe in Siberia. We are among hose who respect everything which is in the nature of a rare plant. Here, then, s the superstition of Montfermeil: it is thought that the devil, from time mmemorial, has selected the forest as a hiding-place for his treasures. oodwives affirm that it is no rarity to encounter at nightfall, in secluded ooks of the forest, a black man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper, earing wooden shoes, clad in trousers and a blouse of linen, and recognizable y the fact, that, instead of a cap or hat, he has two immense horns on his ead. This ought, in fact, to render him recognizable. This man is habitually ngaged in digging a hole. There are three ways of profiting by such an ncounter. The first is to approach the man and speak to him. Then it is seen hat the man is simply a peasant, that he appears black because it is nightfall; hat he is not digging any hole whatever, but is cutting grass for his cows, and hat what had been taken for horns is nothing but a dung-fork which he is arrying on his back, and whose teeth, thanks to the perspective of evening, eemed to spring from his head. The man returns home and dies within the week. he second way is to watch him, to wait until he has dug his hole, until he has illed it and has gone away; then to run with great speed to the trench, to open t once more and to seize the “treasure” which the black man has necessarily laced there. In this case one dies within the month. Finally, the last method s not to speak to the black man, not to look at him, and to flee at the best peed of one’s legs. One then dies within the year.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.3#As all three methods are attended with their special inconveniences, the econd, which at all events, presents some advantages, among others that of ossessing a treasure, if only for a month, is the one most generally adopted. o bold men, who are tempted by every chance, have quite frequently, as we are ssured, opened the holes excavated by the black man, and tried to rob the evil. The success of the operation appears to be but moderate. At least, if the radition is to be believed, and in particular the two enigmatical lines in arbarous Latin, which an evil Norman monk, a bit of a sorcerer, named Tryphon as left on this subject. This Tryphon is buried at the Abbey of Saint-Georges e Bocherville, near Rouen, and toads spawn on his grave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.4#Accordingly, enormous efforts are made. Such trenches are ordinarily xtremely deep; a man sweats, digs, toils all night—for it must be done at ight; he wets his shirt, burns out his candle, breaks his mattock, and when he rrives at the bottom of the hole, when he lays his hand on the “treasure,” what oes he find? What is the devil’s treasure? A sou, sometimes a crown-piece, a tone, a skeleton, a bleeding body, sometimes a spectre folded in four like a heet of paper in a portfolio, sometimes nothing. This is what Tryphon’s verses eem to announce to the indiscreet and curious:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.5#“Fodit, et in fossa thesauros condit opaca, As, nummas, lapides, cadaver, imulacra, nihilque.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.6#It seems that in our day there is sometimes found a powder-horn with ullets, sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn, which has evidently erved the devil. Tryphon does not record these two finds, since Tryphon lived n the twelfth century, and since the devil does not appear to have had the wit o invent powder before Roger Bacon’s time, and cards before the time of Charles I.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.7#Moreover, if one plays at cards, one is sure to lose all that one ossesses! and as for the powder in the horn, it possesses the property of aking your gun burst in your face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.8#Now, a very short time after the epoch when it seemed to the prosecuting ttorney that the liberated convict Jean Valjean during his flight of several ays had been prowling around Montfermeil, it was remarked in that village that certain old road-laborer, named Boulatruelle, had “peculiar ways” in the orest. People thereabouts thought they knew that this Boulatruelle had been in he galleys. He was subjected to certain police supervision, and, as he could ind work nowhere, the administration employed him at reduced rates as a oad-mender on the crossroad from Gagny to Lagny.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.9#This Boulatruelle was a man who was viewed with disfavor by the inhabitants f the district as too respectful, too humble, too prompt in removing his cap to very one, and trembling and smiling in the presence of the gendarmes,—probably ffiliated to robber bands, they said; suspected of lying in ambush at verge of opses at nightfall. The only thing in his favor was that he was a drunkard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.10#This is what people thought they had noticed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.11#Of late, Boulatruelle had taken to quitting his task of stone-breaking and are of the road at a very early hour, and to betaking himself to the forest ith his pickaxe. He was encountered towards evening in the most deserted learings, in the wildest thickets; and he had the appearance of being in search f something, and sometimes he was digging holes. The goodwives who passed took im at first for Beelzebub; then they recognized Boulatruelle, and were not in he least reassured thereby. These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle a ively displeasure. It was evident that he sought to hide, and that there was ome mystery in what he was doing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.12#It was said in the village: “It is clear that the devil has appeared. oulatruelle has seen him, and is on the search. In sooth, he is cunning enough o pocket Lucifer’s hoard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.13#The Voltairians added, “Will Boulatruelle catch the devil, or will the evil catch Boulatruelle?” The old women made a great many signs of the ross.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.14#In the meantime, Boulatruelle’s manœuvres in the forest ceased; and he esumed his regular occupation of roadmending; and people gossiped of something lse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.15#Some persons, however, were still curious, surmising that in all this here was probably no fabulous treasure of the legends, but some fine windfall f a more serious and palpable sort than the devil’s bank-bills, and that the oad-mender had half discovered the secret. The most “puzzled” were the choolmaster and Thénardier, the proprietor of the tavern, who was everybody’s riend, and had not disdained to ally himself with Boulatruelle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.16#“He has been in the galleys,” said Thénardier. “Eh! Good God! no one knows ho has been there or will be there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.17#One evening the schoolmaster affirmed that in former times the law would ave instituted an inquiry as to what Boulatruelle did in the forest, and that he latter would have been forced to speak, and that he would have been put to he torture in case of need, and that Boulatruelle would not have resisted the ater test, for example. “Let us put him to the wine test,” said Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.18#They made an effort, and got the old road-mender to drinking. Boulatruelle rank an enormous amount, but said very little. He combined with admirable art, nd in masterly proportions, the thirst of a gormandizer with the discretion of judge. Nevertheless, by dint of returning to the charge and of comparing and utting together the few obscure words which he did allow to escape him, this is hat Thénardier and the schoolmaster imagined that they had made out:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.19#One morning, when Boulatruelle was on his way to his work, at daybreak, he ad been surprised to see, at a nook of the forest in the underbrush, a shovel nd a pickaxe, _concealed, as one might say_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.20#However, he might have supposed that they were probably the shovel and ick of Father Six-Fours, the water-carrier, and would have thought no more bout it. But, on the evening of that day, he saw, without being seen himself, s he was hidden by a large tree, “a person who did not belong in those parts, nd whom he, Boulatruelle, knew well,” directing his steps towards the densest art of the wood. Translation by Thénardier: _A comrade of the galleys_. oulatruelle obstinately refused to reveal his name. This person carried a ackage—something square, like a large box or a small trunk. Surprise on the art of Boulatruelle. However, it was only after the expiration of seven or ight minutes that the idea of following that “person” had occurred to him. But t was too late; the person was already in the thicket, night had descended, and oulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him. Then he had adopted the ourse of watching for him at the edge of the woods. “It was moonlight.” Two or hree hours later, Boulatruelle had seen this person emerge from the brushwood, arrying no longer the coffer, but a shovel and pick. Boulatruelle had allowed he person to pass, and had not dreamed of accosting him, because he said to imself that the other man was three times as strong as he was, and armed with a ickaxe, and that he would probably knock him over the head on recognizing him, nd on perceiving that he was recognized. Touching effusion of two old comrades n meeting again. But the shovel and pick had served as a ray of light to oulatruelle; he had hastened to the thicket in the morning, and had found either shovel nor pick. From this he had drawn the inference that this person, nce in the forest, had dug a hole with his pick, buried the coffer, and eclosed the hole with his shovel. Now, the coffer was too small to contain a ody; therefore it contained money. Hence his researches. Boulatruelle had xplored, sounded, searched the entire forest and the thicket, and had dug herever the earth appeared to him to have been recently turned up. In vain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.2.21#He had “ferreted out” nothing. No one in Montfermeil thought any more bout it. There were only a few brave gossips, who said, “You may be certain hat the mender on the Gagny road did not take all that trouble for nothing; he as sure that the devil had come.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE ANKLE-CHAIN MUST HAVE UNDERGONE A CERTAIN PREPARATORY ANIPULATION TO BE THUS BROKEN WITH A BLOW FROM A HAMMER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.1#Towards the end of October, in that same year, 1823, the inhabitants of oulon beheld the entry into their port, after heavy weather, and for the urpose of repairing some damages, of the ship _Orion_, which was employed later t Brest as a school-ship, and which then formed a part of the Mediterranean quadron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.2#This vessel, battered as it was,—for the sea had handled it oughly,—produced a fine effect as it entered the roads. It flew some colors hich procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns, which it returned, hot for shot; total, twenty-two. It has been calculated that what with salvos, oyal and military politenesses, courteous exchanges of uproar, signals of tiquette, formalities of roadsteads and citadels, sunrises and sunsets, saluted very day by all fortresses and all ships of war, openings and closings of orts, etc., the civilized world, discharged all over the earth, in the course f four and twenty hours, one hundred and fifty thousand useless shots. At six rancs the shot, that comes to nine hundred thousand francs a day, three hundred illions a year, which vanish in smoke. This is a mere detail. All this time the oor were dying of hunger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.3#The year 1823 was what the Restoration called “the epoch of the Spanish ar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.4#This war contained many events in one, and a quantity of peculiarities. A rand family affair for the house of Bourbon; the branch of France succoring and rotecting the branch of Madrid, that is to say, performing an act devolving on he elder; an apparent return to our national traditions, complicated by ervitude and by subjection to the cabinets of the North; M. le Duc d’Angoulême, urnamed by the liberal sheets _the hero of Andujar_, compressing in a triumphal ttitude that was somewhat contradicted by his peaceable air, the ancient and ery powerful terrorism of the Holy Office at variance with the chimerical errorism of the liberals; the _sansculottes_ resuscitated, to the great terror f dowagers, under the name of _descamisados_; monarchy opposing an obstacle to rogress described as anarchy; the theories of ’89 roughly interrupted in the ap; a European halt, called to the French idea, which was making the tour of he world; beside the son of France as generalissimo, the Prince de Carignan, fterwards Charles Albert, enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against eople as a volunteer, with grenadier epaulets of red worsted; the soldiers of he Empire setting out on a fresh campaign, but aged, saddened, after eight ears of repose, and under the white cockade; the tricolored standard waved broad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen, as the white standard had been thirty ears earlier at Coblentz; monks mingled with our troops; the spirit of liberty nd of novelty brought to its senses by bayonets; principles slaughtered by annonades; France undoing by her arms that which she had done by her mind; in ddition to this, hostile leaders sold, soldiers hesitating, cities besieged by illions; no military perils, and yet possible explosions, as in every mine hich is surprised and invaded; but little bloodshed, little honor won, shame or some, glory for no one. Such was this war, made by the princes descended rom Louis XIV., and conducted by generals who had been under Napoleon. Its sad ate was to recall neither the grand war nor grand politics.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.5#Some feats of arms were serious; the taking of the Trocadéro, among others, as a fine military action; but after all, we repeat, the trumpets of this war ive back a cracked sound, the whole effect was suspicious; history approves of rance for making a difficulty about accepting this false triumph. It seemed vident that certain Spanish officers charged with resistance yielded too asily; the idea of corruption was connected with the victory; it appears as hough generals and not battles had been won, and the conquering soldier eturned humiliated. A debasing war, in short, in which the _Bank of France_ ould be read in the folds of the flag.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.6#Soldiers of the war of 1808, on whom Saragossa had fallen in formidable uin, frowned in 1823 at the easy surrender of citadels, and began to regret alafox. It is the nature of France to prefer to have Rostopchine rather than allesteros in front of her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.7#From a still more serious point of view, and one which it is also proper to nsist upon here, this war, which wounded the military spirit of France, enraged he democratic spirit. It was an enterprise of enthralment. In that campaign, he object of the French soldier, the son of democracy, was the conquest of a oke for others. A hideous contradiction. France is made to arouse the soul of ations, not to stifle it. All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are the rench Revolution: liberty darts rays from France. That is a solar fact. Blind s he who will not see! It was Bonaparte who said it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.8#The war of 1823, an outrage on the generous Spanish nation, was then, at he same time, an outrage on the French Revolution. It was France who committed his monstrous violence; by foul means, for, with the exception of wars of iberation, everything that armies do is by foul means. The words _passive bedience_ indicate this. An army is a strange masterpiece of combination where orce results from an enormous sum of impotence. Thus is war, made by humanity gainst humanity, despite humanity, explained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.9#As for the Bourbons, the war of 1823 was fatal to them. They took it for a uccess. They did not perceive the danger that lies in having an idea slain to rder. They went astray, in their innocence, to such a degree that they ntroduced the immense enfeeblement of a crime into their establishment as an lement of strength. The spirit of the ambush entered into their politics. 1830 ad its germ in 1823. The Spanish campaign became in their counsels an argument or force and for adventures by right Divine. France, having re-established _el ey netto_ in Spain, might well have re-established the absolute king at home. hey fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience of the soldier for the onsent of the nation. Such confidence is the ruin of thrones. It is not ermitted to fall asleep, either in the shadow of a machineel tree, nor in the hadow of an army.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.10#Let us return to the ship _Orion_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.11#During the operations of the army commanded by the prince generalissimo, a quadron had been cruising in the Mediterranean. We have just stated that the Orion_ belonged to this fleet, and that accidents of the sea had brought it nto port at Toulon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.12#The presence of a vessel of war in a port has something about it which ttracts and engages a crowd. It is because it is great, and the crowd loves hat is great.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.13#A ship of the line is one of the most magnificent combinations of the enius of man with the powers of nature.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.14#A ship of the line is composed, at the same time, of the heaviest and the ightest of possible matter, for it deals at one and the same time with three orms of substance,—solid, liquid, and fluid,—and it must do battle with all hree. It has eleven claws of iron with which to seize the granite on the bottom f the sea, and more wings and more antennæ than winged insects, to catch the ind in the clouds. Its breath pours out through its hundred and twenty cannons s through enormous trumpets, and replies proudly to the thunder. The ocean eeks to lead it astray in the alarming sameness of its billows, but the vessel as its soul, its compass, which counsels it and always shows it the north. In he blackest nights, its lanterns supply the place of the stars. Thus, against he wind, it has its cordage and its canvas; against the water, wood; against he rocks, its iron, brass, and lead; against the shadows, its light; against mmensity, a needle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.15#If one wishes to form an idea of all those gigantic proportions which, aken as a whole, constitute the ship of the line, one has only to enter one of he six-story covered construction stocks, in the ports of Brest or Toulon. The essels in process of construction are under a bell-glass there, as it were. his colossal beam is a yard; that great column of wood which stretches out on he earth as far as the eye can reach is the main-mast. Taking it from its root n the stocks to its tip in the clouds, it is sixty fathoms long, and its iameter at its base is three feet. The English main-mast rises to a height of wo hundred and seventeen feet above the water-line. The navy of our fathers mployed cables, ours employs chains. The simple pile of chains on a ship of a undred guns is four feet high, twenty feet in breadth, and eight feet in depth. nd how much wood is required to make this ship? Three thousand cubic metres. It s a floating forest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.16#And moreover, let this be borne in mind, it is only a question here of the ilitary vessel of forty years ago, of the simple sailing-vessel; steam, then in ts infancy, has since added new miracles to that prodigy which is called a war essel. At the present time, for example, the mixed vessel with a screw is a urprising machine, propelled by three thousand square metres of canvas and by n engine of two thousand five hundred horse-power.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.17#Not to mention these new marvels, the ancient vessel of Christopher olumbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man. It is as nexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales; it stores up the wind in its ails, it is precise in the immense vagueness of the billows, it floats, and it eigns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.18#There comes an hour, nevertheless, when the gale breaks that sixty-foot ard like a straw, when the wind bends that mast four hundred feet tall, when hat anchor, which weighs tens of thousands, is twisted in the jaws of the waves ike a fisherman’s hook in the jaws of a pike, when those monstrous cannons tter plaintive and futile roars, which the hurricane bears forth into the void nd into night, when all that power and all that majesty are engulfed in a power nd majesty which are superior.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.19#Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate in an immense eebleness it affords men food for thought. Hence in the ports curious people bound around these marvellous machines of war and of navigation, without being ble to explain perfectly to themselves why. Every day, accordingly, from orning until night, the quays, sluices, and the jetties of the port of Toulon ere covered with a multitude of idlers and loungers, as they say in Paris, hose business consisted in staring at the _Orion_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.20#The _Orion_ was a ship that had been ailing for a long time; in the course f its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles had collected on its keel to uch a degree as to deprive it of half its speed; it had gone into the dry dock he year before this, in order to have the barnacles scraped off, then it had ut to sea again; but this cleaning had affected the bolts of the keel: in the eighborhood of the Balearic Isles the sides had been strained and had opened; nd, as the plating in those days was not of sheet iron, the vessel had sprung a eak. A violent equinoctial gale had come up, which had first staved in a rating and a porthole on the larboard side, and damaged the oretop-gallant-shrouds; in consequence of these injuries, the _Orion_ had run ack to Toulon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.21#It anchored near the Arsenal; it was fully equipped, and repairs were egun. The hull had received no damage on the starboard, but some of the planks ad been unnailed here and there, according to custom, to permit of air entering he hold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.22#One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.23#The crew was busy bending the sails; the topman, who had to take the upper orner of the main-top-sail on the starboard, lost his balance; he was seen to aver; the multitude thronging the Arsenal quay uttered a cry; the man’s head verbalanced his body; the man fell around the yard, with his hands outstretched owards the abyss; on his way he seized the footrope, first with one hand, then ith the other, and remained hanging from it: the sea lay below him at a dizzy epth; the shock of his fall had imparted to the foot-rope a violent swinging otion; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope, like a stone in a ling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.24#It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance; not one of the ailors, all fishermen of the coast, recently levied for the service, dared to ttempt it. In the meantime, the unfortunate topman was losing his strength; his nguish could not be discerned on his face, but his exhaustion was visible in very limb; his arms were contracted in horrible twitchings; every effort which e made to re-ascend served but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope; he id not shout, for fear of exhausting his strength. All were awaiting the minute hen he should release his hold on the rope, and, from instant to instant, heads ere turned aside that his fall might not be seen. There are moments when a bit f rope, a pole, the branch of a tree, is life itself, and it is a terrible hing to see a living being detach himself from it and fall like a ripe ruit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.25#All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agility of a iger-cat; this man was dressed in red; he was a convict; he wore a green cap; e was a life convict. On arriving on a level with the top, a gust of wind arried away his cap, and allowed a perfectly white head to be seen: he was not young man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.26#A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had, in act, at the very first instant, hastened to the officer of the watch, and, in he midst of the consternation and the hesitation of the crew, while all the ailors were trembling and drawing back, he had asked the officer’s permission o risk his life to save the topman; at an affirmative sign from the officer he ad broken the chain riveted to his ankle with one blow of a hammer, then he had aught up a rope, and had dashed into the rigging: no one noticed, at the nstant, with what ease that chain had been broken; it was only later on that he incident was recalled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.27#In a twinkling he was on the yard; he paused for a few seconds and ppeared to be measuring it with his eye; these seconds, during which the breeze wayed the topman at the extremity of a thread, seemed centuries to those who ere looking on. At last, the convict raised his eyes to heaven and advanced a tep: the crowd drew a long breath. He was seen to run out along the yard: on rriving at the point, he fastened the rope which he had brought to it, and llowed the other end to hang down, then he began to descend the rope, hand over and, and then,—and the anguish was indescribable,—instead of one man suspended ver the gulf, there were two.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.28#One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly, only here the pider brought life, not death. Ten thousand glances were fastened on this roup; not a cry, not a word; the same tremor contracted every brow; all mouths eld their breath as though they feared to add the slightest puff to the wind hich was swaying the two unfortunate men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.29#In the meantime, the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to a osition near the sailor. It was high time; one minute more, and the exhausted nd despairing man would have allowed himself to fall into the abyss. The onvict had moored him securely with the cord to which he clung with one hand, hile he was working with the other. At last, he was seen to climb back on the ard, and to drag the sailor up after him; he held him there a moment to allow im to recover his strength, then he grasped him in his arms and carried him, alking on the yard himself to the cap, and from there to the main-top, where he eft him in the hands of his comrades.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.30#At that moment the crowd broke into applause: old convict-sergeants among hem wept, and women embraced each other on the quay, and all voices were heard o cry with a sort of tender rage, “Pardon for that man!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.31#He, in the meantime, had immediately begun to make his descent to rejoin is detachment. In order to reach them the more speedily, he dropped into the igging, and ran along one of the lower yards; all eyes were following him. At a ertain moment fear assailed them; whether it was that he was fatigued, or that is head turned, they thought they saw him hesitate and stagger. All at once the rowd uttered a loud shout: the convict had fallen into the sea.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.32#The fall was perilous. The frigate _Algésiras_ was anchored alongside the Orion_, and the poor convict had fallen between the two vessels: it was to be eared that he would slip under one or the other of them. Four men flung hemselves hastily into a boat; the crowd cheered them on; anxiety again took ossession of all souls; the man had not risen to the surface; he had isappeared in the sea without leaving a ripple, as though he had fallen into a ask of oil: they sounded, they dived. In vain. The search was continued until he evening: they did not even find the body.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.33#On the following day the Toulon newspaper printed these lines:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.2.3.34#“Nov. 17, 1823. Yesterday, a convict belonging to the detachment on board f the _Orion_, on his return from rendering assistance to a sailor, fell into he sea and was drowned. The body has not yet been found; it is supposed that it s entangled among the piles of the Arsenal point: this man was committed under he number 9,430, and his name was Jean Valjean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.head#BOOK THIRD—ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROMISE MADE TO THE DEAD WOMAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.1#Montfermeil is situated between Livry and Chelles, on the southern edge of hat lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne. At the present ay it is a tolerably large town, ornamented all the year through with plaster illas, and on Sundays with beaming bourgeois. In 1823 there were at Montfermeil either so many white houses nor so many well-satisfied citizens: it was only a illage in the forest. Some pleasure-houses of the last century were to be met ith there, to be sure, which were recognizable by their grand air, their alconies in twisted iron, and their long windows, whose tiny panes cast all orts of varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters; but ontfermeil was nonetheless a village. Retired cloth-merchants and rusticating ttorneys had not discovered it as yet; it was a peaceful and charming place, hich was not on the road to anywhere: there people lived, and cheaply, that easant rustic life which is so bounteous and so easy; only, water was rare here, on account of the elevation of the plateau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.2#It was necessary to fetch it from a considerable distance; the end of the illage towards Gagny drew its water from the magnificent ponds which exist in he woods there. The other end, which surrounds the church and which lies in the irection of Chelles, found drinking-water only at a little spring half-way down he slope, near the road to Chelles, about a quarter of an hour from ontfermeil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.3#Thus each household found it hard work to keep supplied with water. The arge houses, the aristocracy, of which the Thénardier tavern formed a part, aid half a farthing a bucketful to a man who made a business of it, and who arned about eight sous a day in his enterprise of supplying Montfermeil with ater; but this good man only worked until seven o’clock in the evening in ummer, and five in winter; and night once come and the shutters on the ground loor once closed, he who had no water to drink went to fetch it for himself or id without it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.4#This constituted the terror of the poor creature whom the reader has robably not forgotten,—little Cosette. It will be remembered that Cosette was seful to the Thénardiers in two ways: they made the mother pay them, and they ade the child serve them. So when the mother ceased to pay altogether, the eason for which we have read in preceding chapters, the Thénardiers kept osette. She took the place of a servant in their house. In this capacity she it as who ran to fetch water when it was required. So the child, who was greatly errified at the idea of going to the spring at night, took great care that ater should never be lacking in the house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.5#Christmas of the year 1823 was particularly brilliant at Montfermeil. The eginning of the winter had been mild; there had been neither snow nor frost up o that time. Some mountebanks from Paris had obtained permission of the mayor o erect their booths in the principal street of the village, and a band of tinerant merchants, under protection of the same tolerance, had constructed heir stalls on the Church Square, and even extended them into Boulanger Alley, here, as the reader will perhaps remember, the Thénardiers’ hostelry was ituated. These people filled the inns and drinking-shops, and communicated to hat tranquil little district a noisy and joyous life. In order to play the part f a faithful historian, we ought even to add that, among the curiosities isplayed in the square, there was a menagerie, in which frightful clowns, clad n rags and coming no one knew whence, exhibited to the peasants of Montfermeil n 1823 one of those horrible Brazilian vultures, such as our Royal Museum did ot possess until 1845, and which have a tricolored cockade for an eye. I elieve that naturalists call this bird Caracara Polyborus; it belongs to the rder of the Apicides, and to the family of the vultures. Some good old onapartist soldiers, who had retired to the village, went to see this creature ith great devotion. The mountebanks gave out that the tricolored cockade was a nique phenomenon made by God expressly for their menagerie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.6#On Christmas eve itself, a number of men, carters, and peddlers, were eated at table, drinking and smoking around four or five candles in the public oom of Thénardier’s hostelry. This room resembled all drinking-shop ooms,—tables, pewter jugs, bottles, drinkers, smokers; but little light and a reat deal of noise. The date of the year 1823 was indicated, nevertheless, by wo objects which were then fashionable in the bourgeois class: to wit, a aleidoscope and a lamp of ribbed tin. The female Thénardier was attending to he supper, which was roasting in front of a clear fire; her husband was rinking with his customers and talking politics.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.7#Besides political conversations which had for their principal subjects the panish war and M. le Duc d’Angoulême, strictly local parentheses, like the ollowing, were audible amid the uproar:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.8#“About Nanterre and Suresnes the vines have flourished greatly. When ten ieces were reckoned on there have been twelve. They have yielded a great deal f juice under the press.” “But the grapes cannot be ripe?” “In those parts the rapes should not be ripe; the wine turns oily as soon as spring comes.” “Then t is very thin wine?” “There are wines poorer even than these. The grapes must e gathered while green.” Etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.9#Or a miller would call out:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.10#“Are we responsible for what is in the sacks? We find in them a quantity f small seed which we cannot sift out, and which we are obliged to send through he mill-stones; there are tares, fennel, vetches, hempseed, fox-tail, and a ost of other weeds, not to mention pebbles, which abound in certain wheat, specially in Breton wheat. I am not fond of grinding Breton wheat, any more han long-sawyers like to saw beams with nails in them. You can judge of the bad ust that makes in grinding. And then people complain of the flour. They are in he wrong. The flour is no fault of ours.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.11#In a space between two windows a mower, who was seated at table with a anded proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow work to be performed n the spring, was saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.12#“It does no harm to have the grass wet. It cuts better. Dew is a good hing, sir. It makes no difference with that grass. Your grass is young and very ard to cut still. It’s terribly tender. It yields before the iron.” Etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.13#Cosette was in her usual place, seated on the cross-bar of the kitchen able near the chimney. She was in rags; her bare feet were thrust into wooden hoes, and by the firelight she was engaged in knitting woollen stockings estined for the young Thénardiers. A very young kitten was playing about among he chairs. Laughter and chatter were audible in the adjoining room, from two resh children’s voices: it was Éponine and Azelma.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.14#In the chimney-corner a cat-o’-nine-tails was hanging on a nail.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.1.15#At intervals the cry of a very young child, which was somewhere in the ouse, rang through the noise of the dram-shop. It was a little boy who had been orn to the Thénardiers during one of the preceding winters,—“she did not know hy,” she said, “the result of the cold,”—and who was a little more than three ears old. The mother had nursed him, but she did not love him. When the ersistent clamor of the brat became too annoying, “Your son is squalling,” hénardier would say; “do go and see what he wants.” “Bah!” the mother would eply, “he bothers me.” And the neglected child continued to shriek in the ark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.head#CHAPTER II—TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.1#So far in this book the Thénardiers have been viewed only in profile; the oment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple, and considering it nder all its aspects.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.2#Thénardier had just passed his fiftieth birthday; Madame Thénardier was pproaching her forties, which is equivalent to fifty in a woman; so that there xisted a balance of age between husband and wife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.3#Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of this Thénardier oman, ever since her first appearance,—tall, blond, red, fat, angular, square, normous, and agile; she belonged, as we have said, to the race of those olossal wild women, who contort themselves at fairs with paving-stones hanging rom their hair. She did everything about the house,—made the beds, did the ashing, the cooking, and everything else. Cosette was her only servant; a mouse n the service of an elephant. Everything trembled at the sound of her oice,—window panes, furniture, and people. Her big face, dotted with red lotches, presented the appearance of a skimmer. She had a beard. She was an deal market-porter dressed in woman’s clothes. She swore splendidly; she oasted of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist. Except for the omances which she had read, and which made the affected lady peep through the gress at times, in a very queer way, the idea would never have occurred to any ne to say of her, “That is a woman.” This Thénardier female was like the roduct of a wench engrafted on a fishwife. When one heard her speak, one said, That is a gendarme”; when one saw her drink, one said, “That is a carter”; when ne saw her handle Cosette, one said, “That is the hangman.” One of her teeth rojected when her face was in repose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.4#Thénardier was a small, thin, pale, angular, bony, feeble man, who had a ickly air and who was wonderfully healthy. His cunning began here; he smiled abitually, by way of precaution, and was almost polite to everybody, even to he beggar to whom he refused half a farthing. He had the glance of a pole-cat nd the bearing of a man of letters. He greatly resembled the portraits of the bbé Delille. His coquetry consisted in drinking with the carters. No one had ver succeeded in rendering him drunk. He smoked a big pipe. He wore a blouse, nd under his blouse an old black coat. He made pretensions to literature and to aterialism. There were certain names which he often pronounced to support hatever things he might be saying,—Voltaire, Raynal, Parny, and, singularly nough, Saint Augustine. He declared that he had “a system.” In addition, he was great swindler. A _filousophe_ [philosophe], a scientific thief. The species oes exist. It will be remembered that he pretended to have served in the army; e was in the habit of relating with exuberance, how, being a sergeant in the th or the 9th light something or other, at Waterloo, he had alone, and in the resence of a squadron of death-dealing hussars, covered with his body and saved rom death, in the midst of the grape-shot, “a general, who had been dangerously ounded.” Thence arose for his wall the flaring sign, and for his inn the name hich it bore in the neighborhood, of “the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo.” e was a liberal, a classic, and a Bonapartist. He had subscribed for the Champ ’Asile. It was said in the village that he had studied for the priesthood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.5#We believe that he had simply studied in Holland for an inn-keeper. This ascal of composite order was, in all probability, some Fleming from Lille, in landers, a Frenchman in Paris, a Belgian at Brussels, being comfortably astride f both frontiers. As for his prowess at Waterloo, the reader is already cquainted with that. It will be perceived that he exaggerated it a trifle. Ebb nd flow, wandering, adventure, was the leven of his existence; a tattered onscience entails a fragmentary life, and, apparently at the stormy epoch of une 18, 1815, Thénardier belonged to that variety of marauding sutlers of which e have spoken, beating about the country, selling to some, stealing from thers, and travelling like a family man, with wife and children, in a rickety art, in the rear of troops on the march, with an instinct for always attaching imself to the victorious army. This campaign ended, and having, as he said, some quibus,” he had come to Montfermeil and set up an inn there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.6#This _quibus_, composed of purses and watches, of gold rings and silver rosses, gathered in harvest-time in furrows sown with corpses, did not amount o a large total, and did not carry this sutler turned eating-house-keeper very ar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.7#Thénardier had that peculiar rectilinear something about his gestures hich, accompanied by an oath, recalls the barracks, and by a sign of the cross, he seminary. He was a fine talker. He allowed it to be thought that he was an ducated man. Nevertheless, the schoolmaster had noticed that he pronounced mproperly.12
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.8#He composed the travellers’ tariff card in a superior manner, but practised yes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it. Thénardier was cunning, reedy, slothful, and clever. He did not disdain his servants, which caused his ife to dispense with them. This giantess was jealous. It seemed to her that hat thin and yellow little man must be an object coveted by all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.9#Thénardier, who was, above all, an astute and well-balanced man, was a camp of a temperate sort. This is the worst species; hypocrisy enters into t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.10#It is not that Thénardier was not, on occasion, capable of wrath to quite he same degree as his wife; but this was very rare, and at such times, since he as enraged with the human race in general, as he bore within him a deep furnace f hatred. And since he was one of those people who are continually avenging heir wrongs, who accuse everything that passes before them of everything which as befallen them, and who are always ready to cast upon the first person who omes to hand, as a legitimate grievance, the sum total of the deceptions, the ankruptcies, and the calamities of their lives,—when all this leaven was tirred up in him and boiled forth from his mouth and eyes, he was terrible. Woe o the person who came under his wrath at such a time!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.11#In addition to his other qualities, Thénardier was attentive and enetrating, silent or talkative, according to circumstances, and always highly ntelligent. He had something of the look of sailors, who are accustomed to crew up their eyes to gaze through marine glasses. Thénardier was a tatesman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.12#Every newcomer who entered the tavern said, on catching sight of Madame hénardier, “There is the master of the house.” A mistake. She was not even the istress. The husband was both master and mistress. She worked; he created. He irected everything by a sort of invisible and constant magnetic action. A word as sufficient for him, sometimes a sign; the mastodon obeyed. Thénardier was a ort of special and sovereign being in Madame Thénardier’s eyes, though she did ot thoroughly realize it. She was possessed of virtues after her own kind; if he had ever had a disagreement as to any detail with “Monsieur hénardier,”—which was an inadmissible hypothesis, by the way,—she would not ave blamed her husband in public on any subject whatever. She would never have ommitted “before strangers” that mistake so often committed by women, and which s called in parliamentary language, “exposing the crown.” Although their oncord had only evil as its result, there was contemplation in Madame hénardier’s submission to her husband. That mountain of noise and of flesh oved under the little finger of that frail despot. Viewed on its dwarfed and rotesque side, this was that grand and universal thing, the adoration of mind y matter; for certain ugly features have a cause in the very depths of eternal eauty. There was an unknown quantity about Thénardier; hence the absolute mpire of the man over that woman. At certain moments she beheld him like a ighted candle; at others she felt him like a claw.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.13#This woman was a formidable creature who loved no one except her children, nd who did not fear any one except her husband. She was a mother because she as mammiferous. But her maternity stopped short with her daughters, and, as we hall see, did not extend to boys. The man had but one thought,—how to enrich imself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.14#He did not succeed in this. A theatre worthy of this great talent was acking. Thénardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil, if ruin is possible to ero; in Switzerland or in the Pyrenees this penniless scamp would have become a illionaire; but an inn-keeper must browse where fate has hitched him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.15#It will be understood that the word _inn-keeper_ is here employed in a estricted sense, and does not extend to an entire class.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.16#In this same year, 1823, Thénardier was burdened with about fifteen undred francs’ worth of petty debts, and this rendered him anxious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.17#Whatever may have been the obstinate injustice of destiny in this case, hénardier was one of those men who understand best, with the most profundity nd in the most modern fashion, that thing which is a virtue among barbarous eoples and an object of merchandise among civilized peoples,—hospitality. esides, he was an admirable poacher, and quoted for his skill in shooting. He ad a certain cold and tranquil laugh, which was particularly dangerous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.18#His theories as a landlord sometimes burst forth in lightning flashes. He ad professional aphorisms, which he inserted into his wife’s mind. “The duty of he inn-keeper,” he said to her one day, violently, and in a low voice, “is to ell to the first comer, stews, repose, light, fire, dirty sheets, a servant, ice, and a smile; to stop passers-by, to empty small purses, and to honestly ighten heavy ones; to shelter travelling families respectfully: to shave the an, to pluck the woman, to pick the child clean; to quote the window open, the indow shut, the chimney-corner, the armchair, the chair, the ottoman, the tool, the feather-bed, the mattress and the truss of straw; to know how much he shadow uses up the mirror, and to put a price on it; and, by five hundred housand devils, to make the traveller pay for everything, even for the flies hich his dog eats!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.19#This man and this woman were ruse and rage wedded—a hideous and terrible eam.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.20#While the husband pondered and combined, Madame Thénardier thought not of bsent creditors, took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow, and lived in a fit f anger, all in a minute.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.21#Such were these two beings. Cosette was between them, subjected to their ouble pressure, like a creature who is at the same time being ground up in a ill and pulled to pieces with pincers. The man and the woman each had a ifferent method: Cosette was overwhelmed with blows—this was the woman’s; she ent barefooted in winter—that was the man’s doing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.22#Cosette ran upstairs and down, washed, swept, rubbed, dusted, ran, luttered about, panted, moved heavy articles, and weak as she was, did the oarse work. There was no mercy for her; a fierce mistress and venomous master. he Thénardier hostelry was like a spider’s web, in which Cosette had been aught, and where she lay trembling. The ideal of oppression was realized by his sinister household. It was something like the fly serving the spiders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.23#The poor child passively held her peace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.2.24#What takes place within these souls when they have but just quitted God, ind themselves thus, at the very dawn of life, very small and in the midst of en all naked!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.head#CHAPTER III—MEN MUST HAVE WINE, AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.1#Four new travellers had arrived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.2#Cosette was meditating sadly; for, although she was only eight years old, he had already suffered so much that she reflected with the lugubrious air of n old woman. Her eye was black in consequence of a blow from Madame hénardier’s fist, which caused the latter to remark from time to time, “How gly she is with her fist-blow on her eye!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.3#Cosette was thinking that it was dark, very dark, that the pitchers and araffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must have been filled nd that there was no more water in the cistern.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.4#She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thénardier establishment rank much water. Thirsty people were never lacking there; but their thirst was f the sort which applies to the jug rather than to the pitcher. Any one who had sked for a glass of water among all those glasses of wine would have appeared a avage to all these men. But there came a moment when the child trembled; Madame hénardier raised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling on the stove, then eized a glass and briskly approached the cistern. She turned the faucet; the hild had raised her head and was following all the woman’s movements. A thin tream of water trickled from the faucet, and half filled the glass. “Well,” aid she, “there is no more water!” A momentary silence ensued. The child did ot breathe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.5#“Bah!” resumed Madame Thénardier, examining the half-filled glass, “this ill be enough.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.6#Cosette applied herself to her work once more, but for a quarter of an hour he felt her heart leaping in her bosom like a big snow-flake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.7#She counted the minutes that passed in this manner, and wished it were the ext morning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.8#From time to time one of the drinkers looked into the street, and xclaimed, “It’s as black as an oven!” or, “One must needs be a cat to go about he streets without a lantern at this hour!” And Cosette trembled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.9#All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered, and said n a harsh voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.10#“My horse has not been watered.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.11#“Yes, it has,” said Madame Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.12#“I tell you that it has not,” retorted the pedler.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.13#Cosette had emerged from under the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.14#“Oh, yes, sir!” said she, “the horse has had a drink; he drank out of a ucket, a whole bucketful, and it was I who took the water to him, and I spoke o him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.15#It was not true; Cosette lied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.16#“There’s a brat as big as my fist who tells lies as big as the house,” xclaimed the pedler. “I tell you that he has not been watered, you little jade! e has a way of blowing when he has had no water, which I know well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.17#Cosette persisted, and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish, and hich was hardly audible:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.18#“And he drank heartily.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.19#“Come,” said the pedler, in a rage, “this won’t do at all, let my horse be atered, and let that be the end of it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.20#Cosette crept under the table again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.21#“In truth, that is fair!” said Madame Thénardier, “if the beast has not een watered, it must be.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.22#Then glancing about her:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.23#“Well, now! Where’s that other beast?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.24#She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end of the able, almost under the drinkers’ feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.25#“Are you coming?” shrieked Madame Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.26#Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hidden herself. he Thénardier resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.27#“Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name, go and water that horse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.28#“But, Madame,” said Cosette, feebly, “there is no water.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.29#The Thénardier threw the street door wide open:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.30#“Well, go and get some, then!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.31#Cosette dropped her head, and went for an empty bucket which stood near he chimney-corner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.32#This bucket was bigger than she was, and the child could have set down in t at her ease.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.33#The Thénardier returned to her stove, and tasted what was in the stewpan, ith a wooden spoon, grumbling the while:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.34#“There’s plenty in the spring. There never was such a malicious creature s that. I think I should have done better to strain my onions.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.35#Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous, pepper, and hallots.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.36#“See here, Mam’selle Toad,” she added, “on your way back, you will get a ig loaf from the baker. Here’s a fifteen-sou piece.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.37#Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron; she took the coin ithout saying a word, and put it in that pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.38#Then she stood motionless, bucket in hand, the open door before her. She eemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.39#“Get along with you!” screamed the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.3.40#Cosette went out. The door closed behind her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.head#CHAPTER IV—ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.1#The line of open-air booths starting at the church, extended, as the reader ill remember, as far as the hostelry of the Thénardiers. These booths were all lluminated, because the citizens would soon pass on their way to the midnight ass, with candles burning in paper funnels, which, as the schoolmaster, then eated at the table at the Thénardiers’ observed, produced “a magical effect.” n compensation, not a star was visible in the sky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.2#The last of these stalls, established precisely opposite the Thénardiers’ oor, was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel, glass, and magnificent objects f tin. In the first row, and far forwards, the merchant had placed on a ackground of white napkins, an immense doll, nearly two feet high, who was ressed in a robe of pink crepe, with gold wheat-ears on her head, which had eal hair and enamel eyes. All that day, this marvel had been displayed to the onderment of all passers-by under ten years of age, without a mother being ound in Montfermeil sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to er child. Éponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it, and Cosette erself had ventured to cast a glance at it, on the sly, it is true.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.3#At the moment when Cosette emerged, bucket in hand, melancholy and overcome s she was, she could not refrain from lifting her eyes to that wonderful doll, owards _the lady_, as she called it. The poor child paused in amazement. She ad not yet beheld that doll close to. The whole shop seemed a palace to her: he doll was not a doll; it was a vision. It was joy, splendor, riches, appiness, which appeared in a sort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little eing so profoundly engulfed in gloomy and chilly misery. With the sad and nnocent sagacity of childhood, Cosette measured the abyss which separated her rom that doll. She said to herself that one must be a queen, or at least a rincess, to have a “thing” like that. She gazed at that beautiful pink dress, hat beautiful smooth hair, and she thought, “How happy that doll must be!” She ould not take her eyes from that fantastic stall. The more she looked, the more azzled she grew. She thought she was gazing at paradise. There were other dolls ehind the large one, which seemed to her to be fairies and genii. The merchant, ho was pacing back and forth in front of his shop, produced on her somewhat the ffect of being the Eternal Father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.4#In this adoration she forgot everything, even the errand with which she was harged.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.5#All at once the Thénardier’s coarse voice recalled her to reality: “What, ou silly jade! you have not gone? Wait! I’ll give it to you! I want to know hat you are doing there! Get along, you little monster!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.6#The Thénardier had cast a glance into the street, and had caught sight of osette in her ecstasy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.4.7#Cosette fled, dragging her pail, and taking the longest strides of which he was capable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.head#CHAPTER V—THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.1#As the Thénardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is near he church, it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of Chelles that osette was obliged to go for her water.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.2#She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant. So long as he was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church, the lighted talls illuminated the road; but soon the last light from the last stall anished. The poor child found herself in the dark. She plunged into it. Only, s a certain emotion overcame her, she made as much motion as possible with the andle of the bucket as she walked along. This made a noise which afforded her ompany.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.3#The further she went, the denser the darkness became. There was no one in he streets. However, she did encounter a woman, who turned around on seeing er, and stood still, muttering between her teeth: “Where can that child be oing? Is it a werewolf child?” Then the woman recognized Cosette. “Well,” said he, “it’s the Lark!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.4#In this manner Cosette traversed the labyrinth of tortuous and deserted treets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side of Chelles. So ong as she had the houses or even the walls only on both sides of her path, she roceeded with tolerable boldness. From time to time she caught the flicker of a andle through the crack of a shutter—this was light and life; there were people here, and it reassured her. But in proportion as she advanced, her pace lackened mechanically, as it were. When she had passed the corner of the last ouse, Cosette paused. It had been hard to advance further than the last stall; t became impossible to proceed further than the last house. She set her bucket n the ground, thrust her hand into her hair, and began slowly to scratch her ead,—a gesture peculiar to children when terrified and undecided what to do. It as no longer Montfermeil; it was the open fields. Black and desert space was efore her. She gazed in despair at that darkness, where there was no longer any ne, where there were beasts, where there were spectres, possibly. She took a ood look, and heard the beasts walking on the grass, and she distinctly saw pectres moving in the trees. Then she seized her bucket again; fear had lent er audacity. “Bah!” said she; “I will tell him that there was no more water!” nd she resolutely re-entered Montfermeil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.5#Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began to scratch er head again. Now it was the Thénardier who appeared to her, with her hideous, yena mouth, and wrath flashing in her eyes. The child cast a melancholy glance efore her and behind her. What was she to do? What was to become of her? Where as she to go? In front of her was the spectre of the Thénardier; behind her all he phantoms of the night and of the forest. It was before the Thénardier that he recoiled. She resumed her path to the spring, and began to run. She emerged rom the village, she entered the forest at a run, no longer looking at or istening to anything. She only paused in her course when her breath failed her; ut she did not halt in her advance. She went straight before her in esperation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.6#As she ran she felt like crying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.7#The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.8#She no longer thought, she no longer saw. The immensity of night was facing his tiny creature. On the one hand, all shadow; on the other, an atom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.9#It was only seven or eight minutes’ walk from the edge of the woods to the pring. Cosette knew the way, through having gone over it many times in aylight. Strange to say, she did not get lost. A remnant of instinct guided her aguely. But she did not turn her eyes either to right or to left, for fear of eeing things in the branches and in the brushwood. In this manner she reached he spring.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.10#It was a narrow, natural basin, hollowed out by the water in a clayey oil, about two feet deep, surrounded with moss and with those tall, crimped rasses which are called Henry IV.‘s frills, and paved with several large tones. A brook ran out of it, with a tranquil little noise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.11#Cosette did not take time to breathe. It was very dark, but she was in the abit of coming to this spring. She felt with her left hand in the dark for a oung oak which leaned over the spring, and which usually served to support her, ound one of its branches, clung to it, bent down, and plunged the bucket in the ater. She was in a state of such violent excitement that her strength was rebled. While thus bent over, she did not notice that the pocket of her apron ad emptied itself into the spring. The fifteen-sou piece fell into the water. osette neither saw nor heard it fall. She drew out the bucket nearly full, and et it on the grass.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.12#That done, she perceived that she was worn out with fatigue. She would ave liked to set out again at once, but the effort required to fill the bucket ad been such that she found it impossible to take a step. She was forced to sit own. She dropped on the grass, and remained crouching there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.13#She shut her eyes; then she opened them again, without knowing why, but ecause she could not do otherwise. The agitated water in the bucket beside her as describing circles which resembled tin serpents.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.14#Overhead the sky was covered with vast black clouds, which were like asses of smoke. The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend vaguely over the hild.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.15#Jupiter was setting in the depths.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.16#The child stared with bewildered eyes at this great star, with which she as unfamiliar, and which terrified her. The planet was, in fact, very near the orizon and was traversing a dense layer of mist which imparted to it a horrible uddy hue. The mist, gloomily empurpled, magnified the star. One would have alled it a luminous wound.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.17#A cold wind was blowing from the plain. The forest was dark, not a leaf as moving; there were none of the vague, fresh gleams of summertide. Great oughs uplifted themselves in frightful wise. Slender and misshapen bushes histled in the clearings. The tall grasses undulated like eels under the north ind. The nettles seemed to twist long arms furnished with claws in search of rey. Some bits of dry heather, tossed by the breeze, flew rapidly by, and had he air of fleeing in terror before something which was coming after. On all ides there were lugubrious stretches.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.18#The darkness was bewildering. Man requires light. Whoever buries himself n the opposite of day feels his heart contract. When the eye sees black, the eart sees trouble. In an eclipse in the night, in the sooty opacity, there is nxiety even for the stoutest of hearts. No one walks alone in the forest at ight without trembling. Shadows and trees—two formidable densities. A himerical reality appears in the indistinct depths. The inconceivable is utlined a few paces distant from you with a spectral clearness. One beholds loating, either in space or in one’s own brain, one knows not what vague and ntangible thing, like the dreams of sleeping flowers. There are fierce ttitudes on the horizon. One inhales the effluvia of the great black void. One s afraid to glance behind him, yet desirous of doing so. The cavities of night, hings grown haggard, taciturn profiles which vanish when one advances, obscure ishevelments, irritated tufts, livid pools, the lugubrious reflected in the unereal, the sepulchral immensity of silence, unknown but possible beings, endings of mysterious branches, alarming torsos of trees, long handfuls of uivering plants,—against all this one has no protection. There is no hardihood hich does not shudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish. One is onscious of something hideous, as though one’s soul were becoming amalgamated ith the darkness. This penetration of the shadows is indescribably sinister in he case of a child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.19#Forests are apocalypses, and the beating of the wings of a tiny soul roduces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.20#Without understanding her sensations, Cosette was conscious that she was eized upon by that black enormity of nature; it was no longer terror alone hich was gaining possession of her; it was something more terrible even than error; she shivered. There are no words to express the strangeness of that hiver which chilled her to the very bottom of her heart; her eye grew wild; she hought she felt that she should not be able to refrain from returning there at he same hour on the morrow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.21#Then, by a sort of instinct, she began to count aloud, one, two, three, our, and so on up to ten, in order to escape from that singular state which she id not understand, but which terrified her, and, when she had finished, she egan again; this restored her to a true perception of the things about her. Her ands, which she had wet in drawing the water, felt cold; she rose; her terror, natural and unconquerable terror, had returned: she had but one thought ow,—to flee at full speed through the forest, across the fields to the houses, o the windows, to the lighted candles. Her glance fell upon the water which tood before her; such was the fright which the Thénardier inspired in her, that he dared not flee without that bucket of water: she seized the handle with both ands; she could hardly lift the pail.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.22#In this manner she advanced a dozen paces, but the bucket was full; it was eavy; she was forced to set it on the ground once more. She took breath for an nstant, then lifted the handle of the bucket again, and resumed her march, roceeding a little further this time, but again she was obliged to pause. After ome seconds of repose she set out again. She walked bent forward, with drooping ead, like an old woman; the weight of the bucket strained and stiffened her hin arms. The iron handle completed the benumbing and freezing of her wet and iny hands; she was forced to halt from time to time, and each time that she did o, the cold water which splashed from the pail fell on her bare legs. This took lace in the depths of a forest, at night, in winter, far from all human sight; he was a child of eight: no one but God saw that sad thing at the moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.23#And her mother, no doubt, alas!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.24#For there are things that make the dead open their eyes in their raves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.25#She panted with a sort of painful rattle; sobs contracted her throat, but he dared not weep, so afraid was she of the Thénardier, even at a distance: it as her custom to imagine the Thénardier always present.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.26#However, she could not make much headway in that manner, and she went on ery slowly. In spite of diminishing the length of her stops, and of walking as ong as possible between them, she reflected with anguish that it would take her ore than an hour to return to Montfermeil in this manner, and that the hénardier would beat her. This anguish was mingled with her terror at being lone in the woods at night; she was worn out with fatigue, and had not yet merged from the forest. On arriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she as acquainted, made a last halt, longer than the rest, in order that she might et well rested; then she summoned up all her strength, picked up her bucket gain, and courageously resumed her march, but the poor little desperate reature could not refrain from crying, “O my God! my God!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.27#At that moment she suddenly became conscious that her bucket no longer eighed anything at all: a hand, which seemed to her enormous, had just seized he handle, and lifted it vigorously. She raised her head. A large black form, traight and erect, was walking beside her through the darkness; it was a man ho had come up behind her, and whose approach she had not heard. This man, ithout uttering a word, had seized the handle of the bucket which she was arrying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.28#There are instincts for all the encounters of life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.5.29#The child was not afraid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.head#CHAPTER VI—WHICH POSSIBLY PROVES BOULATRUELLE’S INTELLIGENCE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.1#On the afternoon of that same Christmas Day, 1823, a man had walked for ather a long time in the most deserted part of the Boulevard de l’Hôpital in aris. This man had the air of a person who is seeking lodgings, and he seemed o halt, by preference, at the most modest houses on that dilapidated border of he faubourg Saint-Marceau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.2#We shall see further on that this man had, in fact, hired a chamber in that solated quarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.3#This man, in his attire, as in all his person, realized the type of what ay be called the well-bred mendicant,—extreme wretchedness combined with xtreme cleanliness. This is a very rare mixture which inspires intelligent earts with that double respect which one feels for the man who is very poor, nd for the man who is very worthy. He wore a very old and very well brushed ound hat; a coarse coat, worn perfectly threadbare, of an ochre yellow, a color hat was not in the least eccentric at that epoch; a large waistcoat with ockets of a venerable cut; black breeches, worn gray at the knee, stockings of lack worsted; and thick shoes with copper buckles. He would have been ronounced a preceptor in some good family, returned from the emigration. He ould have been taken for more than sixty years of age, from his perfectly white air, his wrinkled brow, his livid lips, and his countenance, where everything reathed depression and weariness of life. Judging from his firm tread, from the ingular vigor which stamped all his movements, he would have hardly been hought fifty. The wrinkles on his brow were well placed, and would have isposed in his favor any one who observed him attentively. His lip contracted ith a strange fold which seemed severe, and which was humble. There was in the epth of his glance an indescribable melancholy serenity. In his left hand he arried a little bundle tied up in a handkerchief; in his right he leaned on a ort of a cudgel, cut from some hedge. This stick had been carefully trimmed, nd had an air that was not too threatening; the most had been made of its nots, and it had received a coral-like head, made from red wax: it was a udgel, and it seemed to be a cane.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.4#There are but few passers-by on that boulevard, particularly in the winter. he man seemed to avoid them rather than to seek them, but this without any ffectation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.5#At that epoch, King Louis XVIII. went nearly every day to Choisy-le-Roi: it as one of his favorite excursions. Towards two o’clock, almost invariably, the oyal carriage and cavalcade was seen to pass at full speed along the Boulevard e l’Hôpital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.6#This served in lieu of a watch or clock to the poor women of the quarter ho said, “It is two o’clock; there he is returning to the Tuileries.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.7#And some rushed forward, and others drew up in line, for a passing king lways creates a tumult; besides, the appearance and disappearance of Louis VIII. produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris. It was rapid but ajestic. This impotent king had a taste for a fast gallop; as he was not able o walk, he wished to run: that cripple would gladly have had himself drawn by he lightning. He passed, pacific and severe, in the midst of naked swords. His assive couch, all covered with gilding, with great branches of lilies painted n the panels, thundered noisily along. There was hardly time to cast a glance pon it. In the rear angle on the right there was visible on tufted cushions of hite satin a large, firm, and ruddy face, a brow freshly powdered _à l’oiseau oyal_, a proud, hard, crafty eye, the smile of an educated man, two great paulets with bullion fringe floating over a bourgeois coat, the Golden Fleece, he cross of Saint Louis, the cross of the Legion of Honor, the silver plaque of he Saint-Esprit, a huge belly, and a wide blue ribbon: it was the king. Outside f Paris, he held his hat decked with white ostrich plumes on his knees nwrapped in high English gaiters; when he re-entered the city, he put on his at and saluted rarely; he stared coldly at the people, and they returned it in ind. When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter, the hole success which he produced is contained in this remark of an inhabitant of he faubourg to his comrade, “That big fellow yonder is the government.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.8#This infallible passage of the king at the same hour was, therefore, the aily event of the Boulevard de l’Hôpital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.9#The promenader in the yellow coat evidently did not belong in the quarter, nd probably did not belong in Paris, for he was ignorant as to this detail. hen, at two o’clock, the royal carriage, surrounded by a squadron of the ody-guard all covered with silver lace, debouched on the boulevard, after aving made the turn of the Salpêtrière, he appeared surprised and almost larmed. There was no one but himself in this cross-lane. He drew up hastily ehind the corner of the wall of an enclosure, though this did not prevent M. le uc de Havré from spying him out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.10#M. le Duc de Havré, as captain of the guard on duty that day, was seated n the carriage, opposite the king. He said to his Majesty, “Yonder is an vil-looking man.” Members of the police, who were clearing the king’s route, ook equal note of him: one of them received an order to follow him. But the man lunged into the deserted little streets of the faubourg, and as twilight was eginning to fall, the agent lost trace of him, as is stated in a report ddressed that same evening to M. le Comte d’Anglès, Minister of State, Prefect f Police.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.11#When the man in the yellow coat had thrown the agent off his track, he edoubled his pace, not without turning round many a time to assure himself that e was not being followed. At a quarter-past four, that is to say, when night as fully come, he passed in front of the theatre of the Porte Saint-Martin, here _The Two Convicts_ was being played that day. This poster, illuminated by he theatre lanterns, struck him; for, although he was walking rapidly, he alted to read it. An instant later he was in the blind alley of La Planchette, nd he entered the _Plat d’Etain_ [the Pewter Platter], where the office of the oach for Lagny was then situated. This coach set out at half-past four. The orses were harnessed, and the travellers, summoned by the coachman, were astily climbing the lofty iron ladder of the vehicle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.12#The man inquired:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.13#“Have you a place?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.14#“Only one—beside me on the box,” said the coachman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.15#“I will take it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.16#“Climb up.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.17#Nevertheless, before setting out, the coachman cast a glance at the raveller’s shabby dress, at the diminutive size of his bundle, and made him pay is fare.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.18#“Are you going as far as Lagny?” demanded the coachman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.19#“Yes,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.20#The traveller paid to Lagny.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.21#They started. When they had passed the barrier, the coachman tried to nter into conversation, but the traveller only replied in monosyllables. The oachman took to whistling and swearing at his horses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.22#The coachman wrapped himself up in his cloak. It was cold. The man did not ppear to be thinking of that. Thus they passed Gournay and euilly-sur-Marne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.23#Towards six o’clock in the evening they reached Chelles. The coachman drew p in front of the carters’ inn installed in the ancient buildings of the Royal bbey, to give his horses a breathing spell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.24#“I get down here,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.25#He took his bundle and his cudgel and jumped down from the vehicle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.26#An instant later he had disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.27#He did not enter the inn.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.28#When the coach set out for Lagny a few minutes later, it did not encounter im in the principal street of Chelles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.29#The coachman turned to the inside travellers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.30#“There,” said he, “is a man who does not belong here, for I do not know im. He had not the air of owning a sou, but he does not consider money; he pays o Lagny, and he goes only as far as Chelles. It is night; all the houses are hut; he does not enter the inn, and he is not to be found. So he has dived hrough the earth.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.31#The man had not plunged into the earth, but he had gone with great strides hrough the dark, down the principal street of Chelles, then he had turned to he right before reaching the church, into the crossroad leading to Montfermeil, ike a person who was acquainted with the country and had been there before.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.32#He followed this road rapidly. At the spot where it is intersected by the ncient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny, he heard people oming. He concealed himself precipitately in a ditch, and there waited until he passers-by were at a distance. The precaution was nearly superfluous, owever; for, as we have already said, it was a very dark December night. Not ore than two or three stars were visible in the sky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.33#It is at this point that the ascent of the hill begins. The man did not eturn to the road to Montfermeil; he struck across the fields to the right, and ntered the forest with long strides.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.34#Once in the forest he slackened his pace, and began a careful examination f all the trees, advancing, step by step, as though seeking and following a ysterious road known to himself alone. There came a moment when he appeared to ose himself, and he paused in indecision. At last he arrived, by dint of eeling his way inch by inch, at a clearing where there was a great heap of hitish stones. He stepped up briskly to these stones, and examined them ttentively through the mists of night, as though he were passing them in eview. A large tree, covered with those excrescences which are the warts of egetation, stood a few paces distant from the pile of stones. He went up to his tree and passed his hand over the bark of the trunk, as though seeking to ecognize and count all the warts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.35#Opposite this tree, which was an ash, there was a chestnut-tree, suffering rom a peeling of the bark, to which a band of zinc had been nailed by way of ressing. He raised himself on tiptoe and touched this band of zinc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.36#Then he trod about for awhile on the ground comprised in the space between he tree and the heap of stones, like a person who is trying to assure himself hat the soil has not recently been disturbed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.37#That done, he took his bearings, and resumed his march through the orest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.38#It was the man who had just met Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.6.39#As he walked through the thicket in the direction of Montfermeil, he had spied that tiny shadow moving with a groan, depositing a burden on the ground, hen taking it up and setting out again. He drew near, and perceived that it was very young child, laden with an enormous bucket of water. Then he approached he child, and silently grasped the handle of the bucket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.head#CHAPTER VII—COSETTE SIDE BY SIDE WITH THE STRANGER IN THE DARK
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.1#Cosette, as we have said, was not frightened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.2#The man accosted her. He spoke in a voice that was grave and almost ass.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.3#“My child, what you are carrying is very heavy for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.4#Cosette raised her head and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.5#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.6#“Give it to me,” said the man; “I will carry it for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.7#Cosette let go of the bucket-handle. The man walked along beside her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.8#“It really is very heavy,” he muttered between his teeth. Then he dded:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.9#“How old are you, little one?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.10#“Eight, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.11#“And have you come from far like this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.12#“From the spring in the forest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.13#“Are you going far?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.14#“A good quarter of an hour’s walk from here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.15#The man said nothing for a moment; then he remarked abruptly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.16#“So you have no mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.17#“I don’t know,” answered the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.18#Before the man had time to speak again, she added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.19#“I don’t think so. Other people have mothers. I have none.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.20#And after a silence she went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.21#“I think that I never had any.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.22#The man halted; he set the bucket on the ground, bent down and placed both ands on the child’s shoulders, making an effort to look at her and to see her ace in the dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.23#Cosette’s thin and sickly face was vaguely outlined by the livid light in he sky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.24#“What is your name?” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.25#“Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.26#The man seemed to have received an electric shock. He looked at her once ore; then he removed his hands from Cosette’s shoulders, seized the bucket, and et out again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.27#After a moment he inquired:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.28#“Where do you live, little one?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.29#“At Montfermeil, if you know where that is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.30#“That is where we are going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.31#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.32#He paused; then began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.33#“Who sent you at such an hour to get water in the forest?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.34#“It was Madame Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.35#The man resumed, in a voice which he strove to render indifferent, but in hich there was, nevertheless, a singular tremor:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.36#“What does your Madame Thénardier do?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.37#“She is my mistress,” said the child. “She keeps the inn.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.38#“The inn?” said the man. “Well, I am going to lodge there to-night. Show e the way.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.39#“We are on the way there,” said the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.40#The man walked tolerably fast. Cosette followed him without difficulty. he no longer felt any fatigue. From time to time she raised her eyes towards he man, with a sort of tranquillity and an indescribable confidence. She had ever been taught to turn to Providence and to pray; nevertheless, she felt ithin her something which resembled hope and joy, and which mounted towards eaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.41#Several minutes elapsed. The man resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.42#“Is there no servant in Madame Thénardier’s house?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.43#“No, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.44#“Are you alone there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.45#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.46#Another pause ensued. Cosette lifted up her voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.47#“That is to say, there are two little girls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.48#“What little girls?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.49#“Ponine and Zelma.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.50#This was the way the child simplified the romantic names so dear to the emale Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.51#“Who are Ponine and Zelma?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.52#“They are Madame Thénardier’s young ladies; her daughters, as you would ay.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.53#“And what do those girls do?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.54#“Oh!” said the child, “they have beautiful dolls; things with gold in hem, all full of affairs. They play; they amuse themselves.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.55#“All day long?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.56#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.57#“And you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.58#“I? I work.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.59#“All day long?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.60#The child raised her great eyes, in which hung a tear, which was not isible because of the darkness, and replied gently:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.61#“Yes, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.62#After an interval of silence she went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.63#“Sometimes, when I have finished my work and they let me, I amuse myself, oo.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.64#“How do you amuse yourself?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.65#“In the best way I can. They let me alone; but I have not many playthings. onine and Zelma will not let me play with their dolls. I have only a little ead sword, no longer than that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.66#The child held up her tiny finger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.67#“And it will not cut?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.68#“Yes, sir,” said the child; “it cuts salad and the heads of flies.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.69#They reached the village. Cosette guided the stranger through the streets. hey passed the bakeshop, but Cosette did not think of the bread which she had een ordered to fetch. The man had ceased to ply her with questions, and now reserved a gloomy silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.70#When they had left the church behind them, the man, on perceiving all the pen-air booths, asked Cosette:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.71#“So there is a fair going on here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.72#“No, sir; it is Christmas.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.73#As they approached the tavern, Cosette timidly touched his arm:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.74#“Monsieur?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.75#“What, my child?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.76#“We are quite near the house.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.77#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.78#“Will you let me take my bucket now?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.79#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.80#“If Madame sees that some one has carried it for me, she will beat e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.7.81#The man handed her the bucket. An instant later they were at the tavern oor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE UNPLEASANTNESS OF RECEIVING INTO ONE’S HOUSE A POOR AN WHO MAY BE A RICH MAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.1#Cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the big doll, hich was still displayed at the toy-merchant’s; then she knocked. The door pened. The Thénardier appeared with a candle in her hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.2#“Ah! so it’s you, you little wretch! good mercy, but you’ve taken your ime! The hussy has been amusing herself!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.3#“Madame,” said Cosette, trembling all over, “here’s a gentleman who wants a odging.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.4#The Thénardier speedily replaced her gruff air by her amiable grimace, a hange of aspect common to tavern-keepers, and eagerly sought the newcomer with er eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.5#“This is the gentleman?” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.6#“Yes, Madame,” replied the man, raising his hand to his hat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.7#Wealthy travellers are not so polite. This gesture, and an inspection of he stranger’s costume and baggage, which the Thénardier passed in review with ne glance, caused the amiable grimace to vanish, and the gruff mien to eappear. She resumed dryly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.8#“Enter, my good man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.9#The “good man” entered. The Thénardier cast a second glance at him, paid articular attention to his frock-coat, which was absolutely threadbare, and to is hat, which was a little battered, and, tossing her head, wrinkling her nose, nd screwing up her eyes, she consulted her husband, who was still drinking with he carters. The husband replied by that imperceptible movement of the orefinger, which, backed up by an inflation of the lips, signifies in such ases: A regular beggar. Thereupon, the Thénardier exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.10#“Ah! see here, my good man; I am very sorry, but I have no room left.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.11#“Put me where you like,” said the man; “in the attic, in the stable. I ill pay as though I occupied a room.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.12#“Forty sous.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.13#“Forty sous; agreed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.14#“Very well, then!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.15#“Forty sous!” said a carter, in a low tone, to the Thénardier woman; “why, he charge is only twenty sous!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.16#“It is forty in his case,” retorted the Thénardier, in the same tone. “I on’t lodge poor folks for less.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.17#“That’s true,” added her husband, gently; “it ruins a house to have such eople in it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.18#In the meantime, the man, laying his bundle and his cudgel on a bench, had eated himself at a table, on which Cosette made haste to place a bottle of wine nd a glass. The merchant who had demanded the bucket of water took it to his orse himself. Cosette resumed her place under the kitchen table, and her nitting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.19#The man, who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had poured ut for himself, observed the child with peculiar attention.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.20#Cosette was ugly. If she had been happy, she might have been pretty. We ave already given a sketch of that sombre little figure. Cosette was thin and ale; she was nearly eight years old, but she seemed to be hardly six. Her large yes, sunken in a sort of shadow, were almost put out with weeping. The corners f her mouth had that curve of habitual anguish which is seen in condemned ersons and desperately sick people. Her hands were, as her mother had divined, ruined with chilblains.” The fire which illuminated her at that moment brought nto relief all the angles of her bones, and rendered her thinness frightfully pparent. As she was always shivering, she had acquired the habit of pressing er knees one against the other. Her entire clothing was but a rag which would ave inspired pity in summer, and which inspired horror in winter. All she had n was hole-ridden linen, not a scrap of woollen. Her skin was visible here and here and everywhere black and blue spots could be descried, which marked the laces where the Thénardier woman had touched her. Her naked legs were thin and ed. The hollows in her neck were enough to make one weep. This child’s whole erson, her mien, her attitude, the sound of her voice, the intervals which she llowed to elapse between one word and the next, her glance, her silence, her lightest gesture, expressed and betrayed one sole idea,—fear.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.21#Fear was diffused all over her; she was covered with it, so to speak; fear rew her elbows close to her hips, withdrew her heels under her petticoat, made er occupy as little space as possible, allowed her only the breath that was bsolutely necessary, and had become what might be called the habit of her body, dmitting of no possible variation except an increase. In the depths of her eyes here was an astonished nook where terror lurked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.22#Her fear was such, that on her arrival, wet as she was, Cosette did not are to approach the fire and dry herself, but sat silently down to her work gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.23#The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was habitually o gloomy, and at times so tragic, that it seemed at certain moments as though he were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a demon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.24#As we have stated, she had never known what it is to pray; she had never et foot in a church. “Have I the time?” said the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.25#The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.26#All at once, the Thénardier exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.27#“By the way, where’s that bread?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.28#Cosette, according to her custom whenever the Thénardier uplifted her oice, emerged with great haste from beneath the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.29#She had completely forgotten the bread. She had recourse to the expedient f children who live in a constant state of fear. She lied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.30#“Madame, the baker’s shop was shut.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.31#“You should have knocked.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.32#“I did knock, Madame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.33#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.34#“He did not open the door.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.35#“I’ll find out to-morrow whether that is true,” said the Thénardier; “and f you are telling me a lie, I’ll lead you a pretty dance. In the meantime, give e back my fifteen-sou piece.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.36#Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron, and turned green. he fifteen-sou piece was not there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.37#“Ah, come now,” said Madame Thénardier, “did you hear me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.38#Cosette turned her pocket inside out; there was nothing in it. What could ave become of that money? The unhappy little creature could not find a word to ay. She was petrified.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.39#“Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece?” screamed the Thénardier, hoarsely, or do you want to rob me of it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.40#At the same time, she stretched out her arm towards the cat-o’-nine-tails hich hung on a nail in the chimney-corner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.41#This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength to hriek:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.42#“Mercy, Madame, Madame! I will not do so any more!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.43#The Thénardier took down the whip.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.44#In the meantime, the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in the fob f his waistcoat, without any one having noticed his movements. Besides, the ther travellers were drinking or playing cards, and were not paying attention o anything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.45#Cosette contracted herself into a ball, with anguish, within the angle of he chimney, endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nude limbs. The hénardier raised her arm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.46#“Pardon me, Madame,” said the man, “but just now I caught sight of omething which had fallen from this little one’s apron pocket, and rolled side. Perhaps this is it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.47#At the same time he bent down and seemed to be searching on the floor for moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.48#“Exactly; here it is,” he went on, straightening himself up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.49#And he held out a silver coin to the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.50#“Yes, that’s it,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.51#It was not it, for it was a twenty-sou piece; but the Thénardier found it o her advantage. She put the coin in her pocket, and confined herself to asting a fierce glance at the child, accompanied with the remark, “Don’t let his ever happen again!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.52#Cosette returned to what the Thénardier called “her kennel,” and her large yes, which were riveted on the traveller, began to take on an expression such s they had never worn before. Thus far it was only an innocent amazement, but a ort of stupefied confidence was mingled with it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.53#“By the way, would you like some supper?” the Thénardier inquired of the raveller.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.54#He made no reply. He appeared to be absorbed in thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.55#“What sort of a man is that?” she muttered between her teeth. “He’s some rightfully poor wretch. He hasn’t a sou to pay for a supper. Will he even pay e for his lodging? It’s very lucky, all the same, that it did not occur to him o steal the money that was on the floor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.56#In the meantime, a door had opened, and Éponine and Azelma entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.57#They were two really pretty little girls, more bourgeois than peasant in ooks, and very charming; the one with shining chestnut tresses, the other with ong black braids hanging down her back, both vivacious, neat, plump, rosy, and ealthy, and a delight to the eye. They were warmly clad, but with so much aternal art that the thickness of the stuffs did not detract from the coquetry f arrangement. There was a hint of winter, though the springtime was not wholly ffaced. Light emanated from these two little beings. Besides this, they were on he throne. In their toilettes, in their gayety, in the noise which they made, here was sovereignty. When they entered, the Thénardier said to them in a rumbling tone which was full of adoration, “Ah! there you are, you hildren!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.58#Then drawing them, one after the other to her knees, smoothing their hair, ying their ribbons afresh, and then releasing them with that gentle manner of haking off which is peculiar to mothers, she exclaimed, “What frights they re!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.59#They went and seated themselves in the chimney-corner. They had a doll, hich they turned over and over on their knees with all sorts of joyous chatter. rom time to time Cosette raised her eyes from her knitting, and watched their lay with a melancholy air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.60#Éponine and Azelma did not look at Cosette. She was the same as a dog to hem. These three little girls did not yet reckon up four and twenty years etween them, but they already represented the whole society of man; envy on the ne side, disdain on the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.61#The doll of the Thénardier sisters was very much faded, very old, and much roken; but it seemed nonetheless admirable to Cosette, who had never had a doll n her life, _a real doll_, to make use of the expression which all children ill understand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.62#All at once, the Thénardier, who had been going back and forth in the oom, perceived that Cosette’s mind was distracted, and that, instead of orking, she was paying attention to the little ones at their play.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.63#“Ah! I’ve caught you at it!” she cried. “So that’s the way you work! I’ll ake you work to the tune of the whip; that I will.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.64#The stranger turned to the Thénardier, without quitting his chair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.65#“Bah, Madame,” he said, with an almost timid air, “let her play!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.66#Such a wish expressed by a traveller who had eaten a slice of mutton and ad drunk a couple of bottles of wine with his supper, and who had not the air f being frightfully poor, would have been equivalent to an order. But that a an with such a hat should permit himself such a desire, and that a man with uch a coat should permit himself to have a will, was something which Madame hénardier did not intend to tolerate. She retorted with acrimony:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.67#“She must work, since she eats. I don’t feed her to do nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.68#“What is she making?” went on the stranger, in a gentle voice which ontrasted strangely with his beggarly garments and his porter’s shoulders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.69#The Thénardier deigned to reply:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.70#“Stockings, if you please. Stockings for my little girls, who have none, o to speak, and who are absolutely barefoot just now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.71#The man looked at Cosette’s poor little red feet, and continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.72#“When will she have finished this pair of stockings?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.73#“She has at least three or four good days’ work on them still, the lazy reature!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.74#“And how much will that pair of stockings be worth when she has finished hem?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.75#The Thénardier cast a glance of disdain on him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.76#“Thirty sous at least.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.77#“Will you sell them for five francs?” went on the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.78#“Good heavens!” exclaimed a carter who was listening, with a loud laugh; five francs! the deuce, I should think so! five balls!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.79#Thénardier thought it time to strike in.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.80#“Yes, sir; if such is your fancy, you will be allowed to have that pair of tockings for five francs. We can refuse nothing to travellers.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.81#“You must pay on the spot,” said the Thénardier, in her curt and eremptory fashion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.82#“I will buy that pair of stockings,” replied the man, “and,” he added, rawing a five-franc piece from his pocket, and laying it on the table, “I will ay for them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.83#Then he turned to Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.84#“Now I own your work; play, my child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.85#The carter was so much touched by the five-franc piece, that he abandoned is glass and hastened up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.86#“But it’s true!” he cried, examining it. “A real hind wheel! and not ounterfeit!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.87#Thénardier approached and silently put the coin in his pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.88#The Thénardier had no reply to make. She bit her lips, and her face ssumed an expression of hatred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.89#In the meantime, Cosette was trembling. She ventured to ask:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.90#“Is it true, Madame? May I play?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.91#“Play!” said the Thénardier, in a terrible voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.92#“Thanks, Madame,” said Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.93#And while her mouth thanked the Thénardier, her whole little soul thanked he traveller.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.94#Thénardier had resumed his drinking; his wife whispered in his ear:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.95#“Who can this yellow man be?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.96#“I have seen millionaires with coats like that,” replied Thénardier, in a overeign manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.97#Cosette had dropped her knitting, but had not left her seat. Cosette lways moved as little as possible. She picked up some old rags and her little ead sword from a box behind her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.98#Éponine and Azelma paid no attention to what was going on. They had just xecuted a very important operation; they had just got hold of the cat. They had hrown their doll on the ground, and Éponine, who was the elder, was swathing he little cat, in spite of its mewing and its contortions, in a quantity of lothes and red and blue scraps. While performing this serious and difficult ork she was saying to her sister in that sweet and adorable language of hildren, whose grace, like the splendor of the butterfly’s wing, vanishes when ne essays to fix it fast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.99#“You see, sister, this doll is more amusing than the other. She twists, he cries, she is warm. See, sister, let us play with her. She shall be my ittle girl. I will be a lady. I will come to see you, and you shall look at er. Gradually, you will perceive her whiskers, and that will surprise you. And hen you will see her ears, and then you will see her tail and it will amaze ou. And you will say to me, ‘Ah! Mon Dieu!’ and I will say to you: ‘Yes, adame, it is my little girl. Little girls are made like that just at resent.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.100#Azelma listened admiringly to Éponine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.101#In the meantime, the drinkers had begun to sing an obscene song, and to augh at it until the ceiling shook. Thénardier accompanied and encouraged hem.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.102#As birds make nests out of everything, so children make a doll out of nything which comes to hand. While Éponine and Azelma were bundling up the cat, osette, on her side, had dressed up her sword. That done, she laid it in her rms, and sang to it softly, to lull it to sleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.103#The doll is one of the most imperious needs and, at the same time, one of he most charming instincts of feminine childhood. To care for, to clothe, to eck, to dress, to undress, to redress, to teach, scold a little, to rock, to andle, to lull to sleep, to imagine that something is some one,—therein lies he whole woman’s future. While dreaming and chattering, making tiny outfits, nd baby clothes, while sewing little gowns, and corsages and bodices, the child rows into a young girl, the young girl into a big girl, the big girl into a oman. The first child is the continuation of the last doll.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.104#A little girl without a doll is almost as unhappy, and quite as mpossible, as a woman without children.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.105#So Cosette had made herself a doll out of the sword.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.106#Madame Thénardier approached _the yellow man_; “My husband is right,” she hought; “perhaps it is M. Laffitte; there are such queer rich men!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.107#She came and set her elbows on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.108#“Monsieur,” said she. At this word, _Monsieur_, the man turned; up to hat time, the Thénardier had addressed him only as _brave homme_ or bonhomme_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.109#“You see, sir,” she pursued, assuming a sweetish air that was even more epulsive to behold than her fierce mien, “I am willing that the child should lay; I do not oppose it, but it is good for once, because you are generous. You ee, she has nothing; she must needs work.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.110#“Then this child is not yours?” demanded the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.111#“Oh! mon Dieu! no, sir! she is a little beggar whom we have taken in hrough charity; a sort of imbecile child. She must have water on the brain; she as a large head, as you see. We do what we can for her, for we are not rich; we ave written in vain to her native place, and have received no reply these six onths. It must be that her mother is dead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.112#“Ah!” said the man, and fell into his reverie once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.113#“Her mother didn’t amount to much,” added the Thénardier; “she abandoned er child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.114#During the whole of this conversation Cosette, as though warned by some nstinct that she was under discussion, had not taken her eyes from the hénardier’s face; she listened vaguely; she caught a few words here and here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.115#Meanwhile, the drinkers, all three-quarters intoxicated, were repeating heir unclean refrain with redoubled gayety; it was a highly spiced and wanton ong, in which the Virgin and the infant Jesus were introduced. The Thénardier ent off to take part in the shouts of laughter. Cosette, from her post under he table, gazed at the fire, which was reflected from her fixed eyes. She had egun to rock the sort of baby which she had made, and, as she rocked it, she ang in a low voice, “My mother is dead! my mother is dead! my mother is ead!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.116#On being urged afresh by the hostess, the yellow man, “the millionaire,” onsented at last to take supper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.117#“What does Monsieur wish?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.118#“Bread and cheese,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.119#“Decidedly, he is a beggar” thought Madame Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.120#The drunken men were still singing their song, and the child under the able was singing hers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.121#All at once, Cosette paused; she had just turned round and caught sight f the little Thénardiers’ doll, which they had abandoned for the cat and had eft on the floor a few paces from the kitchen table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.122#Then she dropped the swaddled sword, which only half met her needs, and ast her eyes slowly round the room. Madame Thénardier was whispering to her usband and counting over some money; Ponine and Zelma were playing with the at; the travellers were eating or drinking or singing; not a glance was fixed n her. She had not a moment to lose; she crept out from under the table on her ands and knees, made sure once more that no one was watching her; then she lipped quickly up to the doll and seized it. An instant later she was in her lace again, seated motionless, and only turned so as to cast a shadow on the oll which she held in her arms. The happiness of playing with a doll was so are for her that it contained all the violence of voluptuousness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.123#No one had seen her, except the traveller, who was slowly devouring his eagre supper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.124#This joy lasted about a quarter of an hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.125#But with all the precautions that Cosette had taken she did not perceive hat one of the doll’s legs stuck out and that the fire on the hearth lighted it p very vividly. That pink and shining foot, projecting from the shadow, uddenly struck the eye of Azelma, who said to Éponine, “Look! sister.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.126#The two little girls paused in stupefaction; Cosette had dared to take heir doll!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.127#Éponine rose, and, without releasing the cat, she ran to her mother, and egan to tug at her skirt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.128#“Let me alone!” said her mother; “what do you want?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.129#“Mother,” said the child, “look there!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.130#And she pointed to Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.131#Cosette, absorbed in the ecstasies of possession, no longer saw or heard nything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.132#Madame Thénardier’s countenance assumed that peculiar expression which is omposed of the terrible mingled with the trifles of life, and which has caused his style of woman to be named _Megaeras_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.133#On this occasion, wounded pride exasperated her wrath still further. osette had overstepped all bounds; Cosette had laid violent hands on the doll elonging to “these young ladies.” A czarina who should see a muzhik trying on er imperial son’s blue ribbon would wear no other face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.134#She shrieked in a voice rendered hoarse with indignation:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.135#“Cosette!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.136#Cosette started as though the earth had trembled beneath her; she turned ound.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.137#“Cosette!” repeated the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.138#Cosette took the doll and laid it gently on the floor with a sort of eneration, mingled with despair; then, without taking her eyes from it, she lasped her hands, and, what is terrible to relate of a child of that age, she rung them; then—not one of the emotions of the day, neither the trip to the orest, nor the weight of the bucket of water, nor the loss of the money, nor he sight of the whip, nor even the sad words which she had heard Madame hénardier utter had been able to wring this from her—she wept; she burst out obbing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.139#Meanwhile, the traveller had risen to his feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.140#“What is the matter?” he said to the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.141#“Don’t you see?” said the Thénardier, pointing to the _corpus delicti_ hich lay at Cosette’s feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.142#“Well, what of it?” resumed the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.143#“That beggar,” replied the Thénardier, “has permitted herself to touch he children’s doll!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.144#“All this noise for that!” said the man; “well, what if she did play with hat doll?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.145#“She touched it with her dirty hands!” pursued the Thénardier, “with her rightful hands!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.146#Here Cosette redoubled her sobs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.147#“Will you stop your noise?” screamed the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.148#The man went straight to the street door, opened it, and stepped out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.149#As soon as he had gone, the Thénardier profited by his absence to give osette a hearty kick under the table, which made the child utter loud ries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.150#The door opened again, the man reappeared; he carried in both hands the abulous doll which we have mentioned, and which all the village brats had been taring at ever since the morning, and he set it upright in front of Cosette, aying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.151#“Here; this is for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.152#It must be supposed that in the course of the hour and more which he had pent there he had taken confused notice through his reverie of that toy shop, ighted up by fire-pots and candles so splendidly that it was visible like an llumination through the window of the drinking-shop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.153#Cosette raised her eyes; she gazed at the man approaching her with that oll as she might have gazed at the sun; she heard the unprecedented words, “It s for you”; she stared at him; she stared at the doll; then she slowly etreated, and hid herself at the extreme end, under the table in a corner of he wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.154#She no longer cried; she no longer wept; she had the appearance of no onger daring to breathe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.155#The Thénardier, Éponine, and Azelma were like statues also; the very rinkers had paused; a solemn silence reigned through the whole room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.156#Madame Thénardier, petrified and mute, recommenced her conjectures: “Who s that old fellow? Is he a poor man? Is he a millionaire? Perhaps he is both; hat is to say, a thief.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.157#The face of the male Thénardier presented that expressive fold which ccentuates the human countenance whenever the dominant instinct appears there n all its bestial force. The tavern-keeper stared alternately at the doll and t the traveller; he seemed to be scenting out the man, as he would have scented ut a bag of money. This did not last longer than the space of a flash of ightning. He stepped up to his wife and said to her in a low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.158#“That machine costs at least thirty francs. No nonsense. Down on your elly before that man!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.159#Gross natures have this in common with _naïve_ natures, that they possess o transition state.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.160#“Well, Cosette,” said the Thénardier, in a voice that strove to be sweet, nd which was composed of the bitter honey of malicious women, “aren’t you going o take your doll?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.161#Cosette ventured to emerge from her hole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.162#“The gentleman has given you a doll, my little Cosette,” said Thénardier, ith a caressing air. “Take it; it is yours.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.163#Cosette gazed at the marvellous doll in a sort of terror. Her face was till flooded with tears, but her eyes began to fill, like the sky at daybreak, ith strange beams of joy. What she felt at that moment was a little like what he would have felt if she had been abruptly told, “Little one, you are the ueen of France.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.164#It seemed to her that if she touched that doll, lightning would dart from t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.165#This was true, up to a certain point, for she said to herself that the hénardier would scold and beat her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.166#Nevertheless, the attraction carried the day. She ended by drawing near nd murmuring timidly as she turned towards Madame Thénardier:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.167#“May I, Madame?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.168#No words can render that air, at once despairing, terrified, and cstatic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.169#“Pardi!” cried the Thénardier, “it is yours. The gentleman has given it o you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.170#“Truly, sir?” said Cosette. “Is it true? Is the ‘lady’ mine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.171#The stranger’s eyes seemed to be full of tears. He appeared to have eached that point of emotion where a man does not speak for fear lest he should eep. He nodded to Cosette, and placed the “lady’s” hand in her tiny hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.172#Cosette hastily withdrew her hand, as though that of the “lady” scorched er, and began to stare at the floor. We are forced to add that at that moment he stuck out her tongue immoderately. All at once she wheeled round and seized he doll in a transport.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.173#“I shall call her Catherine,” she said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.174#It was an odd moment when Cosette’s rags met and clasped the ribbons and resh pink muslins of the doll.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.175#“Madame,” she resumed, “may I put her on a chair?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.176#“Yes, my child,” replied the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.177#It was now the turn of Éponine and Azelma to gaze at Cosette with nvy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.178#Cosette placed Catherine on a chair, then seated herself on the floor in ront of her, and remained motionless, without uttering a word, in an attitude f contemplation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.179#“Play, Cosette,” said the stranger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.180#“Oh! I am playing,” returned the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.181#This stranger, this unknown individual, who had the air of a visit which rovidence was making on Cosette, was the person whom the Thénardier hated worse han any one in the world at that moment. However, it was necessary to control erself. Habituated as she was to dissimulation through endeavoring to copy her usband in all his actions, these emotions were more than she could endure. She ade haste to send her daughters to bed, then she asked the man’s _permission_ o send Cosette off also; “for she has worked hard all day,” she added with a aternal air. Cosette went off to bed, carrying Catherine in her arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.182#From time to time the Thénardier went to the other end of the room where er husband was, to _relieve her soul_, as she said. She exchanged with her usband words which were all the more furious because she dared not utter them loud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.183#“Old beast! What has he got in his belly, to come and upset us in this anner! To want that little monster to play! to give away forty-franc dolls to a ade that I would sell for forty sous, so I would! A little more and he will be aying _Your Majesty_ to her, as though to the Duchesse de Berry! Is there any ense in it? Is he mad, then, that mysterious old fellow?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.184#“Why! it is perfectly simple,” replied Thénardier, “if that amuses him! t amuses you to have the little one work; it amuses him to have her play. He’s ll right. A traveller can do what he pleases when he pays for it. If the old ellow is a philanthropist, what is that to you? If he is an imbecile, it does ot concern you. What are you worrying for, so long as he has money?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.185#The language of a master, and the reasoning of an innkeeper, neither of hich admitted of any reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.186#The man had placed his elbows on the table, and resumed his thoughtful ttitude. All the other travellers, both pedlers and carters, had withdrawn a ittle, and had ceased singing. They were staring at him from a distance, with a ort of respectful awe. This poorly dressed man, who drew “hind-wheels” from his ocket with so much ease, and who lavished gigantic dolls on dirty little brats n wooden shoes, was certainly a magnificent fellow, and one to be feared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.187#Many hours passed. The midnight mass was over, the chimes had ceased, the rinkers had taken their departure, the drinking-shop was closed, the public oom was deserted, the fire extinct, the stranger still remained in the same lace and the same attitude. From time to time he changed the elbow on which he eaned. That was all; but he had not said a word since Cosette had left the oom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.188#The Thénardiers alone, out of politeness and curiosity, had remained in he room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.189#“Is he going to pass the night in that fashion?” grumbled the Thénardier. hen two o’clock in the morning struck, she declared herself vanquished, and aid to her husband, “I’m going to bed. Do as you like.” Her husband seated imself at a table in the corner, lighted a candle, and began to read the Courrier Français_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.190#A good hour passed thus. The worthy inn-keeper had perused the _Courrier rançais_ at least three times, from the date of the number to the printer’s ame. The stranger did not stir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.191#Thénardier fidgeted, coughed, spit, blew his nose, and creaked his chair. ot a movement on the man’s part. “Is he asleep?” thought Thénardier. The man as not asleep, but nothing could arouse him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.192#At last Thénardier took off his cap, stepped gently up to him, and entured to say:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.193#“Is not Monsieur going to his repose?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.194#_Not going to bed_ would have seemed to him excessive and familiar. _To epose_ smacked of luxury and respect. These words possess the mysterious and dmirable property of swelling the bill on the following day. A chamber where ne _sleeps_ costs twenty sous; a chamber in which one _reposes_ costs twenty rancs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.195#“Well!” said the stranger, “you are right. Where is your stable?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.196#“Sir!” exclaimed Thénardier, with a smile, “I will conduct you, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.197#He took the candle; the man picked up his bundle and cudgel, and hénardier conducted him to a chamber on the first floor, which was of rare plendor, all furnished in mahogany, with a low bedstead, curtained with red alico.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.198#“What is this?” said the traveller.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.199#“It is really our bridal chamber,” said the tavern-keeper. “My wife and I ccupy another. This is only entered three or four times a year.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.200#“I should have liked the stable quite as well,” said the man, bruptly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.201#Thénardier pretended not to hear this unamiable remark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.202#He lighted two perfectly fresh wax candles which figured on the himney-piece. A very good fire was flickering on the hearth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.203#On the chimney-piece, under a glass globe, stood a woman’s head-dress in ilver wire and orange flowers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.204#“And what is this?” resumed the stranger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.205#“That, sir,” said Thénardier, “is my wife’s wedding bonnet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.206#The traveller surveyed the object with a glance which seemed to say, There really was a time, then, when that monster was a maiden?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.207#Thénardier lied, however. When he had leased this paltry building for the urpose of converting it into a tavern, he had found this chamber decorated in ust this manner, and had purchased the furniture and obtained the orange lowers at second hand, with the idea that this would cast a graceful shadow on his spouse,” and would result in what the English call respectability for his ouse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.208#When the traveller turned round, the host had disappeared. Thénardier had ithdrawn discreetly, without venturing to wish him a good night, as he did not ish to treat with disrespectful cordiality a man whom he proposed to fleece oyally the following morning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.209#The inn-keeper retired to his room. His wife was in bed, but she was not sleep. When she heard her husband’s step she turned over and said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.210#“Do you know, I’m going to turn Cosette out of doors to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.211#Thénardier replied coldly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.212#“How you do go on!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.213#They exchanged no further words, and a few moments later their candle was xtinguished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.214#As for the traveller, he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle in a orner. The landlord once gone, he threw himself into an armchair and remained or some time buried in thought. Then he removed his shoes, took one of the two andles, blew out the other, opened the door, and quitted the room, gazing about im like a person who is in search of something. He traversed a corridor and ame upon a staircase. There he heard a very faint and gentle sound like the reathing of a child. He followed this sound, and came to a sort of triangular ecess built under the staircase, or rather formed by the staircase itself. This ecess was nothing else than the space under the steps. There, in the midst of ll sorts of old papers and potsherds, among dust and spiders’ webs, was a ed—if one can call by the name of bed a straw pallet so full of holes as to isplay the straw, and a coverlet so tattered as to show the pallet. No sheets. his was placed on the floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.215#In this bed Cosette was sleeping.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.216#The man approached and gazed down upon her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.217#Cosette was in a profound sleep; she was fully dressed. In the winter she id not undress, in order that she might not be so cold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.218#Against her breast was pressed the doll, whose large eyes, wide open, littered in the dark. From time to time she gave vent to a deep sigh as though he were on the point of waking, and she strained the doll almost convulsively n her arms. Beside her bed there was only one of her wooden shoes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.219#A door which stood open near Cosette’s pallet permitted a view of a ather large, dark room. The stranger stepped into it. At the further extremity, hrough a glass door, he saw two small, very white beds. They belonged to ponine and Azelma. Behind these beds, and half hidden, stood an uncurtained icker cradle, in which the little boy who had cried all the evening lay sleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.220#The stranger conjectured that this chamber connected with that of the hénardier pair. He was on the point of retreating when his eye fell upon the ireplace—one of those vast tavern chimneys where there is always so little fire hen there is any fire at all, and which are so cold to look at. There was no ire in this one, there was not even ashes; but there was something which ttracted the stranger’s gaze, nevertheless. It was two tiny children’s shoes, oquettish in shape and unequal in size. The traveller recalled the graceful and mmemorial custom in accordance with which children place their shoes in the himney on Christmas eve, there to await in the darkness some sparkling gift rom their good fairy. Éponine and Azelma had taken care not to omit this, and ach of them had set one of her shoes on the hearth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.221#The traveller bent over them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.222#The fairy, that is to say, their mother, had already paid her visit, and n each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.223#The man straightened himself up, and was on the point of withdrawing, hen far in, in the darkest corner of the hearth, he caught sight of another bject. He looked at it, and recognized a wooden shoe, a frightful shoe of the oarsest description, half dilapidated and all covered with ashes and dried mud. t was Cosette’s sabot. Cosette, with that touching trust of childhood, which an always be deceived yet never discouraged, had placed her shoe on the earth-stone also.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.224#Hope in a child who has never known anything but despair is a sweet and ouching thing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.225#There was nothing in this wooden shoe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.226#The stranger fumbled in his waistcoat, bent over and placed a louis d’or n Cosette’s shoe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.8.227#Then he regained his own chamber with the stealthy tread of a wolf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.head#CHAPTER IX— THÉNARDIER AND HIS MANŒUVRES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.1#On the following morning, two hours at least before day-break, Thénardier, eated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern, pen in hand, was making ut the bill for the traveller with the yellow coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.2#His wife, standing beside him, and half bent over him, was following him ith her eyes. They exchanged not a word. On the one hand, there was profound editation, on the other, the religious admiration with which one watches the irth and development of a marvel of the human mind. A noise was audible in the ouse; it was the Lark sweeping the stairs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.3#After the lapse of a good quarter of an hour, and some erasures, Thénardier roduced the following masterpiece:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.4#BILL OF THE GENTLEMAN IN No. 1.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.5#Supper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 francs. Chamber . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 ” Candle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 ” Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 ” Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 ” ————— Total . . . . . . 23 rancs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.6#Service was written _servisse_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.7#“Twenty-three francs!” cried the woman, with an enthusiasm which was ingled with some hesitation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.8#Like all great artists, Thénardier was dissatisfied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.9#“Peuh!” he exclaimed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.10#It was the accent of Castlereagh auditing France’s bill at the Congress of ienna.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.11#“Monsieur Thénardier, you are right; he certainly owes that,” murmured the ife, who was thinking of the doll bestowed on Cosette in the presence of her aughters. “It is just, but it is too much. He will not pay it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.12#Thénardier laughed coldly, as usual, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.13#“He will pay.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.14#This laugh was the supreme assertion of certainty and authority. That hich was asserted in this manner must needs be so. His wife did not insist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.15#She set about arranging the table; her husband paced the room. A moment ater he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.16#“I owe full fifteen hundred francs!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.17#He went and seated himself in the chimney-corner, meditating, with his eet among the warm ashes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.18#“Ah! by the way,” resumed his wife, “you don’t forget that I’m going to urn Cosette out of doors to-day? The monster! She breaks my heart with that oll of hers! I’d rather marry Louis XVIII. than keep her another day in the ouse!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.19#Thénardier lighted his pipe, and replied between two puffs:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.20#“You will hand that bill to the man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.21#Then he went out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.22#Hardly had he left the room when the traveller entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.23#Thénardier instantly reappeared behind him and remained motionless in the alf-open door, visible only to his wife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.24#The yellow man carried his bundle and his cudgel in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.25#“Up so early?” said Madame Thénardier; “is Monsieur leaving us lready?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.26#As she spoke thus, she was twisting the bill about in her hands with an mbarrassed air, and making creases in it with her nails. Her hard face resented a shade which was not habitual with it,—timidity and scruples.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.27#To present such a bill to a man who had so completely the air “of a poor retch” seemed difficult to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.28#The traveller appeared to be preoccupied and absent-minded. He eplied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.29#“Yes, Madame, I am going.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.30#“So Monsieur has no business in Montfermeil?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.31#“No, I was passing through. That is all. What do I owe you, Madame,” he dded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.32#The Thénardier silently handed him the folded bill.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.33#The man unfolded the paper and glanced at it; but his thoughts were vidently elsewhere.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.34#“Madame,” he resumed, “is business good here in Montfermeil?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.35#“So so, Monsieur,” replied the Thénardier, stupefied at not witnessing nother sort of explosion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.36#She continued, in a dreary and lamentable tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.37#“Oh! Monsieur, times are so hard! and then, we have so few bourgeois in he neighborhood! All the people are poor, you see. If we had not, now and then, ome rich and generous travellers like Monsieur, we should not get along at all. e have so many expenses. Just see, that child is costing us our very eyes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.38#“What child?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.39#“Why, the little one, you know! Cosette—the Lark, as she is called ereabouts!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.40#“Ah!” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.41#She went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.42#“How stupid these peasants are with their nicknames! She has more the air f a bat than of a lark. You see, sir, we do not ask charity, and we cannot estow it. We earn nothing and we have to pay out a great deal. The license, the mposts, the door and window tax, the hundredths! Monsieur is aware that the overnment demands a terrible deal of money. And then, I have my daughters. I ave no need to bring up other people’s children.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.43#The man resumed, in that voice which he strove to render indifferent, and n which there lingered a tremor:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.44#“What if one were to rid you of her?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.45#“Who? Cosette?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.46#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.47#The landlady’s red and violent face brightened up hideously.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.48#“Ah! sir, my dear sir, take her, keep her, lead her off, carry her away, ugar her, stuff her with truffles, drink her, eat her, and the blessings of the ood holy Virgin and of all the saints of paradise be upon you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.49#“Agreed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.50#“Really! You will take her away?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.51#“I will take her away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.52#“Immediately?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.53#“Immediately. Call the child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.54#“Cosette!” screamed the Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.55#“In the meantime,” pursued the man, “I will pay you what I owe you. How uch is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.56#He cast a glance on the bill, and could not restrain a start of urprise:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.57#“Twenty-three francs!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.58#He looked at the landlady, and repeated:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.59#“Twenty-three francs?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.60#There was in the enunciation of these words, thus repeated, an accent etween an exclamation and an interrogation point.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.61#The Thénardier had had time to prepare herself for the shock. She replied, ith assurance:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.62#“Good gracious, yes, sir, it is twenty-three francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.63#The stranger laid five five-franc pieces on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.64#“Go and get the child,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.65#At that moment Thénardier advanced to the middle of the room, and aid:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.66#“Monsieur owes twenty-six sous.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.67#“Twenty-six sous!” exclaimed his wife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.68#“Twenty sous for the chamber,” resumed Thénardier, coldly, “and six sous or his supper. As for the child, I must discuss that matter a little with the entleman. Leave us, wife.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.69#Madame Thénardier was dazzled as with the shock caused by unexpected ightning flashes of talent. She was conscious that a great actor was making his ntrance on the stage, uttered not a word in reply, and left the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.70#As soon as they were alone, Thénardier offered the traveller a chair. The raveller seated himself; Thénardier remained standing, and his face assumed a ingular expression of good-fellowship and simplicity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.71#“Sir,” said he, “what I have to say to you is this, that I adore that hild.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.72#The stranger gazed intently at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.73#“What child?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.74#Thénardier continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.75#“How strange it is, one grows attached. What money is that? Take back your undred-sou piece. I adore the child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.76#“Whom do you mean?” demanded the stranger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.77#“Eh! our little Cosette! Are you not intending to take her away from us? ell, I speak frankly; as true as you are an honest man, I will not consent to t. I shall miss that child. I saw her first when she was a tiny thing. It is rue that she costs us money; it is true that she has her faults; it is true hat we are not rich; it is true that I have paid out over four hundred francs or drugs for just one of her illnesses! But one must do something for the good od’s sake. She has neither father nor mother. I have brought her up. I have read enough for her and for myself. In truth, I think a great deal of that hild. You understand, one conceives an affection for a person; I am a good sort f a beast, I am; I do not reason; I love that little girl; my wife is uick-tempered, but she loves her also. You see, she is just the same as our own hild. I want to keep her to babble about the house.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.78#The stranger kept his eye intently fixed on Thénardier. The latter ontinued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.79#“Excuse me, sir, but one does not give away one’s child to a passer-by, ike that. I am right, am I not? Still, I don’t say—you are rich; you have the ir of a very good man,—if it were for her happiness. But one must find out hat. You understand: suppose that I were to let her go and to sacrifice myself, should like to know what becomes of her; I should not wish to lose sight of er; I should like to know with whom she is living, so that I could go to see er from time to time; so that she may know that her good foster-father is live, that he is watching over her. In short, there are things which are not ossible. I do not even know your name. If you were to take her away, I should ay: ‘Well, and the Lark, what has become of her?’ One must, at least, see some etty scrap of paper, some trifle in the way of a passport, you know!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.80#The stranger, still surveying him with that gaze which penetrates, as the aying goes, to the very depths of the conscience, replied in a grave, firm oice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.81#“Monsieur Thénardier, one does not require a passport to travel five eagues from Paris. If I take Cosette away, I shall take her away, and that is he end of the matter. You will not know my name, you will not know my esidence, you will not know where she is; and my intention is that she shall ever set eyes on you again so long as she lives. I break the thread which binds er foot, and she departs. Does that suit you? Yes or no?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.82#Since geniuses, like demons, recognize the presence of a superior God by ertain signs, Thénardier comprehended that he had to deal with a very strong erson. It was like an intuition; he comprehended it with his clear and agacious promptitude. While drinking with the carters, smoking, and singing oarse songs on the preceding evening, he had devoted the whole of the time to bserving the stranger, watching him like a cat, and studying him like a athematician. He had watched him, both on his own account, for the pleasure of he thing, and through instinct, and had spied upon him as though he had been aid for so doing. Not a movement, not a gesture, on the part of the man in the ellow great-coat had escaped him. Even before the stranger had so clearly anifested his interest in Cosette, Thénardier had divined his purpose. He had aught the old man’s deep glances returning constantly to the child. Who was his man? Why this interest? Why this hideous costume, when he had so much money n his purse? Questions which he put to himself without being able to solve hem, and which irritated him. He had pondered it all night long. He could not e Cosette’s father. Was he her grandfather? Then why not make himself known at nce? When one has a right, one asserts it. This man evidently had no right over osette. What was it, then? Thénardier lost himself in conjectures. He caught limpses of everything, but he saw nothing. Be that as it may, on entering into onversation with the man, sure that there was some secret in the case, that the atter had some interest in remaining in the shadow, he felt himself strong; hen he perceived from the stranger’s clear and firm retort, that this ysterious personage was mysterious in so simple a way, he became conscious that e was weak. He had expected nothing of the sort. His conjectures were put to he rout. He rallied his ideas. He weighed everything in the space of a second. hénardier was one of those men who take in a situation at a glance. He decided hat the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward, and quickly at that. e did as great leaders do at the decisive moment, which they know that they lone recognize; he abruptly unmasked his batteries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.83#“Sir,” said he, “I am in need of fifteen hundred francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.84#The stranger took from his side pocket an old pocketbook of black leather, pened it, drew out three bank-bills, which he laid on the table. Then he placed is large thumb on the notes and said to the inn-keeper:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.85#“Go and fetch Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.86#While this was taking place, what had Cosette been doing?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.87#On waking up, Cosette had run to get her shoe. In it she had found the old piece. It was not a Napoleon; it was one of those perfectly new wenty-franc pieces of the Restoration, on whose effigy the little Prussian ueue had replaced the laurel wreath. Cosette was dazzled. Her destiny began to ntoxicate her. She did not know what a gold piece was; she had never seen one; he hid it quickly in her pocket, as though she had stolen it. Still, she felt hat it really was hers; she guessed whence her gift had come, but the joy which he experienced was full of fear. She was happy; above all she was stupefied. uch magnificent and beautiful things did not appear real. The doll frightened er, the gold piece frightened her. She trembled vaguely in the presence of this agnificence. The stranger alone did not frighten her. On the contrary, he eassured her. Ever since the preceding evening, amid all her amazement, even in er sleep, she had been thinking in her little childish mind of that man who eemed to be so poor and so sad, and who was so rich and so kind. Everything had hanged for her since she had met that good man in the forest. Cosette, less appy than the most insignificant swallow of heaven, had never known what it was o take refuge under a mother’s shadow and under a wing. For the last five ears, that is to say, as far back as her memory ran, the poor child had hivered and trembled. She had always been exposed completely naked to the sharp ind of adversity; now it seemed to her she was clothed. Formerly her soul had eemed cold, now it was warm. Cosette was no longer afraid of the Thénardier. he was no longer alone; there was some one there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.88#She hastily set about her regular morning duties. That louis, which she ad about her, in the very apron pocket whence the fifteen-sou piece had fallen n the night before, distracted her thoughts. She dared not touch it, but she pent five minutes in gazing at it, with her tongue hanging out, if the truth ust be told. As she swept the staircase, she paused, remained standing there otionless, forgetful of her broom and of the entire universe, occupied in azing at that star which was blazing at the bottom of her pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.89#It was during one of these periods of contemplation that the Thénardier oined her. She had gone in search of Cosette at her husband’s orders. What was uite unprecedented, she neither struck her nor said an insulting word to er.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.90#“Cosette,” she said, almost gently, “come immediately.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.91#An instant later Cosette entered the public room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.92#The stranger took up the bundle which he had brought and untied it. This undle contained a little woollen gown, an apron, a fustian bodice, a kerchief, petticoat, woollen stockings, shoes—a complete outfit for a girl of seven ears. All was black.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.93#“My child,” said the man, “take these, and go and dress yourself uickly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.94#Daylight was appearing when those of the inhabitants of Montfermeil who ad begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man leading a little girl ressed in mourning, and carrying a pink doll in her arms, pass along the road o Paris. They were going in the direction of Livry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.95#It was our man and Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.96#No one knew the man; as Cosette was no longer in rags, many did not ecognize her. Cosette was going away. With whom? She did not know. Whither? She new not. All that she understood was that she was leaving the Thénardier tavern ehind her. No one had thought of bidding her farewell, nor had she thought of aking leave of any one. She was leaving that hated and hating house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.97#Poor, gentle creature, whose heart had been repressed up to that hour!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.9.98#Cosette walked along gravely, with her large eyes wide open, and gazing at he sky. She had put her louis in the pocket of her new apron. From time to ime, she bent down and glanced at it; then she looked at the good man. She felt omething as though she were beside the good God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.head#CHAPTER X—HE WHO SEEKS TO BETTER HIMSELF MAY RENDER HIS SITUATION ORSE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.1#Madame Thénardier had allowed her husband to have his own way, as was her ont. She had expected great results. When the man and Cosette had taken their eparture, Thénardier allowed a full quarter of an hour to elapse; then he took er aside and showed her the fifteen hundred francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.2#“Is that all?” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.3#It was the first time since they had set up housekeeping that she had dared o criticise one of the master’s acts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.4#The blow told.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.5#“You are right, in sooth,” said he; “I am a fool. Give me my hat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.6#He folded up the three bank-bills, thrust them into his pocket, and ran out n all haste; but he made a mistake and turned to the right first. Some eighbors, of whom he made inquiries, put him on the track again; the Lark and he man had been seen going in the direction of Livry. He followed these hints, alking with great strides, and talking to himself the while:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.7#“That man is evidently a million dressed in yellow, and I am an animal. irst he gave twenty sous, then five francs, then fifty francs, then fifteen undred francs, all with equal readiness. He would have given fifteen thousand rancs. But I shall overtake him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.8#And then, that bundle of clothes prepared beforehand for the child; all hat was singular; many mysteries lay concealed under it. One does not let ysteries out of one’s hand when one has once grasped them. The secrets of the ealthy are sponges of gold; one must know how to subject them to pressure. All hese thoughts whirled through his brain. “I am an animal,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.9#When one leaves Montfermeil and reaches the turn which the road takes that uns to Livry, it can be seen stretching out before one to a great distance cross the plateau. On arriving there, he calculated that he ought to be able to ee the old man and the child. He looked as far as his vision reached, and saw othing. He made fresh inquiries, but he had wasted time. Some passers-by nformed him that the man and child of whom he was in search had gone towards he forest in the direction of Gagny. He hastened in that direction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.10#They were far in advance of him; but a child walks slowly, and he walked ast; and then, he was well acquainted with the country.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.11#All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead like a man ho has forgotten some essential point and who is ready to retrace his teps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.12#“I ought to have taken my gun,” said he to himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.13#Thénardier was one of those double natures which sometimes pass through ur midst without our being aware of the fact, and who disappear without our inding them out, because destiny has only exhibited one side of them. It is the ate of many men to live thus half submerged. In a calm and even situation, hénardier possessed all that is required to make—we will not say to be—what eople have agreed to call an honest trader, a good bourgeois. At the same time ertain circumstances being given, certain shocks arriving to bring his nder-nature to the surface, he had all the requisites for a blackguard. He was shopkeeper in whom there was some taint of the monster. Satan must have ccasionally crouched down in some corner of the hovel in which Thénardier welt, and have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of this hideous asterpiece.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.14#After a momentary hesitation:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.15#“Bah!” he thought; “they will have time to make their escape.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.16#And he pursued his road, walking rapidly straight ahead, and with almost n air of certainty, with the sagacity of a fox scenting a covey of artridges.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.17#In truth, when he had passed the ponds and had traversed in an oblique irection the large clearing which lies on the right of the Avenue de Bellevue, nd reached that turf alley which nearly makes the circuit of the hill, and overs the arch of the ancient aqueduct of the Abbey of Chelles, he caught ight, over the top of the brushwood, of the hat on which he had already erected o many conjectures; it was that man’s hat. The brushwood was not high. hénardier recognized the fact that the man and Cosette were sitting there. The hild could not be seen on account of her small size, but the head of her doll as visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.18#Thénardier was not mistaken. The man was sitting there, and letting osette get somewhat rested. The inn-keeper walked round the brushwood and resented himself abruptly to the eyes of those whom he was in search of.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.19#“Pardon, excuse me, sir,” he said, quite breathless, “but here are your ifteen hundred francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.20#So saying, he handed the stranger the three bank-bills.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.21#The man raised his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.22#“What is the meaning of this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.23#Thénardier replied respectfully:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.24#“It means, sir, that I shall take back Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.25#Cosette shuddered, and pressed close to the old man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.26#He replied, gazing to the very bottom of Thénardier’s eyes the while, and nunciating every syllable distinctly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.27#“You are go-ing to take back Co-sette?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.28#“Yes, sir, I am. I will tell you; I have considered the matter. In fact, I ave not the right to give her to you. I am an honest man, you see; this child oes not belong to me; she belongs to her mother. It was her mother who confided er to me; I can only resign her to her mother. You will say to me, ‘But her other is dead.’ Good; in that case I can only give the child up to the person ho shall bring me a writing, signed by her mother, to the effect that I am to and the child over to the person therein mentioned; that is clear.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.29#The man, without making any reply, fumbled in his pocket, and Thénardier eheld the pocket-book of bank-bills make its appearance once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.30#The tavern-keeper shivered with joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.31#“Good!” thought he; “let us hold firm; he is going to bribe me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.32#Before opening the pocket-book, the traveller cast a glance about him: the pot was absolutely deserted; there was not a soul either in the woods or in the alley. The man opened his pocket-book once more and drew from it, not the andful of bills which Thénardier expected, but a simple little paper, which he nfolded and presented fully open to the inn-keeper, saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.33#“You are right; read!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.34#Thénardier took the paper and read:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.35#“M. SUR M., March 25, 1823.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.36#“MONSIEUR THÉNARDIER:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.37#You will deliver Cosette to this person. You will be paid for all the ittle things. I have the honor to salute you with respect, FANTINE.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.38#“You know that signature?” resumed the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.39#It certainly was Fantine’s signature; Thénardier recognized it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.40#There was no reply to make; he experienced two violent vexations, the exation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for, and the vexation of eing beaten; the man added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.41#“You may keep this paper as your receipt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.42#Thénardier retreated in tolerably good order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.43#“This signature is fairly well imitated,” he growled between his teeth; however, let it go!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.44#Then he essayed a desperate effort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.45#“It is well, sir,” he said, “since you are the person, but I must be paid or all those little things. A great deal is owing to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.46#The man rose to his feet, filliping the dust from his threadbare leeve:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.47#“Monsieur Thénardier, in January last, the mother reckoned that she owed ou one hundred and twenty francs. In February, you sent her a bill of five undred francs; you received three hundred francs at the end of February, and hree hundred francs at the beginning of March. Since then nine months have lapsed, at fifteen francs a month, the price agreed upon, which makes one undred and thirty-five francs. You had received one hundred francs too much; hat makes thirty-five still owing you. I have just given you fifteen hundred rancs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.48#Thénardier’s sensations were those of the wolf at the moment when he feels imself nipped and seized by the steel jaw of the trap.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.49#“Who is this devil of a man?” he thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.50#He did what the wolf does: he shook himself. Audacity had succeeded with im once.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.51#“Monsieur-I-don’t-know-your-name,” he said resolutely, and this time asting aside all respectful ceremony, “I shall take back Cosette if you do not ive me a thousand crowns.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.52#The stranger said tranquilly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.53#“Come, Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.54#He took Cosette by his left hand, and with his right he picked up his udgel, which was lying on the ground.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.55#Thénardier noted the enormous size of the cudgel and the solitude of the pot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.56#The man plunged into the forest with the child, leaving the inn-keeper otionless and speechless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.57#While they were walking away, Thénardier scrutinized his huge shoulders, hich were a little rounded, and his great fists.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.58#Then, bringing his eyes back to his own person, they fell upon his feeble rms and his thin hands. “I really must have been exceedingly stupid not to have hought to bring my gun,” he said to himself, “since I was going hunting!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.59#However, the inn-keeper did not give up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.60#“I want to know where he is going,” said he, and he set out to follow them t a distance. Two things were left on his hands, an irony in the shape of the aper signed _Fantine_, and a consolation, the fifteen hundred francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.61#The man led Cosette off in the direction of Livry and Bondy. He walked lowly, with drooping head, in an attitude of reflection and sadness. The winter ad thinned out the forest, so that Thénardier did not lose them from sight, lthough he kept at a good distance. The man turned round from time to time, and ooked to see if he was being followed. All at once he caught sight of hénardier. He plunged suddenly into the brushwood with Cosette, where they ould both hide themselves. “The deuce!” said Thénardier, and he redoubled his ace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.10.62#The thickness of the undergrowth forced him to draw nearer to them. When he man had reached the densest part of the thicket, he wheeled round. It was in ain that Thénardier sought to conceal himself in the branches; he could not revent the man seeing him. The man cast upon him an uneasy glance, then levated his head and continued his course. The inn-keeper set out again in ursuit. Thus they continued for two or three hundred paces. All at once the man urned round once more; he saw the inn-keeper. This time he gazed at him with so ombre an air that Thénardier decided that it was “useless” to proceed further. hénardier retraced his steps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.11.head#CHAPTER XI—NUMBER 9,430 REAPPEARS, AND COSETTE WINS IT IN THE OTTERY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.11.1#Jean Valjean was not dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.11.2#When he fell into the sea, or rather, when he threw himself into it, he was ot ironed, as we have seen. He swam under water until he reached a vessel at nchor, to which a boat was moored. He found means of hiding himself in this oat until night. At night he swam off again, and reached the shore a little way rom Cape Brun. There, as he did not lack money, he procured clothing. A small ountry-house in the neighborhood of Balaguier was at that time the ressing-room of escaped convicts,—a lucrative specialty. Then Jean Valjean, ike all the sorry fugitives who are seeking to evade the vigilance of the law nd social fatality, pursued an obscure and undulating itinerary. He found his irst refuge at Pradeaux, near Beausset. Then he directed his course towards rand-Villard, near Briançon, in the Hautes-Alpes. It was a fumbling and uneasy light,—a mole’s track, whose branchings are untraceable. Later on, some trace f his passage into Ain, in the territory of Civrieux, was discovered; in the yrenees, at Accons; at the spot called Grange-de-Doumec, near the market of havailles, and in the environs of Perigueux at Brunies, canton of La hapelle-Gonaguet. He reached Paris. We have just seen him at Montfermeil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.11.3#His first care on arriving in Paris had been to buy mourning clothes for a ittle girl of from seven to eight years of age; then to procure a lodging. That one, he had betaken himself to Montfermeil. It will be remembered that already, uring his preceding escape, he had made a mysterious trip thither, or somewhere n that neighborhood, of which the law had gathered an inkling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.11.4#However, he was thought to be dead, and this still further increased the bscurity which had gathered about him. At Paris, one of the journals which hronicled the fact fell into his hands. He felt reassured and almost at peace, s though he had really been dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.11.5#On the evening of the day when Jean Valjean rescued Cosette from the claws f the Thénardiers, he returned to Paris. He re-entered it at nightfall, with he child, by way of the Barrier Monceaux. There he entered a cabriolet, which ook him to the esplanade of the Observatoire. There he got out, paid the oachman, took Cosette by the hand, and together they directed their steps hrough the darkness,—through the deserted streets which adjoin the Ourcine and he Glacière, towards the Boulevard de l’Hôpital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.3.11.6#The day had been strange and filled with emotions for Cosette. They had aten some bread and cheese purchased in isolated taverns, behind hedges; they ad changed carriages frequently; they had travelled short distances on foot. he made no complaint, but she was weary, and Jean Valjean perceived it by the ay she dragged more and more on his hand as she walked. He took her on his ack. Cosette, without letting go of Catherine, laid her head on Jean Valjean’s houlder, and there fell asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.head#BOOK FOURTH—THE GORBEAU HOVEL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.head#CHAPTER I—MASTER GORBEAU
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.1#Forty years ago, a rambler who had ventured into that unknown country of he Salpêtrière, and who had mounted to the Barrière d’Italie by way of the oulevard, reached a point where it might be said that Paris disappeared. It was o longer solitude, for there were passers-by; it was not the country, for there ere houses and streets; it was not the city, for the streets had ruts like ighways, and the grass grew in them; it was not a village, the houses were too ofty. What was it, then? It was an inhabited spot where there was no one; it as a desert place where there was some one; it was a boulevard of the great ity, a street of Paris; more wild at night than the forest, more gloomy by day han a cemetery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.2#It was the old quarter of the Marché-aux-Chevaux.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.3#The rambler, if he risked himself outside the four decrepit walls of this arché-aux-Chevaux; if he consented even to pass beyond the Rue du etit-Banquier, after leaving on his right a garden protected by high walls; hen a field in which tan-bark mills rose like gigantic beaver huts; then an nclosure encumbered with timber, with a heap of stumps, sawdust, and shavings, n which stood a large dog, barking; then a long, low, utterly dilapidated wall, ith a little black door in mourning, laden with mosses, which were covered with lowers in the spring; then, in the most deserted spot, a frightful and decrepit uilding, on which ran the inscription in large letters: POST NO BILLS,—this aring rambler would have reached little known latitudes at the corner of the ue des Vignes-Saint-Marcel. There, near a factory, and between two garden alls, there could be seen, at that epoch, a mean building, which, at the first lance, seemed as small as a thatched hovel, and which was, in reality, as large s a cathedral. It presented its side and gable to the public road; hence its pparent diminutiveness. Nearly the whole of the house was hidden. Only the door nd one window could be seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.4#This hovel was only one story high.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.5#The first detail that struck the observer was, that the door could never ave been anything but the door of a hovel, while the window, if it had been arved out of dressed stone instead of being in rough masonry, might have been he lattice of a lordly mansion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.6#The door was nothing but a collection of worm-eaten planks roughly bound ogether by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs. It opened directly on steep staircase of lofty steps, muddy, chalky, plaster-stained, dusty steps, f the same width as itself, which could be seen from the street, running traight up like a ladder and disappearing in the darkness between two walls. he top of the shapeless bay into which this door shut was masked by a narrow cantling in the centre of which a triangular hole had been sawed, which served oth as wicket and air-hole when the door was closed. On the inside of the door he figures 52 had been traced with a couple of strokes of a brush dipped in nk, and above the scantling the same hand had daubed the number 50, so that one esitated. Where was one? Above the door it said, “Number 50”; the inside eplied, “no, Number 52.” No one knows what dust-colored figures were suspended ike draperies from the triangular opening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.7#The window was large, sufficiently elevated, garnished with Venetian linds, and with a frame in large square panes; only these large panes were uffering from various wounds, which were both concealed and betrayed by an ngenious paper bandage. And the blinds, dislocated and unpasted, threatened assers-by rather than screened the occupants. The horizontal slats were missing ere and there and had been naïvely replaced with boards nailed on erpendicularly; so that what began as a blind ended as a shutter. This door ith an unclean, and this window with an honest though dilapidated air, thus eheld on the same house, produced the effect of two incomplete beggars walking ide by side, with different miens beneath the same rags, the one having always een a mendicant, and the other having once been a gentleman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.8#The staircase led to a very vast edifice which resembled a shed which had een converted into a house. This edifice had, for its intestinal tube, a long orridor, on which opened to right and left sorts of compartments of varied imensions which were inhabitable under stress of circumstances, and rather more ike stalls than cells. These chambers received their light from the vague waste rounds in the neighborhood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.9#All this was dark, disagreeable, wan, melancholy, sepulchral; traversed ccording as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door, by cold rays or by icy inds. An interesting and picturesque peculiarity of this sort of dwelling is he enormous size of the spiders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.10#To the left of the entrance door, on the boulevard side, at about the eight of a man from the ground, a small window which had been walled up formed square niche full of stones which the children had thrown there as they passed y.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.11#A portion of this building has recently been demolished. From what still emains of it one can form a judgment as to what it was in former days. As a hole, it was not over a hundred years old. A hundred years is youth in a church nd age in a house. It seems as though man’s lodging partook of his ephemeral haracter, and God’s house of his eternity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.12#The postmen called the house Number 50-52; but it was known in the eighborhood as the Gorbeau house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.13#Let us explain whence this appellation was derived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.14#Collectors of petty details, who become herbalists of anecdotes, and prick lippery dates into their memories with a pin, know that there was in Paris, uring the last century, about 1770, two attorneys at the Châtelet named, one orbeau (Raven), the other Renard (Fox). The two names had been forestalled by a Fontaine. The opportunity was too fine for the lawyers; they made the most of t. A parody was immediately put in circulation in the galleries of the ourt-house, in verses that limped a little:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.15#Maître Corbeau, sur un dossier perché, Tenait dans son bec une saisie xécutoire; Maître Renard, par l’odeur alléché, Lui fit à peu près cette istoire: Hé! bonjour. Etc.13
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.16#The two honest practitioners, embarrassed by the jests, and finding the earing of their heads interfered with by the shouts of laughter which followed hem, resolved to get rid of their names, and hit upon the expedient of applying o the king.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.17#Their petition was presented to Louis XV. on the same day when the Papal uncio, on the one hand, and the Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon on the other, both evoutly kneeling, were each engaged in putting on, in his Majesty’s presence, a lipper on the bare feet of Madame du Barry, who had just got out of bed. The ing, who was laughing, continued to laugh, passed gayly from the two bishops to he two lawyers, and bestowed on these limbs of the law their former names, or early so. By the kings command, Maître Corbeau was permitted to add a tail to is initial letter and to call himself Gorbeau. Maître Renard was less lucky; ll he obtained was leave to place a P in front of his R, and to call himself renard; so that the second name bore almost as much resemblance as the irst.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.18#Now, according to local tradition, this Maître Gorbeau had been the roprietor of the building numbered 50-52 on the Boulevard de l’Hôpital. He was ven the author of the monumental window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.19#Hence the edifice bore the name of the Gorbeau house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.20#Opposite this house, among the trees of the boulevard, rose a great elm hich was three-quarters dead; almost directly facing it opens the Rue de la arrière des Gobelins, a street then without houses, unpaved, planted with nhealthy trees, which was green or muddy according to the season, and which nded squarely in the exterior wall of Paris. An odor of copperas issued in uffs from the roofs of the neighboring factory.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.21#The barrier was close at hand. In 1823 the city wall was still in xistence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.22#This barrier itself evoked gloomy fancies in the mind. It was the road to icêtre. It was through it that, under the Empire and the Restoration, prisoners ondemned to death re-entered Paris on the day of their execution. It was there, hat, about 1829, was committed that mysterious assassination, called “The ssassination of the Fontainebleau barrier,” whose authors justice was never ble to discover; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated, a rightful enigma which has never been unriddled. Take a few steps, and you come pon that fatal Rue Croulebarbe, where Ulbach stabbed the goat-girl of Ivry to he sound of thunder, as in the melodramas. A few paces more, and you arrive at he abominable pollarded elms of the Barrière Saint-Jacques, that expedient of he philanthropist to conceal the scaffold, that miserable and shameful Place de rève of a shop-keeping and bourgeois society, which recoiled before the death enalty, neither daring to abolish it with grandeur, nor to uphold it with uthority.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.23#Leaving aside this Place Saint-Jacques, which was, as it were, redestined, and which has always been horrible, probably the most mournful spot n that mournful boulevard, seven and thirty years ago, was the spot which even o-day is so unattractive, where stood the building Number 50-52.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.24#Bourgeois houses only began to spring up there twenty-five years later. he place was unpleasant. In addition to the gloomy thoughts which assailed one here, one was conscious of being between the Salpêtrière, a glimpse of whose ome could be seen, and Bicêtre, whose outskirts one was fairly touching; that s to say, between the madness of women and the madness of men. As far as the ye could see, one could perceive nothing but the abattoirs, the city wall, and he fronts of a few factories, resembling barracks or monasteries; everywhere bout stood hovels, rubbish, ancient walls blackened like cerecloths, new white alls like winding-sheets; everywhere parallel rows of trees, buildings erected n a line, flat constructions, long, cold rows, and the melancholy sadness of ight angles. Not an unevenness of the ground, not a caprice in the rchitecture, not a fold. The _ensemble_ was glacial, regular, hideous. Nothing ppresses the heart like symmetry. It is because symmetry is ennui, and ennui is t the very foundation of grief. Despair yawns. Something more terrible than a ell where one suffers may be imagined, and that is a hell where one is bored. f such a hell existed, that bit of the Boulevard de l’Hôpital might have formed he entrance to it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.25#Nevertheless, at nightfall, at the moment when the daylight is vanishing, specially in winter, at the hour when the twilight breeze tears from the elms heir last russet leaves, when the darkness is deep and starless, or when the oon and the wind are making openings in the clouds and losing themselves in the hadows, this boulevard suddenly becomes frightful. The black lines sink inwards nd are lost in the shades, like morsels of the infinite. The passer-by cannot efrain from recalling the innumerable traditions of the place which are onnected with the gibbet. The solitude of this spot, where so many crimes have een committed, had something terrible about it. One almost had a presentiment f meeting with traps in that darkness; all the confused forms of the darkness eemed suspicious, and the long, hollow square, of which one caught a glimpse etween each tree, seemed graves: by day it was ugly; in the evening melancholy; y night it was sinister.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.26#In summer, at twilight, one saw, here and there, a few old women seated at he foot of the elm, on benches mouldy with rain. These good old women were fond f begging.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.27#However, this quarter, which had a superannuated rather than an antique ir, was tending even then to transformation. Even at that time any one who was esirous of seeing it had to make haste. Each day some detail of the whole ffect was disappearing. For the last twenty years the station of the Orleans ailway has stood beside the old faubourg and distracted it, as it does to-day. herever it is placed on the borders of a capital, a railway station is the eath of a suburb and the birth of a city. It seems as though, around these reat centres of the movements of a people, the earth, full of germs, trembled nd yawned, to engulf the ancient dwellings of men and to allow new ones to pring forth, at the rattle of these powerful machines, at the breath of these onstrous horses of civilization which devour coal and vomit fire. The old ouses crumble and new ones rise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.1.28#Since the Orleans railway has invaded the region of the Salpêtrière, the ncient, narrow streets which adjoin the moats Saint-Victor and the Jardin des lantes tremble, as they are violently traversed three or four times each day by hose currents of coach fiacres and omnibuses which, in a given time, crowd back he houses to the right and the left; for there are things which are odd when aid that are rigorously exact; and just as it is true to say that in large ities the sun makes the southern fronts of houses to vegetate and grow, it is ertain that the frequent passage of vehicles enlarges streets. The symptoms of new life are evident. In this old provincial quarter, in the wildest nooks, he pavement shows itself, the sidewalks begin to crawl and to grow longer, even here there are as yet no pedestrians. One morning,—a memorable morning in July, 845,—black pots of bitumen were seen smoking there; on that day it might be aid that civilization had arrived in the Rue de l’Ourcine, and that Paris had ntered the suburb of Saint-Marceau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.head#CHAPTER II—A NEST FOR OWL AND A WARBLER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.1#It was in front of this Gorbeau house that Jean Valjean halted. Like wild irds, he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.2#He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket, drew out a sort of a pass-key, opened he door, entered, closed it again carefully, and ascended the staircase, still arrying Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.3#At the top of the stairs he drew from his pocket another key, with which he pened another door. The chamber which he entered, and which he closed again nstantly, was a kind of moderately spacious attic, furnished with a mattress aid on the floor, a table, and several chairs; a stove in which a fire was urning, and whose embers were visible, stood in one corner. A lantern on the oulevard cast a vague light into this poor room. At the extreme end there was a ressing-room with a folding bed; Jean Valjean carried the child to this bed and aid her down there without waking her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.4#He struck a match and lighted a candle. All this was prepared beforehand on he table, and, as he had done on the previous evening, he began to scrutinize osette’s face with a gaze full of ecstasy, in which the expression of kindness nd tenderness almost amounted to aberration. The little girl, with that ranquil confidence which belongs only to extreme strength and extreme weakness, ad fallen asleep without knowing with whom she was, and continued to sleep ithout knowing where she was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.5#Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child’s hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.6#Nine months before he had kissed the hand of the mother, who had also just allen asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.7#The same sad, piercing, religious sentiment filled his heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.8#He knelt beside Cosette’s bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.9#lt was broad daylight, and the child still slept. A wan ray of the December un penetrated the window of the attic and lay upon the ceiling in long threads f light and shade. All at once a heavily laden carrier’s cart, which was assing along the boulevard, shook the frail bed, like a clap of thunder, and ade it quiver from top to bottom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.10#“Yes, madame!” cried Cosette, waking with a start, “here I am! here I m!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.11#And she sprang out of bed, her eyes still half shut with the heaviness of leep, extending her arms towards the corner of the wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.12#“Ah! mon Dieu, my broom!” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.13#She opened her eyes wide now, and beheld the smiling countenance of Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.14#“Ah! so it is true!” said the child. “Good morning, Monsieur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.15#Children accept joy and happiness instantly and familiarly, being hemselves by nature joy and happiness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.16#Cosette caught sight of Catherine at the foot of her bed, and took ossession of her, and, as she played, she put a hundred questions to Jean aljean. Where was she? Was Paris very large? Was Madame Thénardier very far way? Was she to go back? etc., etc. All at once she exclaimed, “How pretty it s here!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.17#It was a frightful hole, but she felt free.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.18#“Must I sweep?” she resumed at last.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.19#“Play!” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.2.20#The day passed thus. Cosette, without troubling herself to understand nything, was inexpressibly happy with that doll and that kind man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.head#CHAPTER III—TWO MISFORTUNES MAKE ONE PIECE OF GOOD FORTUNE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.1#On the following morning, at daybreak, Jean Valjean was still by Cosette’s edside; he watched there motionless, waiting for her to wake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.2#Some new thing had come into his soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.3#Jean Valjean had never loved anything; for twenty-five years he had been lone in the world. He had never been father, lover, husband, friend. In the rison he had been vicious, gloomy, chaste, ignorant, and shy. The heart of that x-convict was full of virginity. His sister and his sister’s children had left im only a vague and far-off memory which had finally almost completely anished; he had made every effort to find them, and not having been able to ind them, he had forgotten them. Human nature is made thus; the other tender motions of his youth, if he had ever had any, had fallen into an abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.4#When he saw Cosette, when he had taken possession of her, carried her off, nd delivered her, he felt his heart moved within him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.5#All the passion and affection within him awoke, and rushed towards that hild. He approached the bed, where she lay sleeping, and trembled with joy. He uffered all the pangs of a mother, and he knew not what it meant; for that reat and singular movement of a heart which begins to love is a very obscure nd a very sweet thing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.6#Poor old man, with a perfectly new heart!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.7#Only, as he was five and fifty, and Cosette eight years of age, all that ight have been love in the whole course of his life flowed together into a sort f ineffable light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.8#It was the second white apparition which he had encountered. The Bishop had aused the dawn of virtue to rise on his horizon; Cosette caused the dawn of ove to rise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.9#The early days passed in this dazzled state.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.10#Cosette, on her side, had also, unknown to herself, become another being, oor little thing! She was so little when her mother left her, that she no onger remembered her. Like all children, who resemble young shoots of the vine, hich cling to everything, she had tried to love; she had not succeeded. All had epulsed her,—the Thénardiers, their children, other children. She had loved the og, and he had died, after which nothing and nobody would have anything to do ith her. It is a sad thing to say, and we have already intimated it, that, at ight years of age, her heart was cold. It was not her fault; it was not the aculty of loving that she lacked; alas! it was the possibility. Thus, from the ery first day, all her sentient and thinking powers loved this kind man. She elt that which she had never felt before—a sensation of expansion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.11#The man no longer produced on her the effect of being old or poor; she hought Jean Valjean handsome, just as she thought the hovel pretty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.12#These are the effects of the dawn, of childhood, of joy. The novelty of he earth and of life counts for something here. Nothing is so charming as the oloring reflection of happiness on a garret. We all have in our past a elightful garret.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.13#Nature, a difference of fifty years, had set a profound gulf between Jean aljean and Cosette; destiny filled in this gulf. Destiny suddenly united and edded with its irresistible power these two uprooted existences, differing in ge, alike in sorrow. One, in fact, completed the other. Cosette’s instinct ought a father, as Jean Valjean’s instinct sought a child. To meet was to find ach other. At the mysterious moment when their hands touched, they were welded ogether. When these two souls perceived each other, they recognized each other s necessary to each other, and embraced each other closely.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.14#Taking the words in their most comprehensive and absolute sense, we may ay that, separated from every one by the walls of the tomb, Jean Valjean was he widower, and Cosette was the orphan: this situation caused Jean Valjean to ecome Cosette’s father after a celestial fashion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.15#And in truth, the mysterious impression produced on Cosette in the depths f the forest of Chelles by the hand of Jean Valjean grasping hers in the dark as not an illusion, but a reality. The entrance of that man into the destiny of hat child had been the advent of God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.16#Moreover, Jean Valjean had chosen his refuge well. There he seemed erfectly secure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.17#The chamber with a dressing-room, which he occupied with Cosette, was the ne whose window opened on the boulevard. This being the only window in the ouse, no neighbors’ glances were to be feared from across the way or at the ide.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.18#The ground floor of Number 50-52, a sort of dilapidated penthouse, served s a wagon-house for market-gardeners, and no communication existed between it nd the first story. It was separated by the flooring, which had neither traps or stairs, and which formed the diaphragm of the building, as it were. The irst story contained, as we have said, numerous chambers and several attics, nly one of which was occupied by the old woman who took charge of Jean aljean’s housekeeping; all the rest was uninhabited.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.19#It was this old woman, ornamented with the name of the _principal lodger_, nd in reality intrusted with the functions of portress, who had let him the odging on Christmas eve. He had represented himself to her as a gentleman of eans who had been ruined by Spanish bonds, who was coming there to live with is little daughter. He had paid her six months in advance, and had commissioned he old woman to furnish the chamber and dressing-room, as we have seen. It was his good woman who had lighted the fire in the stove, and prepared everything n the evening of their arrival.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.20#Week followed week; these two beings led a happy life in that hovel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.21#Cosette laughed, chattered, and sang from daybreak. Children have their orning song as well as birds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.22#It sometimes happened that Jean Valjean clasped her tiny red hand, all racked with chilblains, and kissed it. The poor child, who was used to being eaten, did not know the meaning of this, and ran away in confusion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.23#At times she became serious and stared at her little black gown. Cosette as no longer in rags; she was in mourning. She had emerged from misery, and she as entering into life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.24#Jean Valjean had undertaken to teach her to read. Sometimes, as he made he child spell, he remembered that it was with the idea of doing evil that he ad learned to read in prison. This idea had ended in teaching a child to read. hen the ex-convict smiled with the pensive smile of the angels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.25#He felt in it a premeditation from on high, the will of some one who was ot man, and he became absorbed in reverie. Good thoughts have their abysses as ell as evil ones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.26#To teach Cosette to read, and to let her play, this constituted nearly the hole of Jean Valjean’s existence. And then he talked of her mother, and he made er pray.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.27#She called him _father_, and knew no other name for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.28#He passed hours in watching her dressing and undressing her doll, and in istening to her prattle. Life, henceforth, appeared to him to be full of nterest; men seemed to him good and just; he no longer reproached any one in hought; he saw no reason why he should not live to be a very old man, now that his child loved him. He saw a whole future stretching out before him, lluminated by Cosette as by a charming light. The best of us are not exempt rom egotistical thoughts. At times, he reflected with a sort of joy that she ould be ugly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.3.29#This is only a personal opinion; but, to utter our whole thought, at the oint where Jean Valjean had arrived when he began to love Cosette, it is by no eans clear to us that he did not need this encouragement in order that he might ersevere in well-doing. He had just viewed the malice of men and the misery of ociety under a new aspect—incomplete aspects, which unfortunately only xhibited one side of the truth, the fate of woman as summed up in Fantine, and ublic authority as personified in Javert. He had returned to prison, this time or having done right; he had quaffed fresh bitterness; disgust and lassitude ere overpowering him; even the memory of the Bishop probably suffered a emporary eclipse, though sure to reappear later on luminous and triumphant; ut, after all, that sacred memory was growing dim. Who knows whether Jean aljean had not been on the eve of growing discouraged and of falling once more? e loved and grew strong again. Alas! he walked with no less indecision than osette. He protected her, and she strengthened him. Thanks to him, she could alk through life; thanks to her, he could continue in virtue. He was that hild’s stay, and she was his prop. Oh, unfathomable and divine mystery of the alances of destiny!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE REMARKS OF THE PRINCIPAL TENANT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.1#Jean Valjean was prudent enough never to go out by day. Every evening, at wilight, he walked for an hour or two, sometimes alone, often with Cosette, eeking the most deserted side alleys of the boulevard, and entering churches at ightfall. He liked to go to Saint-Médard, which is the nearest church. When he id not take Cosette with him, she remained with the old woman; but the child’s elight was to go out with the good man. She preferred an hour with him to all er rapturous _tête-à-têtes_ with Catherine. He held her hand as they walked, nd said sweet things to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.2#It turned out that Cosette was a very gay little person.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.3#The old woman attended to the housekeeping and cooking and went to arket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.4#They lived soberly, always having a little fire, but like people in very oderate circumstances. Jean Valjean had made no alterations in the furniture as t was the first day; he had merely had the glass door leading to Cosette’s ressing-room replaced by a solid door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.5#He still wore his yellow coat, his black breeches, and his old hat. In the treet, he was taken for a poor man. It sometimes happened that kind-hearted omen turned back to bestow a sou on him. Jean Valjean accepted the sou with a eep bow. It also happened occasionally that he encountered some poor wretch sking alms; then he looked behind him to make sure that no one was observing im, stealthily approached the unfortunate man, put a piece of money into his and, often a silver coin, and walked rapidly away. This had its disadvantages. e began to be known in the neighborhood under the name of _the beggar who gives lms_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.6#The old _principal lodger_, a cross-looking creature, who was thoroughly ermeated, so far as her neighbors were concerned, with the inquisitiveness eculiar to envious persons, scrutinized Jean Valjean a great deal, without his uspecting the fact. She was a little deaf, which rendered her talkative. There emained to her from her past, two teeth,—one above, the other below,—which she as continually knocking against each other. She had questioned Cosette, who had ot been able to tell her anything, since she knew nothing herself except that he had come from Montfermeil. One morning, this spy saw Jean Valjean, with an ir which struck the old gossip as peculiar, entering one of the uninhabited ompartments of the hovel. She followed him with the step of an old cat, and was ble to observe him without being seen, through a crack in the door, which was irectly opposite him. Jean Valjean had his back turned towards this door, by ay of greater security, no doubt. The old woman saw him fumble in his pocket nd draw thence a case, scissors, and thread; then he began to rip the lining of ne of the skirts of his coat, and from the opening he took a bit of yellowish aper, which he unfolded. The old woman recognized, with terror, the fact that t was a bank-bill for a thousand francs. It was the second or third only that he had seen in the course of her existence. She fled in alarm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.7#A moment later, Jean Valjean accosted her, and asked her to go and get this housand-franc bill changed for him, adding that it was his quarterly income, hich he had received the day before. “Where?” thought the old woman. “He did ot go out until six o’clock in the evening, and the government bank certainly s not open at that hour.” The old woman went to get the bill changed, and entioned her surmises. That thousand-franc note, commented on and multiplied, roduced a vast amount of terrified discussion among the gossips of the Rue des ignes Saint-Marcel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.8#A few days later, it chanced that Jean Valjean was sawing some wood, in his hirt-sleeves, in the corridor. The old woman was in the chamber, putting things n order. She was alone. Cosette was occupied in admiring the wood as it was awed. The old woman caught sight of the coat hanging on a nail, and examined t. The lining had been sewed up again. The good woman felt of it carefully, and hought she observed in the skirts and revers thicknesses of paper. More housand-franc bank-bills, no doubt!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.9#She also noticed that there were all sorts of things in the pockets. Not nly the needles, thread, and scissors which she had seen, but a big ocket-book, a very large knife, and—a suspicious circumstance—several wigs of arious colors. Each pocket of this coat had the air of being in a manner rovided against unexpected accidents.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.4.10#Thus the inhabitants of the house reached the last days of winter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.head#CHAPTER V—A FIVE-FRANC PIECE FALLS ON THE GROUND AND PRODUCES A UMULT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.1#Near Saint-Médard’s church there was a poor man who was in the habit of rouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned, and on whom ean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity. He never passed this man without iving him a few sous. Sometimes he spoke to him. Those who envied this endicant said that he belonged to the police. He was an ex-beadle of eventy-five, who was constantly mumbling his prayers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.2#One evening, as Jean Valjean was passing by, when he had not Cosette with im, he saw the beggar in his usual place, beneath the lantern which had just een lighted. The man seemed engaged in prayer, according to his custom, and was uch bent over. Jean Valjean stepped up to him and placed his customary alms in is hand. The mendicant raised his eyes suddenly, stared intently at Jean aljean, then dropped his head quickly. This movement was like a flash of ightning. Jean Valjean was seized with a shudder. It seemed to him that he had ust caught sight, by the light of the street lantern, not of the placid and eaming visage of the old beadle, but of a well-known and startling face. He xperienced the same impression that one would have on finding one’s self, all f a sudden, face to face, in the dark, with a tiger. He recoiled, terrified, etrified, daring neither to breathe, to speak, to remain, nor to flee, staring t the beggar who had dropped his head, which was enveloped in a rag, and no onger appeared to know that he was there. At this strange moment, an nstinct—possibly the mysterious instinct of self-preservation,—restrained Jean aljean from uttering a word. The beggar had the same figure, the same rags, the ame appearance as he had every day. “Bah!” said Jean Valjean, “I am mad! I am reaming! Impossible!” And he returned profoundly troubled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.3#He hardly dared to confess, even to himself, that the face which he thought e had seen was the face of Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.4#That night, on thinking the matter over, he regretted not having questioned he man, in order to force him to raise his head a second time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.5#On the following day, at nightfall, he went back. The beggar was at his ost. “Good day, my good man,” said Jean Valjean, resolutely, handing him a sou. he beggar raised his head, and replied in a whining voice, “Thanks, my good ir.” It was unmistakably the ex-beadle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.6#Jean Valjean felt completely reassured. He began to laugh. “How the deuce ould I have thought that I saw Javert there?” he thought. “Am I going to lose y eyesight now?” And he thought no more about it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.7#A few days afterwards,—it might have been at eight o’clock in the vening,—he was in his room, and engaged in making Cosette spell aloud, when he eard the house door open and then shut again. This struck him as singular. The ld woman, who was the only inhabitant of the house except himself, always went o bed at nightfall, so that she might not burn out her candles. Jean Valjean ade a sign to Cosette to be quiet. He heard some one ascending the stairs. It ight possibly be the old woman, who might have fallen ill and have been out to he apothecary’s. Jean Valjean listened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.8#The step was heavy, and sounded like that of a man; but the old woman wore tout shoes, and there is nothing which so strongly resembles the step of a man s that of an old woman. Nevertheless, Jean Valjean blew out his candle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.9#He had sent Cosette to bed, saying to her in a low voice, “Get into bed ery softly”; and as he kissed her brow, the steps paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.10#Jean Valjean remained silent, motionless, with his back towards the door, eated on the chair from which he had not stirred, and holding his breath in the ark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.11#After the expiration of a rather long interval, he turned round, as he eard nothing more, and, as he raised his eyes towards the door of his chamber, e saw a light through the keyhole. This light formed a sort of sinister star in he blackness of the door and the wall. There was evidently some one there, who as holding a candle in his hand and listening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.12#Several minutes elapsed thus, and the light retreated. But he heard no ound of footsteps, which seemed to indicate that the person who had been istening at the door had removed his shoes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.13#Jean Valjean threw himself, all dressed as he was, on his bed, and could ot close his eyes all night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.14#At daybreak, just as he was falling into a doze through fatigue, he was wakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some attic at the end of the orridor, then he heard the same masculine footstep which had ascended the tairs on the preceding evening. The step was approaching. He sprang off the bed nd applied his eye to the keyhole, which was tolerably large, hoping to see the erson who had made his way by night into the house and had listened at his oor, as he passed. It was a man, in fact, who passed, this time without ausing, in front of Jean Valjean’s chamber. The corridor was too dark to allow f the person’s face being distinguished; but when the man reached the taircase, a ray of light from without made it stand out like a silhouette, and ean Valjean had a complete view of his back. The man was of lofty stature, clad n a long frock-coat, with a cudgel under his arm. The formidable neck and houlders belonged to Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.15#Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of him through is window opening on the boulevard, but he would have been obliged to open the indow: he dared not.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.16#It was evident that this man had entered with a key, and like himself. Who ad given him that key? What was the meaning of this?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.17#When the old woman came to do the work, at seven o’clock in the morning, ean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her, but he did not question her. The ood woman appeared as usual.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.18#As she swept up she remarked to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.19#“Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.20#At that age, and on that boulevard, eight o’clock in the evening was the ead of the night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.21#“That is true, by the way,” he replied, in the most natural tone possible. Who was it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.22#“It was a new lodger who has come into the house,” said the old woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.23#“And what is his name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.24#“I don’t know exactly; Dumont, or Daumont, or some name of that sort.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.25#“And who is this Monsieur Dumont?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.26#The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes, and nswered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.27#“A gentleman of property, like yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.28#Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning. Jean Valjean thought he perceived ne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.29#When the old woman had taken her departure, he did up a hundred francs hich he had in a cupboard, into a roll, and put it in his pocket. In spite of ll the precautions which he took in this operation so that he might not be eard rattling silver, a hundred-sou piece escaped from his hands and rolled oisily on the floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.30#When darkness came on, he descended and carefully scrutinized both sides f the boulevard. He saw no one. The boulevard appeared to be absolutely eserted. It is true that a person can conceal himself behind trees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.31#He went upstairs again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.32#“Come.” he said to Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.4.5.33#He took her by the hand, and they both went out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.head#BOOK FIFTH—FOR A BLACK HUNT, A MUTE PACK
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.1#An observation here becomes necessary, in view of the pages which the eader is about to peruse, and of others which will be met with further on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.2#The author of this book, who regrets the necessity of mentioning himself, as been absent from Paris for many years. Paris has been transformed since he uitted it. A new city has arisen, which is, after a fashion, unknown to him. here is no need for him to say that he loves Paris: Paris is his mind’s natal ity. In consequence of demolitions and reconstructions, the Paris of his youth, hat Paris which he bore away religiously in his memory, is now a Paris of days one by. He must be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it still existed. t is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a spot and says, “In uch a street there stands such and such a house,” neither street nor house will ny longer exist in that locality. Readers may verify the facts if they care to ake the trouble. For his own part, he is unacquainted with the new Paris, and e writes with the old Paris before his eyes in an illusion which is precious to im. It is a delight to him to dream that there still lingers behind him omething of that which he beheld when he was in his own country, and that all as not vanished. So long as you go and come in your native land, you imagine hat those streets are a matter of indifference to you; that those windows, hose roofs, and those doors are nothing to you; that those walls are strangers o you; that those trees are merely the first encountered haphazard; that those ouses, which you do not enter, are useless to you; that the pavements which you read are merely stones. Later on, when you are no longer there, you perceive hat the streets are dear to you; that you miss those roofs, those doors; and hat those walls are necessary to you, those trees are well beloved by you; that ou entered those houses which you never entered, every day, and that you have eft a part of your heart, of your blood, of your soul, in those pavements. All hose places which you no longer behold, which you may never behold again, erchance, and whose memory you have cherished, take on a melancholy charm, ecur to your mind with the melancholy of an apparition, make the holy land isible to you, and are, so to speak, the very form of France, and you love hem; and you call them up as they are, as they were, and you persist in this, nd you will submit to no change: for you are attached to the figure of your atherland as to the face of your mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.3#May we, then, be permitted to speak of the past in the present? That said, e beg the reader to take note of it, and we continue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.4#Jean Valjean instantly quitted the boulevard and plunged into the streets, aking the most intricate lines which he could devise, returning on his track at imes, to make sure that he was not being followed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.5#This manœuvre is peculiar to the hunted stag. On soil where an imprint of he track may be left, this manœuvre possesses, among other advantages, that of eceiving the huntsmen and the dogs, by throwing them on the wrong scent. In enery this is called _false re-imbushment_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.6#The moon was full that night. Jean Valjean was not sorry for this. The oon, still very close to the horizon, cast great masses of light and shadow in he streets. Jean Valjean could glide along close to the houses on the dark ide, and yet keep watch on the light side. He did not, perhaps, take ufficiently into consideration the fact that the dark side escaped him. Still, n the deserted lanes which lie near the Rue Poliveau, he thought he felt ertain that no one was following him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.7#Cosette walked on without asking any questions. The sufferings of the first ix years of her life had instilled something passive into her nature. oreover,—and this is a remark to which we shall frequently have occasion to ecur,—she had grown used, without being herself aware of it, to the eculiarities of this good man and to the freaks of destiny. And then she was ith him, and she felt safe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.8#Jean Valjean knew no more where he was going than did Cosette. He trusted n God, as she trusted in him. It seemed as though he also were clinging to the and of some one greater than himself; he thought he felt a being leading him, hough invisible. However, he had no settled idea, no plan, no project. He was ot even absolutely sure that it was Javert, and then it might have been Javert, ithout Javert knowing that he was Jean Valjean. Was not he disguised? Was not e believed to be dead? Still, queer things had been going on for several days. e wanted no more of them. He was determined not to return to the Gorbeau house. ike the wild animal chased from its lair, he was seeking a hole in which he ight hide until he could find one where he might dwell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.9#Jean Valjean described many and varied labyrinths in the Mouffetard uarter, which was already asleep, as though the discipline of the Middle Ages nd the yoke of the curfew still existed; he combined in various manners, with unning strategy, the Rue Censier and the Rue Copeau, the Rue du attoir-Saint-Victor and the Rue du Puits l’Ermite. There are lodging houses in his locality, but he did not even enter one, finding nothing which suited him. e had no doubt that if any one had chanced to be upon his track, they would ave lost it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.10#As eleven o’clock struck from Saint-Étienne-du-Mont, he was traversing the ue de Pontoise, in front of the office of the commissary of police, situated at o. 14. A few moments later, the instinct of which we have spoken above made him urn round. At that moment he saw distinctly, thanks to the commissary’s antern, which betrayed them, three men who were following him closely, pass, ne after the other, under that lantern, on the dark side of the street. One of he three entered the alley leading to the commissary’s house. The one who arched at their head struck him as decidedly suspicious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.11#“Come, child,” he said to Cosette; and he made haste to quit the Rue ontoise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.12#He took a circuit, turned into the Passage des Patriarches, which was losed on account of the hour, strode along the Rue de l‘Épée-de-Bois and the ue de l’Arbalète, and plunged into the Rue des Postes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.13#At that time there was a square formed by the intersection of streets, here the College Rollin stands to-day, and where the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève urns off.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.14#It is understood, of course, that the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève is an old treet, and that a posting-chaise does not pass through the Rue des Postes once n ten years. In the thirteenth century this Rue des Postes was inhabited by otters, and its real name is Rue des Pots.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.15#The moon cast a livid light into this open space. Jean Valjean went into mbush in a doorway, calculating that if the men were still following him, he ould not fail to get a good look at them, as they traversed this illuminated pace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.16#In point of fact, three minutes had not elapsed when the men made their ppearance. There were four of them now. All were tall, dressed in long, brown oats, with round hats, and huge cudgels in their hands. Their great stature and heir vast fists rendered them no less alarming than did their sinister stride hrough the darkness. One would have pronounced them four spectres disguised as ourgeois.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.1.17#They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group, like men in onsultation. They had an air of indecision. The one who appeared to be their eader turned round and pointed hastily with his right hand in the direction hich Jean Valjean had taken; another seemed to indicate the contrary direction ith considerable obstinacy. At the moment when the first man wheeled round, the oon fell full in his face. Jean Valjean recognized Javert perfectly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.head#CHAPTER II—IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D’AUSTERLITZ BEARS ARRIAGES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.1#Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean: fortunately it still lasted for he men. He took advantage of their hesitation. It was time lost for them, but ained for him. He slipped from under the gate where he had concealed himself, nd went down the Rue des Postes, towards the region of the Jardin des Plantes. osette was beginning to be tired. He took her in his arms and carried her. here were no passers-by, and the street lanterns had not been lighted on ccount of there being a moon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.2#He redoubled his pace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.3#In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries, on the front of which he moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient inscription:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.4#De Goblet fils c’est ici la fabrique; Venez choisir des cruches et des rocs, Des pots à fleurs, des tuyaux, de la brique. A tout venant le Cœur vend es Carreaux.14
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.5#He left behind him the Rue de la Clef, then the Fountain Saint-Victor, kirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets, and reached the quay. There e turned round. The quay was deserted. The streets were deserted. There was no ne behind him. He drew a long breath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.6#He gained the Pont d’Austerlitz.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.7#Tolls were still collected there at that epoch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.8#He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.9#“It is two sous,” said the old soldier in charge of the bridge. “You are arrying a child who can walk. Pay for two.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.10#He paid, vexed that his passage should have aroused remark. Every flight hould be an imperceptible slipping away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.11#A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself, and on ts way, like him, to the right bank. This was of use to him. He could traverse he bridge in the shadow of the cart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.12#Towards the middle of the Bridge, Cosette, whose feet were benumbed, anted to walk. He set her on the ground and took her hand again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.13#The bridge once crossed, he perceived some timber-yards on his right. He irected his course thither. In order to reach them, it was necessary to risk imself in a tolerably large unsheltered and illuminated space. He did not esitate. Those who were on his track had evidently lost the scent, and Jean aljean believed himself to be out of danger. Hunted, yes; followed, no.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.14#A little street, the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, opened out between wo timber-yards enclosed in walls. This street was dark and narrow and seemed ade expressly for him. Before entering it he cast a glance behind him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.15#From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent of the Pont ’Austerlitz.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.16#Four shadows were just entering on the bridge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.17#These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes and were on heir way to the right bank.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.18#These four shadows were the four men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.19#Jean Valjean shuddered like the wild beast which is recaptured.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.20#One hope remained to him; it was, that the men had not, perhaps, stepped n the bridge, and had not caught sight of him while he was crossing the large lluminated space, holding Cosette by the hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.21#In that case, by plunging into the little street before him, he might scape, if he could reach the timber-yards, the marshes, the market-gardens, the ninhabited ground which was not built upon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.2.22#It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent little treet. He entered it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.head#CHAPTER III—TO WIT, THE PLAN OF PARIS IN 1727
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.1#Three hundred paces further on, he arrived at a point where the street orked. It separated into two streets, which ran in a slanting line, one to the ight, and the other to the left.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.2#Jean Valjean had before him what resembled the two branches of a Y. Which hould he choose? He did not hesitate, but took the one on the right.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.3#Why?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.4#Because that to the left ran towards a suburb, that is to say, towards nhabited regions, and the right branch towards the open country, that is to ay, towards deserted regions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.5#However, they no longer walked very fast. Cosette’s pace retarded Jean aljean’s.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.6#He took her up and carried her again. Cosette laid her head on the shoulder f the good man and said not a word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.7#He turned round from time to time and looked behind him. He took care to eep always on the dark side of the street. The street was straight in his rear. he first two or three times that he turned round he saw nothing; the silence as profound, and he continued his march somewhat reassured. All at once, on urning round, he thought he perceived in the portion of the street which he had ust passed through, far off in the obscurity, something which was moving.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.8#He rushed forward precipitately rather than walked, hoping to find some ide-street, to make his escape through it, and thus to break his scent once ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.9#He arrived at a wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.10#This wall, however, did not absolutely prevent further progress; it was a all which bordered a transverse street, in which the one he had taken nded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.11#Here again, he was obliged to come to a decision; should he go to the ight or to the left.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.12#He glanced to the right. The fragmentary lane was prolonged between uildings which were either sheds or barns, then ended at a blind alley. The xtremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible,—a lofty white wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.13#He glanced to the left. On that side the lane was open, and about two undred paces further on, ran into a street of which it was the affluent. On hat side lay safety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.14#At the moment when Jean Valjean was meditating a turn to the left, in an ffort to reach the street which he saw at the end of the lane, he perceived a ort of motionless, black statue at the corner of the lane and the street owards which he was on the point of directing his steps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.15#It was some one, a man, who had evidently just been posted there, and who as barring the passage and waiting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.16#Jean Valjean recoiled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.17#The point of Paris where Jean Valjean found himself, situated between the aubourg Saint-Antoine and la Râpée, is one of those which recent improvements ave transformed from top to bottom,—resulting in disfigurement according to ome, and in a transfiguration according to others. The market-gardens, the imber-yards, and the old buildings have been effaced. To-day, there are rand-new, wide streets, arenas, circuses, hippodromes, railway stations, and a rison, Mazas, there; progress, as the reader sees, with its antidote.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.18#Half a century ago, in that ordinary, popular tongue, which is all ompounded of traditions, which persists in calling the Institut _les uatre-Nations_, and the Opera-Comique _Feydeau_, the precise spot whither Jean aljean had arrived was called _le Petit-Picpus_. The Porte Saint-Jacques, the orte Paris, the Barrière des Sergents, the Porcherons, la Galiote, les élestins, les Capucins, le Mail, la Bourbe, l’Arbre de Cracovie, la etite-Pologne—these are the names of old Paris which survive amid the new. The emory of the populace hovers over these relics of the past.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.19#Le Petit-Picpus, which, moreover, hardly ever had any existence, and never as more than the outline of a quarter, had nearly the monkish aspect of a panish town. The roads were not much paved; the streets were not much built up. ith the exception of the two or three streets, of which we shall presently peak, all was wall and solitude there. Not a shop, not a vehicle, hardly a andle lighted here and there in the windows; all lights extinguished after ten ’clock. Gardens, convents, timber-yards, marshes; occasional lowly dwellings nd great walls as high as the houses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.20#Such was this quarter in the last century. The Revolution snubbed it oundly. The republican government demolished and cut through it. Rubbish shoots ere established there. Thirty years ago, this quarter was disappearing under he erasing process of new buildings. To-day, it has been utterly blotted out. he Petit-Picpus, of which no existing plan has preserved a trace, is indicated ith sufficient clearness in the plan of 1727, published at Paris by Denis hierry, Rue Saint-Jacques, opposite the Rue du Plâtre; and at Lyons, by Jean irin, Rue Mercière, at the sign of Prudence. Petit-Picpus had, as we have just entioned, a Y of streets, formed by the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, which pread out in two branches, taking on the left the name of Little Picpus Street, nd on the right the name of the Rue Polonceau. The two limbs of the Y were onnected at the apex as by a bar; this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur. The Rue olonceau ended there; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on, and ascended towards the enoir market. A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the Rue olonceau, and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur, turning abruptly at a right ngle, in front of him the wall of that street, and on his right a truncated rolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur, which had no issue and was called the ul-de-Sac Genrot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.21#It was here that Jean Valjean stood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.22#As we have just said, on catching sight of that black silhouette standing n guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the Rue Petit-Picpus, he ecoiled. There could be no doubt of it. That phantom was lying in wait for im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.23#What was he to do?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.3.24#The time for retreating was passed. That which he had perceived in ovement an instant before, in the distant darkness, was Javert and his squad ithout a doubt. Javert was probably already at the commencement of the street t whose end Jean Valjean stood. Javert, to all appearances, was acquainted with his little labyrinth, and had taken his precautions by sending one of his men o guard the exit. These surmises, which so closely resembled proofs, whirled uddenly, like a handful of dust caught up by an unexpected gust of wind, hrough Jean Valjean’s mournful brain. He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot; there e was cut off. He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus; there stood a sentinel. He saw hat black form standing out in relief against the white pavement, illuminated y the moon; to advance was to fall into this man’s hands; to retreat was to ling himself into Javert’s arms. Jean Valjean felt himself caught, as in a net, hich was slowly contracting; he gazed heavenward in despair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.1#In order to understand what follows, it is requisite to form an exact idea f the Droit-Mur lane, and, in particular, of the angle which one leaves on the eft when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau into this lane. Droit-Mur lane was lmost entirely bordered on the right, as far as the Rue Petit-Picpus, by houses f mean aspect; on the left by a solitary building of severe outlines, composed f numerous parts which grew gradually higher by a story or two as they pproached the Rue Petit-Picpus side; so that this building, which was very ofty on the Rue Petit-Picpus side, was tolerably low on the side adjoining the ue Polonceau. There, at the angle of which we have spoken, it descended to such degree that it consisted of merely a wall. This wall did not abut directly on he street; it formed a deeply retreating niche, concealed by its two corners rom two observers who might have been, one in the Rue Polonceau, the other in he Rue Droit-Mur.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.2#Beginning with these angles of the niche, the wall extended along the Rue olonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49, and along the Rue roit-Mur, where the fragment was much shorter, as far as the gloomy building hich we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected, thus forming another etreating angle in the street. This gable was sombre of aspect; only one window as visible, or, to speak more correctly, two shutters covered with a sheet of inc and kept constantly closed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.3#The state of the places of which we are here giving a description is igorously exact, and will certainly awaken a very precise memory in the mind of ld inhabitants of the quarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.4#The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal and retched door; it was a vast, formless assemblage of perpendicular planks, the pper ones being broader than the lower, bound together by long transverse trips of iron. At one side there was a carriage gate of the ordinary imensions, and which had evidently not been cut more than fifty years reviously.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.5#A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche, and the wall was covered ith ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.6#In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself, this sombre uilding had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which tempted him. He ran is eyes rapidly over it; he said to himself, that if he could contrive to get nside it, he might save himself. First he conceived an idea, then a hope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.7#In the central portion of the front of this building, on the Rue Droit-Mur ide, there were at all the windows of the different stories ancient cistern ipes of lead. The various branches of the pipes which led from one central pipe o all these little basins sketched out a sort of tree on the front. These amifications of pipes with their hundred elbows imitated those old leafless ine-stocks which writhe over the fronts of old farm-houses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.8#This odd espalier, with its branches of lead and iron, was the first thing hat struck Jean Valjean. He seated Cosette with her back against a stone post, ith an injunction to be silent, and ran to the spot where the conduit touched he pavement. Perhaps there was some way of climbing up by it and entering the ouse. But the pipe was dilapidated and past service, and hardly hung to its astenings. Moreover, all the windows of this silent dwelling were grated with eavy iron bars, even the attic windows in the roof. And then, the moon fell ull upon that façade, and the man who was watching at the corner of the street ould have seen Jean Valjean in the act of climbing. And finally, what was to be one with Cosette? How was she to be drawn up to the top of a three-story ouse?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.9#He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe, and crawled long the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.10#When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette, he oticed that no one could see him there. As we have just explained, he was oncealed from all eyes, no matter from which direction they were approaching; esides this, he was in the shadow. Finally, there were two doors; perhaps they ight be forced. The wall above which he saw the linden-tree and the ivy vidently abutted on a garden where he could, at least, hide himself, although here were as yet no leaves on the trees, and spend the remainder of the ight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.11#Time was passing; he must act quickly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.12#He felt over the carriage door, and immediately recognized the fact that t was impracticable outside and in.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.13#He approached the other door with more hope; it was frightfully decrepit; ts very immensity rendered it less solid; the planks were rotten; the iron ands—there were only three of them—were rusted. It seemed as though it might be ossible to pierce this worm-eaten barrier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.4.14#On examining it he found that the door was not a door; it had neither inges, cross-bars, lock, nor fissure in the middle; the iron bands traversed it rom side to side without any break. Through the crevices in the planks he aught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stone roughly cemented together, hich passers-by might still have seen there ten years ago. He was forced to cknowledge with consternation that this apparent door was simply the wooden ecoration of a building against which it was placed. It was easy to tear off a lank; but then, one found one’s self face to face with a wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.head#CHAPTER V—WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.1#At that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible at some istance. Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street. Seven or ight soldiers, drawn up in a platoon, had just debouched into the Rue olonceau. He saw the gleam of their bayonets. They were advancing towards him; hese soldiers, at whose head he distinguished Javert’s tall figure, advanced lowly and cautiously. They halted frequently; it was plain that they were earching all the nooks of the walls and all the embrasures of the doors and lleys.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.2#This was some patrol that Javert had encountered—there could be no mistake s to this surmise—and whose aid he had demanded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.3#Javert’s two acolytes were marching in their ranks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.4#At the rate at which they were marching, and in consideration of the halts hich they were making, it would take them about a quarter of an hour to reach he spot where Jean Valjean stood. It was a frightful moment. A few minutes only eparated Jean Valjean from that terrible precipice which yawned before him for he third time. And the galleys now meant not only the galleys, but Cosette lost o him forever; that is to say, a life resembling the interior of a tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.5#There was but one thing which was possible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.6#Jean Valjean had this peculiarity, that he carried, as one might say, two eggar’s pouches: in one he kept his saintly thoughts; in the other the edoubtable talents of a convict. He rummaged in the one or the other, according o circumstances.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.7#Among his other resources, thanks to his numerous escapes from the prison t Toulon, he was, as it will be remembered, a past master in the incredible art f crawling up without ladder or climbing-irons, by sheer muscular force, by eaning on the nape of his neck, his shoulders, his hips, and his knees, by elping himself on the rare projections of the stone, in the right angle of a all, as high as the sixth story, if need be; an art which has rendered so elebrated and so alarming that corner of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris y which Battemolle, condemned to death, made his escape twenty years ago.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.8#Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied the inden; it was about eighteen feet in height. The angle which it formed with the able of the large building was filled, at its lower extremity, by a mass of asonry of a triangular shape, probably intended to preserve that too convenient orner from the rubbish of those dirty creatures called the passers-by. This ractice of filling up corners of the wall is much in use in Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.9#This mass was about five feet in height; the space above the summit of this ass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteen feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.10#The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.11#Cosette was the difficulty, for she did not know how to climb a wall. hould he abandon her? Jean Valjean did not once think of that. It was mpossible to carry her. A man’s whole strength is required to successfully arry out these singular ascents. The least burden would disturb his centre of ravity and pull him downwards.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.12#A rope would have been required; Jean Valjean had none. Where was he to et a rope at midnight, in the Rue Polonceau? Certainly, if Jean Valjean had had kingdom, he would have given it for a rope at that moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.13#All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which sometimes azzle, sometimes illuminate us.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.14#Jean Valjean’s despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post of the lind alley Genrot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.15#At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris. At nightfall anterns placed at regular distances were lighted; they were ascended and escended by means of a rope, which traversed the street from side to side, and as adjusted in a groove of the post. The pulley over which this rope ran was astened underneath the lantern in a little iron box, the key to which was kept y the lamp-lighter, and the rope itself was protected by a metal case.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.16#Jean Valjean, with the energy of a supreme struggle, crossed the street at ne bound, entered the blind alley, broke the latch of the little box with the oint of his knife, and an instant later he was beside Cosette once more. He had rope. These gloomy inventors of expedients work rapidly when they are fighting gainst fatality.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.17#We have already explained that the lanterns had not been lighted that ight. The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus naturally extinct, like the est; and one could pass directly under it without even noticing that it was no onger in its place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.18#Nevertheless, the hour, the place, the darkness, Jean Valjean’s bsorption, his singular gestures, his goings and comings, all had begun to ender Cosette uneasy. Any other child than she would have given vent to loud hrieks long before. She contented herself with plucking Jean Valjean by the kirt of his coat. They could hear the sound of the patrol’s approach ever more nd more distinctly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.19#“Father,” said she, in a very low voice, “I am afraid. Who is coming onder?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.20#“Hush!” replied the unhappy man; “it is Madame Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.21#Cosette shuddered. He added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.22#“Say nothing. Don’t interfere with me. If you cry out, if you weep, the hénardier is lying in wait for you. She is coming to take you back.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.23#Then, without haste, but without making a useless movement, with firm and urt precision, the more remarkable at a moment when the patrol and Javert might ome upon him at any moment, he undid his cravat, passed it round Cosette’s body nder the armpits, taking care that it should not hurt the child, fastened this ravat to one end of the rope, by means of that knot which seafaring men call a swallow knot,” took the other end of the rope in his teeth, pulled off his hoes and stockings, which he threw over the wall, stepped upon the mass of asonry, and began to raise himself in the angle of the wall and the gable with s much solidity and certainty as though he had the rounds of a ladder under his eet and elbows. Half a minute had not elapsed when he was resting on his knees n the wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.24#Cosette gazed at him in stupid amazement, without uttering a word. Jean aljean’s injunction, and the name of Madame Thénardier, had chilled her lood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.25#All at once she heard Jean Valjean’s voice crying to her, though in a very ow tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.26#“Put your back against the wall.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.27#She obeyed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.28#“Don’t say a word, and don’t be alarmed,” went on Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.29#And she felt herself lifted from the ground.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.30#Before she had time to recover herself, she was on the top of the all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.31#Jean Valjean grasped her, put her on his back, took her two tiny hands in is large left hand, lay down flat on his stomach and crawled along on top of he wall as far as the cant. As he had guessed, there stood a building whose oof started from the top of the wooden barricade and descended to within a very hort distance of the ground, with a gentle slope which grazed the linden-tree. lucky circumstance, for the wall was much higher on this side than on the treet side. Jean Valjean could only see the ground at a great depth below im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.32#He had just reached the slope of the roof, and had not yet left the crest f the wall, when a violent uproar announced the arrival of the patrol. The hundering voice of Javert was audible:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.33#“Search the blind alley! The Rue Droit-Mur is guarded! so is the Rue etit-Picpus. I’ll answer for it that he is in the blind alley.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.34#The soldiers rushed into the Genrot alley.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.5.35#Jean Valjean allowed himself to slide down the roof, still holding fast to osette, reached the linden-tree, and leaped to the ground. Whether from terror r courage, Cosette had not breathed a sound, though her hands were a little braded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE BEGINNING OF AN ENIGMA
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.1#Jean Valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast and of ingular aspect; one of those melancholy gardens which seem made to be looked at n winter and at night. This garden was oblong in shape, with an alley of large oplars at the further end, tolerably tall forest trees in the corners, and an nshaded space in the centre, where could be seen a very large, solitary tree, hen several fruit-trees, gnarled and bristling like bushes, beds of vegetables, melon patch, whose glass frames sparkled in the moonlight, and an old well. ere and there stood stone benches which seemed black with moss. The alleys were ordered with gloomy and very erect little shrubs. The grass had half taken ossession of them, and a green mould covered the rest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.2#Jean Valjean had beside him the building whose roof had served him as a eans of descent, a pile of fagots, and, behind the fagots, directly against the all, a stone statue, whose mutilated face was no longer anything more than a hapeless mask which loomed vaguely through the gloom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.3#The building was a sort of ruin, where dismantled chambers were istinguishable, one of which, much encumbered, seemed to serve as a shed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.4#The large building of the Rue Droit-Mur, which had a wing on the Rue etit-Picpus, turned two façades, at right angles, towards this garden. These nterior façades were even more tragic than the exterior. All the windows were rated. Not a gleam of light was visible at any one of them. The upper story had cuttles like prisons. One of those façades cast its shadow on the other, which ell over the garden like an immense black pall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.5#No other house was visible. The bottom of the garden was lost in mist and arkness. Nevertheless, walls could be confusedly made out, which intersected as hough there were more cultivated land beyond, and the low roofs of the Rue olonceau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.6#Nothing more wild and solitary than this garden could be imagined. There as no one in it, which was quite natural in view of the hour; but it did not eem as though this spot were made for any one to walk in, even in broad aylight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.7#Jean Valjean’s first care had been to get hold of his shoes and put them on gain, then to step under the shed with Cosette. A man who is fleeing never hinks himself sufficiently hidden. The child, whose thoughts were still on the hénardier, shared his instinct for withdrawing from sight as much as ossible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.8#Cosette trembled and pressed close to him. They heard the tumultuous noise f the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets; the blows of their un-stocks against the stones; Javert’s appeals to the police spies whom he had osted, and his imprecations mingled with words which could not be istinguished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.9#At the expiration of a quarter of an hour it seemed as though that species f stormy roar were becoming more distant. Jean Valjean held his breath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.10#He had laid his hand lightly on Cosette’s mouth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.11#However, the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm, that this rightful uproar, close and furious as it was, did not disturb him by so much as he shadow of a misgiving. It seemed as though those walls had been built of the eaf stones of which the Scriptures speak.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.12#All at once, in the midst of this profound calm, a fresh sound arose; a ound as celestial, divine, ineffable, ravishing, as the other had been orrible. It was a hymn which issued from the gloom, a dazzling burst of prayer nd harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of the night; women’s voices, ut voices composed at one and the same time of the pure accents of virgins and he innocent accents of children,—voices which are not of the earth, and which esemble those that the newborn infant still hears, and which the dying man ears already. This song proceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above he garden. At the moment when the hubbub of demons retreated, one would have aid that a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.13#Cosette and Jean Valjean fell on their knees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.14#They knew not what it was, they knew not where they were; but both of hem, the man and the child, the penitent and the innocent, felt that they must neel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.15#These voices had this strange characteristic, that they did not prevent he building from seeming to be deserted. It was a supernatural chant in an ninhabited house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.16#While these voices were singing, Jean Valjean thought of nothing. He no onger beheld the night; he beheld a blue sky. It seemed to him that he felt hose wings which we all have within us, unfolding.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.17#The song died away. It may have lasted a long time. Jean Valjean could not ave told. Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.6.18#All fell silent again. There was no longer anything in the street; there as nothing in the garden. That which had menaced, that which had reassured im,—all had vanished. The breeze swayed a few dry weeds on the crest of the all, and they gave out a faint, sweet, melancholy sound.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.head#CHAPTER VII—CONTINUATION OF THE ENIGMA
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.1#The night wind had risen, which indicated that it must be between one and wo o’clock in the morning. Poor Cosette said nothing. As she had seated herself eside him and leaned her head against him, Jean Valjean had fancied that she as asleep. He bent down and looked at her. Cosette’s eyes were wide open, and er thoughtful air pained Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.2#She was still trembling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.3#“Are you sleepy?” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.4#“I am very cold,” she replied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.5#A moment later she resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.6#“Is she still there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.7#“Who?” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.8#“Madame Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.9#Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed to make osette keep silent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.10#“Ah!” said he, “she is gone. You need fear nothing further.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.11#The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.12#The ground was damp, the shed open on all sides, the breeze grew more keen very instant. The goodman took off his coat and wrapped it round Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.13#“Are you less cold now?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.14#“Oh, yes, father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.15#“Well, wait for me a moment. I will soon be back.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.16#He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building, seeking a better helter. He came across doors, but they were closed. There were bars at all the indows of the ground floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.17#Just after he had turned the inner angle of the edifice, he observed that e was coming to some arched windows, where he perceived a light. He stood on iptoe and peeped through one of these windows. They all opened on a tolerably ast hall, paved with large flagstones, cut up by arcades and pillars, where nly a tiny light and great shadows were visible. The light came from a taper hich was burning in one corner. The apartment was deserted, and nothing was tirring in it. Nevertheless, by dint of gazing intently he thought he perceived n the ground something which appeared to be covered with a winding-sheet, and hich resembled a human form. This form was lying face downward, flat on the avement, with the arms extended in the form of a cross, in the immobility of eath. One would have said, judging from a sort of serpent which undulated over he floor, that this sinister form had a rope round its neck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.18#The whole chamber was bathed in that mist of places which are sparely lluminated, which adds to horror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.19#Jean Valjean often said afterwards, that, although many funereal spectres ad crossed his path in life, he had never beheld anything more blood-curdling nd terrible than that enigmatical form accomplishing some inexplicable mystery n that gloomy place, and beheld thus at night. It was alarming to suppose that hat thing was perhaps dead; and still more alarming to think that it was erhaps alive.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.20#He had the courage to plaster his face to the glass, and to watch whether he thing would move. In spite of his remaining thus what seemed to him a very ong time, the outstretched form made no movement. All at once he felt himself verpowered by an inexpressible terror, and he fled. He began to run towards the hed, not daring to look behind him. It seemed to him, that if he turned his ead, he should see that form following him with great strides and waving its rms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.21#He reached the ruin all out of breath. His knees were giving way beneath im; the perspiration was pouring from him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.22#Where was he? Who could ever have imagined anything like that sort of epulchre in the midst of Paris! What was this strange house? An edifice full of octurnal mystery, calling to souls through the darkness with the voice of ngels, and when they came, offering them abruptly that terrible vision; romising to open the radiant portals of heaven, and then opening the horrible ates of the tomb! And it actually was an edifice, a house, which bore a number n the street! It was not a dream! He had to touch the stones to convince imself that such was the fact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.23#Cold, anxiety, uneasiness, the emotions of the night, had given him a enuine fever, and all these ideas were clashing together in his brain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.7.24#He stepped up to Cosette. She was asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE ENIGMA BECOMES DOUBLY MYSTERIOUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.1#The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.2#He sat down beside her and began to think. Little by little, as he gazed at er, he grew calm and regained possession of his freedom of mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.3#He clearly perceived this truth, the foundation of his life henceforth, hat so long as she was there, so long as he had her near him, he should need othing except for her, he should fear nothing except for her. He was not even onscious that he was very cold, since he had taken off his coat to cover er.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.4#Nevertheless, athwart this reverie into which he had fallen he had heard or some time a peculiar noise. It was like the tinkling of a bell. This sound roceeded from the garden. It could be heard distinctly though faintly. It esembled the faint, vague music produced by the bells of cattle at night in the astures.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.5#This noise made Valjean turn round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.6#He looked and saw that there was some one in the garden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.7#A being resembling a man was walking amid the bell-glasses of the melon eds, rising, stooping, halting, with regular movements, as though he were ragging or spreading out something on the ground. This person appeared to imp.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.8#Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy. For them verything is hostile and suspicious. They distrust the day because it enables eople to see them, and the night because it aids in surprising them. A little hile before he had shivered because the garden was deserted, and now he hivered because there was some one there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.9#He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors. He said to himself hat Javert and the spies had, perhaps, not taken their departure; that they ad, no doubt, left people on the watch in the street; that if this man should iscover him in the garden, he would cry out for help against thieves and eliver him up. He took the sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her ehind a heap of old furniture, which was out of use, in the most remote corner f the shed. Cosette did not stir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.10#From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melon atch. The strange thing about it was, that the sound of the bell followed each f this man’s movements. When the man approached, the sound approached; when the an retreated, the sound retreated; if he made any hasty gesture, a tremolo ccompanied the gesture; when he halted, the sound ceased. It appeared evident hat the bell was attached to that man; but what could that signify? Who was his man who had a bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.11#As he put these questions to himself, he touched Cosette’s hands. They ere icy cold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.12#“Ah! good God!” he cried.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.13#He spoke to her in a low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.14#“Cosette!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.15#She did not open her eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.16#He shook her vigorously.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.17#She did not wake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.18#“Is she dead?” he said to himself, and sprang to his feet, quivering from ead to foot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.19#The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind. There are oments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies, and violently orce the partitions of our brains. When those we love are in question, our rudence invents every sort of madness. He remembered that sleep in the open air n a cold night may be fatal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.20#Cosette was pale, and had fallen at full length on the ground at his feet, ithout a movement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.21#He listened to her breathing: she still breathed, but with a respiration hich seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.22#How was he to warm her back to life? How was he to rouse her? All that was ot connected with this vanished from his thoughts. He rushed wildly from the uin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.8.23#It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a ire in less than a quarter of an hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.head#CHAPTER IX—THE MAN WITH THE BELL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.1#He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden. He had taken in is hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his waistcoat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.2#The man’s head was bent down, and he did not see him approaching. In a few trides Jean Valjean stood beside him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.3#Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.4#“One hundred francs!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.5#The man gave a start and raised his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.6#“You can earn a hundred francs,” went on Jean Valjean, “if you will grant e shelter for this night.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.7#The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean’s terrified countenance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.8#“What! so it is you, Father Madeleine!” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.9#That name, thus pronounced, at that obscure hour, in that unknown spot, by hat strange man, made Jean Valjean start back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.10#He had expected anything but that. The person who thus addressed him was a ent and lame old man, dressed almost like a peasant, who wore on his left knee leather knee-cap, whence hung a moderately large bell. His face, which was in he shadow, was not distinguishable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.11#However, the goodman had removed his cap, and exclaimed, trembling all ver:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.12#“Ah, good God! How come you here, Father Madeleine? Where did you enter? ieu-Jésus! Did you fall from heaven? There is no trouble about that: if ever ou do fall, it will be from there. And what a state you are in! You have no ravat; you have no hat; you have no coat! Do you know, you would have rightened any one who did not know you? No coat! Lord God! Are the saints going ad nowadays? But how did you get in here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.13#His words tumbled over each other. The goodman talked with a rustic olubility, in which there was nothing alarming. All this was uttered with a ixture of stupefaction and _naïve_ kindliness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.14#“Who are you? and what house is this?” demanded Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.15#“Ah! pardieu, this is too much!” exclaimed the old man. “I am the person or whom you got the place here, and this house is the one where you had me laced. What! You don’t recognize me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.16#“No,” said Jean Valjean; “and how happens it that you know me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.17#“You saved my life,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.18#He turned. A ray of moonlight outlined his profile, and Jean Valjean ecognized old Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.19#“Ah!” said Jean Valjean, “so it is you? Yes, I recollect you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.20#“That is very lucky,” said the old man, in a reproachful tone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.21#“And what are you doing here?” resumed Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.22#“Why, I am covering my melons, of course!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.23#In fact, at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him, old Fauchelevent eld in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in spreading over he melon bed. During the hour or thereabouts that he had been in the garden he ad already spread out a number of them. It was this operation which had caused im to execute the peculiar movements observed from the shed by Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.24#He continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.25#“I said to myself, ‘The moon is bright: it is going to freeze. What if I ere to put my melons into their greatcoats?’ And,” he added, looking at Jean aljean with a broad smile,—“pardieu! you ought to have done the same! But how o you come here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.26#Jean Valjean, finding himself known to this man, at least only under the ame of Madeleine, thenceforth advanced only with caution. He multiplied his uestions. Strange to say, their rôles seemed to be reversed. It was he, the ntruder, who interrogated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.27#“And what is this bell which you wear on your knee?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.28#“This,” replied Fauchelevent, “is so that I may be avoided.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.29#“What! so that you may be avoided?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.30#Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.31#“Ah, goodness! there are only women in this house—many young girls. It ppears that I should be a dangerous person to meet. The bell gives them arning. When I come, they go.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.32#“What house is this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.33#“Come, you know well enough.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.34#“But I do not.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.35#“Not when you got me the place here as gardener?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.36#“Answer me as though I knew nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.37#“Well, then, this is the Petit-Picpus convent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.38#Memories recurred to Jean Valjean. Chance, that is to say, Providence, had ast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoine where old auchelevent, crippled by the fall from his cart, had been admitted on his ecommendation two years previously. He repeated, as though talking to imself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.39#“The Petit-Picpus convent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.40#“Exactly,” returned old Fauchelevent. “But to come to the point, how the euce did you manage to get in here, you, Father Madeleine? No matter if you are saint; you are a man as well, and no man enters here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.41#“You certainly are here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.42#“There is no one but me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.43#“Still,” said Jean Valjean, “I must stay here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.44#“Ah, good God!” cried Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.45#Jean Valjean drew near to the old man, and said to him in a grave oice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.46#“Father Fauchelevent, I saved your life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.47#“I was the first to recall it,” returned Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.48#“Well, you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the olden ays.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.49#Fauchelevent took in his aged, trembling, and wrinkled hands Jean aljean’s two robust hands, and stood for several minutes as though incapable of peaking. At length he exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.50#“Oh! that would be a blessing from the good God, if I could make you some ittle return for that! Save your life! Monsieur le Maire, dispose of the old an!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.51#A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man. His countenance seemed to mit a ray of light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.52#“What do you wish me to do?” he resumed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.53#“That I will explain to you. You have a chamber?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.54#“I have an isolated hovel yonder, behind the ruins of the old convent, in corner which no one ever looks into. There are three rooms in it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.55#The hut was, in fact, so well hidden behind the ruins, and so cleverly rranged to prevent it being seen, that Jean Valjean had not perceived it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.56#“Good,” said Jean Valjean. “Now I am going to ask two things of you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.57#“What are they, Mr. Mayor?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.58#“In the first place, you are not to tell any one what you know about me. n the second, you are not to try to find out anything more.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.59#“As you please. I know that you can do nothing that is not honest, that ou have always been a man after the good God’s heart. And then, moreover, you t was who placed me here. That concerns you. I am at your service.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.60#“That is settled then. Now, come with me. We will go and get the hild.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.61#“Ah!” said Fauchelevent, “so there is a child?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.62#He added not a word further, and followed Jean Valjean as a dog follows is master.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.9.63#Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette, who had grown rosy again before he flame of a good fire, was lying asleep in the old gardener’s bed. Jean aljean had put on his cravat and coat once more; his hat, which he had flung ver the wall, had been found and picked up. While Jean Valjean was putting on is coat, Fauchelevent had removed the bell and kneecap, which now hung on a ail beside a vintage basket that adorned the wall. The two men were warming hemselves with their elbows resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had laced a bit of cheese, black bread, a bottle of wine, and two glasses, and the ld man was saying to Jean Valjean, as he laid his hand on the latter’s knee: Ah! Father Madeleine! You did not recognize me immediately; you save people’s ives, and then you forget them! That is bad! But they remember you! You are an ngrate!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.head#CHAPTER X—WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.1#The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side, so to speak, had ome about in the simplest possible manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.2#When Jean Valjean, on the evening of the very day when Javert had arrested im beside Fantine’s death-bed, had escaped from the town jail of M. sur M., the olice had supposed that he had betaken himself to Paris. Paris is a maelstrom here everything is lost, and everything disappears in this belly of the world, s in the belly of the sea. No forest hides a man as does that crowd. Fugitives f every sort know this. They go to Paris as to an abyss; there are gulfs which ave. The police know it also, and it is in Paris that they seek what they have ost elsewhere. They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert was summoned to aris to throw light on their researches. Javert had, in fact, rendered powerful ssistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean. Javert’s zeal and intelligence on hat occasion had been remarked by M. Chabouillet, secretary of the Prefecture nder Comte Anglès. M. Chabouillet, who had, moreover, already been Javert’s atron, had the inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris. here Javert rendered himself useful in divers and, though the word may seem trange for such services, honorable manners.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.3#He no longer thought of Jean Valjean,—the wolf of to-day causes these dogs ho are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday,—when, in December, 823, he read a newspaper, he who never read newspapers; but Javert, a onarchical man, had a desire to know the particulars of the triumphal entry of he “Prince Generalissimo” into Bayonne. Just as he was finishing the article, hich interested him; a name, the name of Jean Valjean, attracted his attention t the bottom of a page. The paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was ead, and published the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it. e confined himself to the remark, “That’s a good entry.” Then he threw aside he paper, and thought no more about it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.4#Some time afterwards, it chanced that a police report was transmitted from he prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in Paris, oncerning the abduction of a child, which had taken place, under peculiar ircumstances, as it was said, in the commune of Montfermeil. A little girl of even or eight years of age, the report said, who had been intrusted by her other to an inn-keeper of that neighborhood, had been stolen by a stranger; his child answered to the name of Cosette, and was the daughter of a girl named antine, who had died in the hospital, it was not known where or when.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.5#This report came under Javert’s eye and set him to thinking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.6#The name of Fantine was well known to him. He remembered that Jean Valjean ad made him, Javert, burst into laughter, by asking him for a respite of three ays, for the purpose of going to fetch that creature’s child. He recalled the act that Jean Valjean had been arrested in Paris at the very moment when he was tepping into the coach for Montfermeil. Some signs had made him suspect at the ime that this was the second occasion of his entering that coach, and that he ad already, on the previous day, made an excursion to the neighborhood of that illage, for he had not been seen in the village itself. What had he been ntending to do in that region of Montfermeil? It could not even be surmised. avert understood it now. Fantine’s daughter was there. Jean Valjean was going here in search of her. And now this child had been stolen by a stranger! Who ould that stranger be? Could it be Jean Valjean? But Jean Valjean was dead. avert, without saying anything to anybody, took the coach from the _Pewter latter_, Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette, and made a trip to Montfermeil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.7#He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there; he found a reat deal of obscurity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.8#For the first few days the Thénardiers had chattered in their rage. The isappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village. He immediately btained numerous versions of the story, which ended in the abduction of a hild. Hence the police report. But their first vexation having passed off, hénardier, with his wonderful instinct, had very quickly comprehended that it s never advisable to stir up the prosecutor of the Crown, and that his omplaints with regard to the _abduction_ of Cosette would have as their first esult to fix upon himself, and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand, the littering eye of justice. The last thing that owls desire is to have a candle rought to them. And in the first place, how explain the fifteen hundred francs hich he had received? He turned squarely round, put a gag on his wife’s mouth, nd feigned astonishment when the _stolen child_ was mentioned to him. He nderstood nothing about it; no doubt he had grumbled for awhile at having that ear little creature “taken from him” so hastily; he should have liked to keep er two or three days longer, out of tenderness; but her “grandfather” had come or her in the most natural way in the world. He added the “grandfather,” which roduced a good effect. This was the story that Javert hit upon when he arrived t Montfermeil. The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.9#Nevertheless, Javert dropped a few questions, like plummets, into hénardier’s history. “Who was that grandfather? and what was his name?” hénardier replied with simplicity: “He is a wealthy farmer. I saw his passport. think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.10#Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name. Thereupon Javert eturned to Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.11#“Jean Valjean is certainly dead,” said he, “and I am a ninny.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.12#He had again begun to forget this history, when, in the course of March, 824, he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parish of Saint-Médard nd who had been surnamed “the mendicant who gives alms.” This person, the story an, was a man of means, whose name no one knew exactly, and who lived alone ith a little girl of eight years, who knew nothing about herself, save that she ad come from Montfermeil. Montfermeil! that name was always coming up, and it ade Javert prick up his ears. An old beggar police spy, an ex-beadle, to whom his person had given alms, added a few more details. This gentleman of property as very shy,—never coming out except in the evening, speaking to no one, xcept, occasionally to the poor, and never allowing any one to approach him. He ore a horrible old yellow frock-coat, which was worth many millions, being all added with bank-bills. This piqued Javert’s curiosity in a decided manner. In rder to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarming him, he orrowed the beadle’s outfit for a day, and the place where the old spy was in he habit of crouching every evening, whining orisons through his nose, and laying the spy under cover of prayer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.13#“The suspected individual” did indeed approach Javert thus disguised, and estow alms on him. At that moment Javert raised his head, and the shock which ean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to the one received by avert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.14#However, the darkness might have misled him; Jean Valjean’s death was fficial; Javert cherished very grave doubts; and when in doubt, Javert, the man f scruples, never laid a finger on any one’s collar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.15#He followed his man to the Gorbeau house, and got “the old woman” to alking, which was no difficult matter. The old woman confirmed the fact egarding the coat lined with millions, and narrated to him the episode of the housand-franc bill. She had seen it! She had handled it! Javert hired a room; hat evening he installed himself in it. He came and listened at the mysterious odger’s door, hoping to catch the sound of his voice, but Jean Valjean saw his andle through the key-hole, and foiled the spy by keeping silent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.16#On the following day Jean Valjean decamped; but the noise made by the fall f the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman, who, hearing the rattling f coin, suspected that he might be intending to leave, and made haste to warn avert. At night, when Jean Valjean came out, Javert was waiting for him behind he trees of the boulevard with two men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.17#Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture, but he had not mentioned he name of the individual whom he hoped to seize; that was his secret, and he ad kept it for three reasons: in the first place, because the slightest ndiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert; next, because, to lay hands on n ex-convict who had made his escape and was reputed dead, on a criminal whom ustice had formerly classed forever as _among malefactors of the most dangerous ort_, was a magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police ould assuredly not leave to a newcomer like Javert, and he was afraid of being eprived of his convict; and lastly, because Javert, being an artist, had a aste for the unforeseen. He hated those well-heralded successes which are alked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off. He preferred to laborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil them suddenly at the ast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.18#Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree, then from corner to orner of the street, and had not lost sight of him for a single instant; even t the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be the most secure Javert’s ye had been on him. Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean? Because he was till in doubt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.19#It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely at ts ease; the free press embarrassed it; several arbitrary arrests denounced by he newspapers, had echoed even as far as the Chambers, and had rendered the refecture timid. Interference with individual liberty was a grave matter. The olice agents were afraid of making a mistake; the prefect laid the blame on hem; a mistake meant dismissal. The reader can imagine the effect which this rief paragraph, reproduced by twenty newspapers, would have caused in Paris: Yesterday, an aged grandfather, with white hair, a respectable and well-to-do entleman, who was walking with his grandchild, aged eight, was arrested and onducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.20#Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own; injunctions f his conscience were added to the injunctions of the prefect. He was really in oubt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.21#Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.22#Sadness, uneasiness, anxiety, depression, this fresh misfortune of being orced to flee by night, to seek a chance refuge in Paris for Cosette and imself, the necessity of regulating his pace to the pace of the child—all this, ithout his being aware of it, had altered Jean Valjean’s walk, and impressed on is bearing such senility, that the police themselves, incarnate in the person f Javert, might, and did in fact, make a mistake. The impossibility of pproaching too close, his costume of an _émigré_ preceptor, the declaration of hénardier which made a grandfather of him, and, finally, the belief in his eath in prison, added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in avert’s mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.23#For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his papers; ut if the man was not Jean Valjean, and if this man was not a good, honest old ellow living on his income, he was probably some merry blade deeply and unningly implicated in the obscure web of Parisian misdeeds, some chief of a angerous band, who gave alms to conceal his other talents, which was an old odge. He had trusty fellows, accomplices’ retreats in case of emergencies, in hich he would, no doubt, take refuge. All these turns which he was making hrough the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and honest man. o arrest him too hastily would be “to kill the hen that laid the golden eggs.” here was the inconvenience in waiting? Javert was very sure that he would not scape.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.24#Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind, putting to imself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.25#It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise, that, thanks to the rilliant light thrown from a dram-shop, he decidedly recognized Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.26#There are in this world two beings who give a profound start,—the mother ho recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey. Javert gave that rofound start.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.27#As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean, the formidable onvict, he perceived that there were only three of them, and he asked for einforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise. One puts on gloves efore grasping a thorn cudgel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.28#This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with his agents ame near causing him to lose the trail. He speedily divined, however, that Jean aljean would want to put the river between his pursuers and himself. He bent is head and reflected like a blood-hound who puts his nose to the ground to ake sure that he is on the right scent. Javert, with his powerful rectitude of nstinct, went straight to the bridge of Austerlitz. A word with the toll-keeper urnished him with the information which he required: “Have you seen a man with little girl?” “I made him pay two sous,” replied the toll-keeper. Javert eached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small illuminated pot on the other side of the water, leading Cosette by the hand. He saw him nter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine; he remembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot rranged there like a trap, and of the sole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the ue Petit-Picpus. _He made sure of his back burrows_, as huntsmen say; he astily despatched one of his agents, by a roundabout way, to guard that issue. patrol which was returning to the Arsenal post having passed him, he made a equisition on it, and caused it to accompany him. In such games soldiers are ces. Moreover, the principle is, that in order to get the best of a wild boar, ne must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs. These combinations aving been effected, feeling that Jean Valjean was caught between the blind lley Genrot on the right, his agent on the left, and himself, Javert, in the ear, he took a pinch of snuff.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.29#Then he began the game. He experienced one ecstatic and infernal moment; e allowed his man to go on ahead, knowing that he had him safe, but desirous of ostponing the moment of arrest as long as possible, happy at the thought that e was taken and yet at seeing him free, gloating over him with his gaze, with hat voluptuousness of the spider which allows the fly to flutter, and of the at which lets the mouse run. Claws and talons possess a monstrous ensuality,—the obscure movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers. hat a delight this strangling is!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.30#Javert was enjoying himself. The meshes of his net were stoutly knotted. e was sure of success; all he had to do now was to close his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.31#Accompanied as he was, the very idea of resistance was impossible, however igorous, energetic, and desperate Jean Valjean might be.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.32#Javert advanced slowly, sounding, searching on his way all the nooks of he street like so many pockets of thieves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.33#When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.34#His exasperation can be imagined.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.35#He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus; that gent, who had remained imperturbably at his post, had not seen the man ass.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.36#It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns; that is to say, e escapes although he has the pack on his very heels, and then the oldest untsmen know not what to say. Duvivier, Ligniville, and Desprez halt short. In discomfiture of this sort, Artonge exclaims, “It was not a stag, but a orcerer.” Javert would have liked to utter the same cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.37#His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.38#It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia, that lexander committed blunders in the war in India, that Cæsar made mistakes in he war in Africa, that Cyrus was at fault in the war in Scythia, and that avert blundered in this campaign against Jean Valjean. He was wrong, perhaps, n hesitating in his recognition of the exconvict. The first glance should have ufficed him. He was wrong in not arresting him purely and simply in the old uilding; he was wrong in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in he Rue de Pontoise. He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in the ull light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin. Advice is certainly useful; it s a good thing to know and to interrogate those of the dogs who deserve onfidence; but the hunter cannot be too cautious when he is chasing uneasy nimals like the wolf and the convict. Javert, by taking too much thought as to ow he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on the trail, alarmed the beast by iving him wind of the dart, and so made him run. Above all, he was wrong in hat after he had picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz, he layed that formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a hread. He thought himself stronger than he was, and believed that he could play t the game of the mouse and the lion. At the same time, he reckoned himself as oo weak, when he judged it necessary to obtain reinforcement. Fatal precaution, aste of precious time! Javert committed all these blunders, and nonetheless was ne of the cleverest and most correct spies that ever existed. He was, in the ull force of the term, what is called in venery a _knowing dog_. But what is here that is perfect?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.39#Great strategists have their eclipses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.40#The greatest follies are often composed, like the largest ropes, of a ultitude of strands. Take the cable thread by thread, take all the petty etermining motives separately, and you can break them one after the other, and ou say, “That is all there is of it!” Braid them, twist them together; the esult is enormous: it is Attila hesitating between Marcian on the east and alentinian on the west; it is Hannibal tarrying at Capua; it is Danton falling sleep at Arcis-sur-Aube.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.41#However that may be, even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjean had scaped him, Javert did not lose his head. Sure that the convict who had broken is ban could not be far off, he established sentinels, he organized traps and mbuscades, and beat the quarter all that night. The first thing he saw was the isorder in the street lantern whose rope had been cut. A precious sign which, owever, led him astray, since it caused him to turn all his researches in the irection of the Cul-de-Sac Genrot. In this blind alley there were tolerably low alls which abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of aste land. Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction. The fact s, that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot, he would robably have done so and have been lost. Javert explored these gardens and hese waste stretches as though he had been hunting for a needle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.5.10.42#At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook, and returned to he Prefecture of Police, as much ashamed as a police spy who had been captured y a robber might have been.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.head#BOOK SIXTH—LE PETIT-PICPUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.head#CHAPTER I—NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.1#Nothing, half a century ago, more resembled every other carriage gate than he carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. This entrance, which usually tood ajar in the most inviting fashion, permitted a view of two things, neither f which have anything very funereal about them,—a courtyard surrounded by walls ung with vines, and the face of a lounging porter. Above the wall, at the ottom of the court, tall trees were visible. When a ray of sunlight enlivened he courtyard, when a glass of wine cheered up the porter, it was difficult to ass Number 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smiling impression f it. Nevertheless, it was a sombre place of which one had had a glimpse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.2#The threshold smiled; the house prayed and wept.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.3#If one succeeded in passing the porter, which was not easy,—which was even early impossible for every one, for there was an _open sesame!_ which it was ecessary to know,—if, the porter once passed, one entered a little vestibule on he right, on which opened a staircase shut in between two walls and so narrow hat only one person could ascend it at a time, if one did not allow one’s self o be alarmed by a daubing of canary yellow, with a dado of chocolate which lothed this staircase, if one ventured to ascend it, one crossed a first anding, then a second, and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the ellow wash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable ersistency. Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows. The orridor took a turn and became dark. If one doubled this cape, one arrived a ew paces further on, in front of a door which was all the more mysterious ecause it was not fastened. If one opened it, one found one’s self in a little hamber about six feet square, tiled, well-scrubbed, clean, cold, and hung with ankin paper with green flowers, at fifteen sous the roll. A white, dull light ell from a large window, with tiny panes, on the left, which usurped the whole idth of the room. One gazed about, but saw no one; one listened, one heard either a footstep nor a human murmur. The walls were bare, the chamber was not urnished; there was not even a chair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.4#One looked again, and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangular ole, about a foot square, with a grating of interlacing iron bars, black, notted, solid, which formed squares—I had almost said meshes—of less than an nch and a half in diagonal length. The little green flowers of the nankin paper an in a calm and orderly manner to those iron bars, without being startled or hrown into confusion by their funereal contact. Supposing that a living being ad been so wonderfully thin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the quare hole, this grating would have prevented it. It did not allow the passage f the body, but it did allow the passage of the eyes; that is to say, of the ind. This seems to have occurred to them, for it had been re-enforced by a heet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear, and pierced with a housand holes more microscopic than the holes of a strainer. At the bottom of his plate, an aperture had been pierced exactly similar to the orifice of a etter box. A bit of tape attached to a bell-wire hung at the right of the rated opening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.5#If the tape was pulled, a bell rang, and one heard a voice very near at and, which made one start.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.6#“Who is there?” the voice demanded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.7#It was a woman’s voice, a gentle voice, so gentle that it was mournful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.8#Here, again, there was a magical word which it was necessary to know. If ne did not know it, the voice ceased, the wall became silent once more, as hough the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on the other side of t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.9#If one knew the password, the voice resumed, “Enter on the right.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.10#One then perceived on the right, facing the window, a glass door urmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray. On raising the latch and crossing he threshold, one experienced precisely the same impression as when one enters t the theatre into a grated _baignoire_, before the grating is lowered and the handelier is lighted. One was, in fact, in a sort of theatre-box, narrow, urnished with two old chairs, and a much-frayed straw matting, sparely lluminated by the vague light from the glass door; a regular box, with its ront just of a height to lean upon, bearing a tablet of black wood. This box as grated, only the grating of it was not of gilded wood, as at the opera; it as a monstrous lattice of iron bars, hideously interlaced and riveted to the all by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.11#The first minutes passed; when one’s eyes began to grow used to this ellar-like half-twilight, one tried to pass the grating, but got no further han six inches beyond it. There he encountered a barrier of black shutters, e-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood painted a gingerbread ellow. These shutters were divided into long, narrow slats, and they masked the ntire length of the grating. They were always closed. At the expiration of a ew moments one heard a voice proceeding from behind these shutters, and aying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.12#“I am here. What do you wish with me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.13#It was a beloved, sometimes an adored, voice. No one was visible. Hardly he sound of a breath was audible. It seemed as though it were a spirit which ad been evoked, that was speaking to you across the walls of the tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.14#If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare conditions, he slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you; the evoked spirit became an pparition. Behind the grating, behind the shutter, one perceived so far as the rating permitted sight, a head, of which only the mouth and the chin were isible; the rest was covered with a black veil. One caught a glimpse of a black uimpe, and a form that was barely defined, covered with a black shroud. That ead spoke with you, but did not look at you and never smiled at you.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.15#The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner that ou saw her in the white, and she saw you in the black. This light was ymbolical.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.16#Nevertheless, your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was ade in that place shut off from all glances. A profound vagueness enveloped hat form clad in mourning. Your eyes searched that vagueness, and sought to ake out the surroundings of the apparition. At the expiration of a very short ime you discovered that you could see nothing. What you beheld was night, mptiness, shadows, a wintry mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb, a sort of errible peace, a silence from which you could gather nothing, not even sighs, a loom in which you could distinguish nothing, not even phantoms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.17#What you beheld was the interior of a cloister.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.18#It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was called the onvent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration. The box in which you tood was the parlor. The first voice which had addressed you was that of the ortress who always sat motionless and silent, on the other side of the wall, ear the square opening, screened by the iron grating and the plate with its housand holes, as by a double visor. The obscurity which bathed the grated box rose from the fact that the parlor, which had a window on the side of the orld, had none on the side of the convent. Profane eyes must see nothing of hat sacred place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.1.19#Nevertheless, there was something beyond that shadow; there was a light; here was life in the midst of that death. Although this was the most strictly alled of all convents, we shall endeavor to make our way into it, and to take he reader in, and to say, without transgressing the proper bounds, things which tory-tellers have never seen, and have, therefore, never described.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.1#This convent, which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in the ue Petit-Picpus, was a community of Bernardines of the obedience of Martin erga.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.2#These Bernardines were attached, in consequence, not to Clairvaux, like the ernardine monks, but to Cîteaux, like the Benedictine monks. In other words, hey were the subjects, not of Saint Bernard, but of Saint Benoît.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.3#Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent knows that Martin erga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines, with Salamanca or the head of the order, and Alcala as the branch establishment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.4#This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic ountries of Europe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.5#There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one order n another. To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoît, which is here in uestion: there are attached to this order, without counting the obedience of artin Verga, four congregations,—two in Italy, Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine f Padua; two in France, Cluny and Saint-Maur; and nine orders,—Vallombrosa, ranmont, the Célestins, the Camaldules, the Carthusians, the Humiliés, the livateurs, the Silvestrins, and lastly, Cîteaux; for Cîteaux itself, a trunk or other orders, is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoît. Cîteaux dates from Saint obert, Abbé de Molesme, in the diocese of Langres, in 1098. Now it was in 529 hat the devil, having retired to the desert of Subiaco—he was old—had he turned ermit?—was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo, where he dwelt, by aint-Benoît, then aged seventeen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.6#After the rule of the Carmelites, who go barefoot, wear a bit of willow on heir throats, and never sit down, the harshest rule is that of the ernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga. They are clothed in black, with a uimpe, which, in accordance with the express command of Saint-Benoît, mounts to he chin. A robe of serge with large sleeves, a large woollen veil, the guimpe hich mounts to the chin cut square on the breast, the band which descends over heir brow to their eyes,—this is their dress. All is black except the band, hich is white. The novices wear the same habit, but all in white. The professed uns also wear a rosary at their side.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.7#The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual doration, like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament, who, at he beginning of this century, had two houses in Paris,—one at the Temple, the ther in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève. However, the Bernardines-Benedictines f the Petit-Picpus, of whom we are speaking, were a totally different order rom the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament, cloistered in the Rue euve-Sainte-Geneviève and at the Temple. There were numerous differences in heir rule; there were some in their costume. The Bernardines-Benedictines of he Petit-Picpus wore the black guimpe, and the Benedictines of the Holy acrament and of the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève wore a white one, and had, esides, on their breasts, a Holy Sacrament about three inches long, in silver ilt or gilded copper. The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this Holy acrament. The Perpetual Adoration, which was common to the house of the etit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple, leaves those two orders perfectly istinct. Their only resemblance lies in this practice of the Ladies of the Holy acrament and the Bernardines of Martin Verga, just as there existed a imilarity in the study and the glorification of all the mysteries relating to he infancy, the life, and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin, between the two rders, which were, nevertheless, widely separated, and on occasion even ostile. The Oratory of Italy, established at Florence by Philip de Neri, and he Oratory of France, established by Pierre de Bérulle. The Oratory of France laimed the precedence, since Philip de Neri was only a saint, while Bérulle was cardinal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.8#Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.9#The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round, bstain from meat, fast in Lent and on many other days which are peculiar to hem, rise from their first sleep, from one to three o’clock in the morning, to ead their breviary and chant matins, sleep in all seasons between serge sheets nd on straw, make no use of the bath, never light a fire, scourge themselves very Friday, observe the rule of silence, speak to each other only during the ecreation hours, which are very brief, and wear drugget chemises for six months n the year, from September 14th, which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, ntil Easter. These six months are a modification: the rule says all the year, ut this drugget chemise, intolerable in the heat of summer, produced fevers and ervous spasms. The use of it had to be restricted. Even with this palliation, hen the nuns put on this chemise on the 14th of September, they suffer from ever for three or four days. Obedience, poverty, chastity, perseverance in heir seclusion,—these are their vows, which the rule greatly aggravates.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.10#The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers, who are called mères vocales_ because they have a voice in the chapter. A prioress can only be e-elected twice, which fixes the longest possible reign of a prioress at nine ears.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.11#They never see the officiating priest, who is always hidden from them by a erge curtain nine feet in height. During the sermon, when the preacher is in he chapel, they drop their veils over their faces. They must always speak low, alk with their eyes on the ground and their heads bowed. One man only is llowed to enter the convent,—the archbishop of the diocese.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.12#There is really one other,—the gardener. But he is always an old man, and, n order that he may always be alone in the garden, and that the nuns may be arned to avoid him, a bell is attached to his knee.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.13#Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive. It is the anonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation. As at the voice of hrist, _ut voci Christi_, at a gesture, at the first sign, _ad nutum, ad primum ignum_, immediately, with cheerfulness, with perseverance, with a certain blind bedience, _prompte, hilariter, perseveranter et cæca quadam obedientia_, as the ile in the hand of the workman, _quasi limam in manibus fabri_, without power o read or to write without express permission, _legere vel scribere non ddiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.14#Each one of them in turn makes what they call _reparation_. The reparation s the prayer for all the sins, for all the faults, for all the dissensions, for ll the violations, for all the iniquities, for all the crimes committed on arth. For the space of twelve consecutive hours, from four o’clock in the fternoon till four o’clock in the morning, or from four o’clock in the morning ntil four o’clock in the afternoon, the sister who is making _reparation_ emains on her knees on the stone before the Holy Sacrament, with hands clasped, rope around her neck. When her fatigue becomes unendurable, she prostrates erself flat on her face against the earth, with her arms outstretched in the orm of a cross; this is her only relief. In this attitude she prays for all the uilty in the universe. This is great to sublimity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.15#As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle, it is alled without distinction, _to make reparation_ or _to be at the post_. The uns even prefer, out of humility, this last expression, which contains an idea f torture and abasement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.16#_To make reparation_ is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed. he sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt to fall directly ehind her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.17#Besides this, there is always a sister kneeling before the Holy Sacrament. his station lasts an hour. They relieve each other like soldiers on guard. This s the Perpetual Adoration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.18#The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped with eculiar solemnity, recalling, not the saints and martyrs, but moments in the ife of Jesus Christ: as Mother Nativity, Mother Conception, Mother resentation, Mother Passion. But the names of saints are not interdicted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.19#When one sees them, one never sees anything but their mouths.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.20#All their teeth are yellow. No tooth-brush ever entered that convent. rushing one’s teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is the loss of ne’s soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.21#They never say _my_. They possess nothing of their own, and they must not ttach themselves to anything. They call everything _our_; thus: our veil, our haplet; if they were speaking of their chemise, they would say _our chemise_. ometimes they grow attached to some petty object,—to a book of hours, a relic, medal that has been blessed. As soon as they become aware that they are rowing attached to this object, they must give it up. They recall the words of aint Thérèse, to whom a great lady said, as she was on the point of entering er order, “Permit me, mother, to send for a Bible to which I am greatly ttached.” “Ah, you are attached to something! In that case, do not enter our rder!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.22#Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up, to have _a place of er own, a chamber_. They live with their cells open. When they meet, one says, Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar!” The other esponds, “Forever.” The same ceremony when one taps at the other’s door. Hardly as she touched the door when a soft voice on the other side is heard to say astily, “Forever!” Like all practices, this becomes mechanical by force of abit; and one sometimes says _forever_ before the other has had time to say the ather long sentence, “Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the ltar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.23#Among the Visitandines the one who enters says: “Ave Maria,” and the one hose cell is entered says, “Gratia plena.” It is their way of saying good day, hich is in fact full of grace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.24#At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the church ell of the convent. At this signal prioress, vocal mothers, professed nuns, ay-sisters, novices, postulants, interrupt what they are saying, what they are oing, or what they are thinking, and all say in unison if it is five o’clock, or instance, “At five o’clock and at all hours praised and adored be the most oly Sacrament of the altar!” If it is eight o’clock, “At eight o’clock and at ll hours!” and so on, according to the hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.25#This custom, the object of which is to break the thread of thought and to ead it back constantly to God, exists in many communities; the formula alone aries. Thus at The Infant Jesus they say, “At this hour and at every hour may he love of Jesus kindle my heart!” The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin erga, cloistered fifty years ago at Petit-Picpus, chant the offices to a solemn salmody, a pure Gregorian chant, and always with full voice during the whole ourse of the office. Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they ause, and say in a low voice, “Jesus-Marie-Joseph.” For the office of the dead hey adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly descend to such a epth. The effect produced is striking and tragic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.26#The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altar for he burial of their community. _The Government_, as they say, does not permit his vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when they die. This is n affliction to them, and causes them consternation as an infraction of the ules.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.27#They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best,—permission to be nterred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient Vaugirard emetery, which was made of land which had formerly belonged to their ommunity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.28#On Fridays the nuns hear high mass, vespers, and all the offices, as on unday. They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivals unknown o people of the world, of which the Church of France was so prodigal in the lden days, and of which it is still prodigal in Spain and Italy. Their stations n the chapel are interminable. As for the number and duration of their prayers e can convey no better idea of them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one f them: “The prayers of the postulants are frightful, the prayers of the ovices are still worse, and the prayers of the professed nuns are still orse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.29#Once a week the chapter assembles: the prioress presides; the vocal others assist. Each sister kneels in turn on the stones, and confesses aloud, n the presence of all, the faults and sins which she has committed during the eek. The vocal mothers consult after each confession and inflict the penance loud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.30#Besides this confession in a loud tone, for which all faults in the least erious are reserved, they have for their venial offences what they call the coulpe. To make one’s coulpe_ means to prostrate one’s self flat on one’s face uring the office in front of the prioress until the latter, who is never called nything but _our mother_, notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot gainst the wood of her stall that she can rise. The _coulpe_ or _peccavi_, is ade for a very small matter—a broken glass, a torn veil, an involuntary delay f a few seconds at an office, a false note in church, etc.; this suffices, and he _coulpe_ is made. The _coulpe_ is entirely spontaneous; it is the culpable erson herself (the word is etymologically in its place here) who judges herself nd inflicts it on herself. On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors ntone the offices before a large reading-desk with four places. One day one of he mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with _Ecce_, and instead of Ecce_ she uttered aloud the three notes _do si sol_; for this piece of bsent-mindedness she underwent a _coulpe_ which lasted during the whole ervice: what rendered the fault enormous was the fact that the chapter had aughed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.31#When a nun is summoned to the parlor, even were it the prioress herself, he drops her veil, as will be remembered, so that only her mouth is isible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.32#The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers. The others can ee only their immediate family, and that very rarely. If, by chance, an utsider presents herself to see a nun, or one whom she has known and loved in he outer world, a regular series of negotiations is required. If it is a woman, he authorization may sometimes be granted; the nun comes, and they talk to her hrough the shutters, which are opened only for a mother or sister. It is nnecessary to say that permission is always refused to men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.33#Such is the rule of Saint-Benoît, aggravated by Martin Verga.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.2.34#These nuns are not gay, rosy, and fresh, as the daughters of other orders ften are. They are pale and grave. Between 1825 and 1830 three of them went ad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.3.head#CHAPTER III—AUSTERITIES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.3.1#One is a postulant for two years at least, often for four; a novice for our. It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier than the age f twenty-three or twenty-four years. The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin erga do not admit widows to their order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.3.2#In their cells, they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations, of hich they must never speak.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.3.3#On the day when a novice makes her profession, she is dressed in her andsomest attire, she is crowned with white roses, her hair is brushed until it hines, and curled. Then she prostrates herself; a great black veil is thrown ver her, and the office for the dead is sung. Then the nuns separate into two iles; one file passes close to her, saying in plaintive accents, “Our sister is ead”; and the other file responds in a voice of ecstasy, “Our sister is alive n Jesus Christ!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.3.4#At the epoch when this story takes place, a boarding-school was attached to he convent—a boarding-school for young girls of noble and mostly wealthy amilies, among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de Saint-Aulaire and de élissen, and an English girl bearing the illustrious Catholic name of Talbot. hese young girls, reared by these nuns between four walls, grew up with a orror of the world and of the age. One of them said to us one day, “The sight f the street pavement made me shudder from head to foot.” They were dressed in lue, with a white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their reast. On certain grand festival days, particularly Saint Martha’s day, they ere permitted, as a high favor and a supreme happiness, to dress themselves as uns and to carry out the offices and practice of Saint-Benoît for a whole day. n the early days the nuns were in the habit of lending them their black arments. This seemed profane, and the prioress forbade it. Only the novices ere permitted to lend. It is remarkable that these performances, tolerated and ncouraged, no doubt, in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and n order to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit, were a genuine appiness and a real recreation for the scholars. They simply amused themselves ith it. _It was new; it gave them a change_. Candid reasons of childhood, which o not, however, succeed in making us worldlings comprehend the felicity of olding a holy water sprinkler in one’s hand and standing for hours together inging hard enough for four in front of a reading-desk.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.3.5#The pupils conformed, with the exception of the austerities, to all the ractices of the convent. There was a certain young woman who entered the world, nd who after many years of married life had not succeeded in breaking herself f the habit of saying in great haste whenever any one knocked at her door, forever!” Like the nuns, the pupils saw their relatives only in the parlor. heir very mothers did not obtain permission to embrace them. The following llustrates to what a degree severity on that point was carried. One day a young irl received a visit from her mother, who was accompanied by a little sister hree years of age. The young girl wept, for she wished greatly to embrace her ister. Impossible. She begged that, at least, the child might be permitted to ass her little hand through the bars so that she could kiss it. This was almost ndignantly refused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.head#CHAPTER IV—GAYETIES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.1#Nonetheless, these young girls filled this grave house with charming ouvenirs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.2#At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister. The recreation hour truck. A door swung on its hinges. The birds said, “Good; here come the hildren!” An irruption of youth inundated that garden intersected with a cross ike a shroud. Radiant faces, white foreheads, innocent eyes, full of merry ight, all sorts of auroras, were scattered about amid these shadows. After the salmodies, the bells, the peals, and knells and offices, the sound of these ittle girls burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees. The ive of joy was opened, and each one brought her honey. They played, they called o each other, they formed into groups, they ran about; pretty little white eeth chattered in the corners; the veils superintended the laughs from a istance, shades kept watch of the sunbeams, but what mattered it? Still they eamed and laughed. Those four lugubrious walls had their moment of dazzling rilliancy. They looked on, vaguely blanched with the reflection of so much joy t this sweet swarming of the hives. It was like a shower of roses falling thwart this house of mourning. The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of he nuns; the gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence. Thanks to hese children, there was, among so many austere hours, one hour of ngenuousness. The little ones skipped about; the elder ones danced. In this loister play was mingled with heaven. Nothing is so delightful and so august as ll these fresh, expanding young souls. Homer would have come thither to laugh ith Perrault; and there was in that black garden, youth, health, noise, cries, iddiness, pleasure, happiness enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ncestresses, those of the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale, those of the hrone as well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la ère-Grand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.3#In that house more than anywhere else, perhaps, arise those children’s ayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of houghtfulness. It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of five ears exclaimed one day: “Mother! one of the big girls has just told me that I ave only nine years and ten months longer to remain here. What happiness!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.4#It was here, too, that this memorable dialogue took place:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.5#_A Vocal Mother_. Why are you weeping, my child?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.6#_The child_ (aged six). I told Alix that I knew my French history. She says hat I do not know it, but I do.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.7#_Alix_, the big girl (aged nine). No; she does not know it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.8#_The Mother_. How is that, my child?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.9#_Alix_. She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any question n the book, and she would answer it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.10#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.11#“She did not answer it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.12#“Let us see about it. What did you ask her?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.13#“I opened the book at random, as she proposed, and I put the first uestion that I came across.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.14#“And what was the question?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.15#“It was, ‘What happened after that?’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.16#It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedy aroquet which belonged to a lady boarder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.17#“How well bred! it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just like person!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.18#It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once icked up a confession which had been written out in advance, in order that she ight not forget it, by a sinner of seven years:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.19#“Father, I accuse myself of having been avaricious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.20#“Father, I accuse myself of having been an adulteress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.21#“Father, I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.22#It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six ears of age improvised the following tale, which was listened to by blue eyes ged four and five years:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.23#“There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a reat many flowers. They plucked the flowers and put them in their pockets. fter that they plucked the leaves and put them in their playthings. There was a olf in that country; there was a great deal of forest; and the wolf was in the orest; and he ate the little cocks.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.24#And this other poem:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.25#“There came a blow with a stick.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.26#“It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.27#“It was not good for her; it hurt her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.28#“Then a lady put Punchinello in prison.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.29#It was there that a little abandoned child, a foundling whom the convent as bringing up out of charity, uttered this sweet and heart-breaking saying. he heard the others talking of their mothers, and she murmured in her orner:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.30#“As for me, my mother was not there when I was born!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.31#There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through the orridors with her bunch of keys, and whose name was Sister Agatha. The _big big irls_—those over ten years of age—called her _Agathocles_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.32#The refectory, a large apartment of an oblong square form, which received o light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the garden, was dark nd damp, and, as the children say, full of beasts. All the places round about urnished their contingent of insects.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.33#Each of its four corners had received, in the language of the pupils, a pecial and expressive name. There was Spider corner, Caterpillar corner, ood-louse corner, and Cricket corner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.34#Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed. It was not so old there as elsewhere. From the refectory the names had passed to the oarding-school, and there served as in the old College Mazarin to distinguish our nations. Every pupil belonged to one of these four nations according to the orner of the refectory in which she sat at meals. One day Monseigneur the rchbishop while making his pastoral visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with eautiful golden hair enter the class-room through which he was passing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.35#He inquired of another pupil, a charming brunette with rosy cheeks, who tood near him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.36#“Who is that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.37#“She is a spider, Monseigneur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.38#“Bah! And that one yonder?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.39#“She is a cricket.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.40#“And that one?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.41#“She is a caterpillar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.42#“Really! and yourself?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.43#“I am a wood-louse, Monseigneur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.44#Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities. At the beginning of his century Écouen was one of those strict and graceful places where young irls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august. At Écouen, in rder to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament, a distinction was ade between virgins and florists. There were also the “dais” and the censors,”—the first who held the cords of the dais, and the others who carried ncense before the Holy Sacrament. The flowers belonged by right to the lorists. Four “virgins” walked in advance. On the morning of that great day it as no rare thing to hear the question put in the dormitory, “Who is a irgin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.4.45#Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a “little one” of seven years, o a “big girl” of sixteen, who took the head of the procession, while she, the ittle one, remained at the rear, “You are a virgin, but I am not.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.head#CHAPTER V—DISTRACTIONS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.1#Above the door of the refectory this prayer, which was called the _white aternoster_, and which possessed the property of bearing people straight to aradise, was inscribed in large black letters:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.2#“Little white Paternoster, which God made, which God said, which God placed n paradise. In the evening, when I went to bed, I found three angels sitting on y bed, one at the foot, two at the head, the good Virgin Mary in the middle, ho told me to lie down without hesitation. The good God is my father, the good irgin is my mother, the three apostles are my brothers, the three virgins are y sisters. The shirt in which God was born envelopes my body; Saint Margaret’s ross is written on my breast. Madame the Virgin was walking through the eadows, weeping for God, when she met M. Saint John. ‘Monsieur Saint John, hence come you?’ ‘I come from _Ave Salus_.’ ‘You have not seen the good God; here is he?’ ‘He is on the tree of the Cross, his feet hanging, his hands ailed, a little cap of white thorns on his head.’ Whoever shall say this thrice t eventide, thrice in the morning, shall win paradise at the last.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.3#In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall under a riple coating of daubing paint. At the present time it is finally disappearing rom the memories of several who were young girls then, and who are old women ow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.4#A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of this efectory, whose only door, as we think we have mentioned, opened on the garden. wo narrow tables, each flanked by two wooden benches, formed two long parallel ines from one end to the other of the refectory. The walls were white, the ables were black; these two mourning colors constitute the only variety in onvents. The meals were plain, and the food of the children themselves severe. single dish of meat and vegetables combined, or salt fish—such was their uxury. This meagre fare, which was reserved for the pupils alone, was, evertheless, an exception. The children ate in silence, under the eye of the other whose turn it was, who, if a fly took a notion to fly or to hum against he rule, opened and shut a wooden book from time to time. This silence was easoned with the lives of the saints, read aloud from a little pulpit with a esk, which was situated at the foot of the crucifix. The reader was one of the ig girls, in weekly turn. At regular distances, on the bare tables, there were arge, varnished bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and nives and forks, and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat r spoiled fish; this was punished. These bowls were called _ronds d’eau_. The hild who broke the silence “made a cross with her tongue.” Where? On the round. She licked the pavement. The dust, that end of all joys, was charged ith the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaves which had been guilty of hirping.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.5#There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except as a unique copy_, and which it is forbidden to read. It is the rule of aint-Benoît. An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate. _Nemo regulas, seu onstitutiones nostras, externis communicabit_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.6#The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book, and set to eading it with avidity, a reading which was often interrupted by the fear of eing caught, which caused them to close the volume precipitately.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.7#From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate amount f pleasure. The most “interesting thing” they found were some unintelligible ages about the sins of young boys.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.8#They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabby ruit-trees. In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of the unishments administered, when the wind had shaken the trees, they sometimes ucceeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot or an inhabited pear n the sly. I will now cede the privilege of speech to a letter which lies efore me, a letter written five and twenty years ago by an old pupil, now adame la Duchesse de ——, one of the most elegant women in Paris. I quote iterally: “One hides one’s pear or one’s apple as best one may. When one goes pstairs to put the veil on the bed before supper, one stuffs them under one’s illow and at night one eats them in bed, and when one cannot do that, one eats hem in the closet.” That was one of their greatest luxuries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.9#Once—it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the onvent—one of the young girls, Mademoiselle Bouchard, who was connected with he Montmorency family, laid a wager that she would ask for a day’s leave of bsence—an enormity in so austere a community. The wager was accepted, but not ne of those who bet believed that she would do it. When the moment came, as the rchbishop was passing in front of the pupils, Mademoiselle Bouchard, to the ndescribable terror of her companions, stepped out of the ranks, and said, Monseigneur, a day’s leave of absence.” Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall, looming, with the prettiest little rosy face in the world. M. de Quélen smiled nd said, “What, my dear child, a day’s leave of absence! Three days if you ike. I grant you three days.” The prioress could do nothing; the archbishop had poken. Horror of the convent, but joy of the pupil. The effect may be magined.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.10#This stern cloister was not so well walled off, however, but that the life f the passions of the outside world, drama, and even romance, did not make heir way in. To prove this, we will confine ourselves to recording here and to riefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact, which, however, bears no eference in itself to, and is not connected by any thread whatever with the tory which we are relating. We mention the fact for the sake of completing the hysiognomy of the convent in the reader’s mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.11#About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who was not a un, who was treated with great respect, and who was addressed as _Madame lbertine_. Nothing was known about her, save that she was mad, and that in the orld she passed for dead. Beneath this history it was said there lay the rrangements of fortune necessary for a great marriage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.12#This woman, hardly thirty years of age, of dark complexion and tolerably retty, had a vague look in her large black eyes. Could she see? There was some oubt about this. She glided rather than walked, she never spoke; it was not uite known whether she breathed. Her nostrils were livid and pinched as after ielding up their last sigh. To touch her hand was like touching snow. She ossessed a strange spectral grace. Wherever she entered, people felt cold. One ay a sister, on seeing her pass, said to another sister, “She passes for a dead oman.” “Perhaps she is one,” replied the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.13#A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine. This arose from the eternal uriosity of the pupils. In the chapel there was a gallery called _L‘Œil de œuf_. It was in this gallery, which had only a circular bay, an _œil de bœuf_, hat Madame Albertine listened to the offices. She always occupied it alone ecause this gallery, being on the level of the first story, the preacher or the fficiating priest could be seen, which was interdicted to the nuns. One day the ulpit was occupied by a young priest of high rank, M. Le Duc de Rohan, peer of rance, officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince de Léon, and ho died afterward, in 1830, as cardinal and Archbishop of Besançon. It was the irst time that M. de Rohan had preached at the Petit-Picpus convent. Madame lbertine usually preserved perfect calmness and complete immobility during the ermons and services. That day, as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan, she alf rose, and said, in a loud voice, amid the silence of the chapel, “Ah! uguste!” The whole community turned their heads in amazement, the preacher aised his eyes, but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility. A breath rom the outer world, a flash of life, had passed for an instant across that old and lifeless face and had then vanished, and the mad woman had become a orpse again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.14#Those two words, however, had set every one in the convent who had the rivilege of speech to chattering. How many things were contained in that “Ah! uguste!” what revelations! M. de Rohan’s name really was Auguste. It was vident that Madame Albertine belonged to the very highest society, since she new M. de Rohan, and that her own rank there was of the highest, since she poke thus familiarly of so great a lord, and that there existed between them ome connection, of relationship, perhaps, but a very close one in any case, ince she knew his “pet name.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.15#Two very severe duchesses, Mesdames de Choiseul and de Sérent, often isited the community, whither they penetrated, no doubt, in virtue of the rivilege _Magnates mulieres_, and caused great consternation in the oarding-school. When these two old ladies passed by, all the poor young girls rembled and dropped their eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.16#Moreover, M. de Rohan, quite unknown to himself, was an object of ttention to the school-girls. At that epoch he had just been made, while aiting for the episcopate, vicar-general of the Archbishop of Paris. It was one f his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate the offices in the chapel of he nuns of the Petit-Picpus. Not one of the young recluses could see him, ecause of the serge curtain, but he had a sweet and rather shrill voice, which hey had come to know and to distinguish. He had been a mousquetaire, and then, e was said to be very coquettish, that his handsome brown hair was very well ressed in a roll around his head, and that he had a broad girdle of magnificent oire, and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in the world. He eld a great place in all these imaginations of sixteen years.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.17#Not a sound from without made its way into the convent. But there was one ear when the sound of a flute penetrated thither. This was an event, and the irls who were at school there at the time still recall it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.5.18#It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood. This flute always layed the same air, an air which is very far away nowadays,—“My Zétulbé, come eign o’er my soul,”—and it was heard two or three times a day. The young girls assed hours in listening to it, the vocal mothers were upset by it, brains were usy, punishments descended in showers. This lasted for several months. The irls were all more or less in love with the unknown musician. Each one dreamed hat she was Zétulbé. The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the ue Droit-Mur; and they would have given anything, compromised everything, ttempted anything for the sake of seeing, of catching a glance, if only for a econd, of the “young man” who played that flute so deliciously, and who, no oubt, played on all these souls at the same time. There were some who made heir escape by a back door, and ascended to the third story on the Rue roit-Mur side, in order to attempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps. mpossible! One even went so far as to thrust her arm through the grating, and o wave her white handkerchief. Two were still bolder. They found means to climb n a roof, and risked their lives there, and succeeded at last in seeing “the oung man.” He was an old _émigré_ gentleman, blind and penniless, who was laying his flute in his attic, in order to pass the time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE LITTLE CONVENT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.1#In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly distinct uildings,—the Great Convent, inhabited by the nuns, the Boarding-school, where he scholars were lodged; and lastly, what was called the Little Convent. It was building with a garden, in which lived all sorts of aged nuns of various rders, the relics of cloisters destroyed in the Revolution; a reunion of all he black, gray, and white medleys of all communities and all possible arieties; what might be called, if such a coupling of words is permissible, a ort of harlequin convent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.2#When the Empire was established, all these poor old dispersed and exiled omen had been accorded permission to come and take shelter under the wings of he Bernardines-Benedictines. The government paid them a small pension, the adies of the Petit-Picpus received them cordially. It was a singular pell-mell. ach followed her own rule. Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were llowed, as a great recreation, to pay them a visit; the result is, that all hose young memories have retained among other souvenirs that of Mother ainte-Bazile, Mother Sainte-Scolastique, and Mother Jacob.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.3#One of these refugees found herself almost at home. She was a nun of ainte-Aure, the only one of her order who had survived. The ancient convent of he ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied, at the beginning of the eighteenth century, his very house of the Petit-Picpus, which belonged later to the Benedictines of artin Verga. This holy woman, too poor to wear the magnificent habit of her rder, which was a white robe with a scarlet scapulary, had piously put it on a ittle manikin, which she exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to he house at her death. In 1824, only one nun of this order remained; to-day, here remains only a doll.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.4#In addition to these worthy mothers, some old society women had obtained ermission of the prioress, like Madame Albertine, to retire into the Little onvent. Among the number were Madame Beaufort d’Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne. nother was never known in the convent except by the formidable noise which she ade when she blew her nose. The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini hubbub).
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.5#About 1820 or 1821, Madame de Genlis, who was at that time editing a little eriodical publication called _l’Intrépide_, asked to be allowed to enter the onvent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident. The Duc d’Orléans recommended her. proar in the hive; the vocal-mothers were all in a flutter; Madame de Genlis ad made romances. But she declared that she was the first to detest them, and hen, she had reached her fierce stage of devotion. With the aid of God, and of he Prince, she entered. She departed at the end of six or eight months, lleging as a reason, that there was no shade in the garden. The nuns were elighted. Although very old, she still played the harp, and did it very ell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.6#When she went away she left her mark in her cell. Madame de Genlis was uperstitious and a Latinist. These two words furnish a tolerably good profile f her. A few years ago, there were still to be seen, pasted in the inside of a ittle cupboard in her cell in which she locked up her silverware and her ewels, these five lines in Latin, written with her own hand in red ink on ellow paper, and which, in her opinion, possessed the property of frightening way robbers:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.7#Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis: Dismas et Gesmas, media est ivina potestas; Alta petit Dismas, infelix, infima, Gesmas; Nos et res nostras onservet summa potestas. Hos versus dicas, ne tu furto tua perdas.15
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.8#These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the two hieves of Calvary were named, as is commonly believed, Dismas and Gestas, or ismas and Gesmas. This orthography might have confounded the pretensions put orward in the last century by the Vicomte de Gestas, of a descent from the icked thief. However, the useful virtue attached to these verses forms an rticle of faith in the order of the Hospitallers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.6.9#The church of the house, constructed in such a manner as to separate the reat Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritable intrenchment, was, of ourse, common to the Boarding-school, the Great Convent, and the Little onvent. The public was even admitted by a sort of lazaretto entrance on the treet. But all was so arranged, that none of the inhabitants of the cloister ould see a face from the outside world. Suppose a church whose choir is grasped n a gigantic hand, and folded in such a manner as to form, not, as in ordinary hurches, a prolongation behind the altar, but a sort of hall, or obscure ellar, to the right of the officiating priest; suppose this hall to be shut off y a curtain seven feet in height, of which we have already spoken; in the hadow of that curtain, pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in the choir on the eft, the school-girls on the right, the lay-sisters and the novices at the ottom, and you will have some idea of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus assisting at ivine service. That cavern, which was called the choir, communicated with the loister by a lobby. The church was lighted from the garden. When the nuns were resent at services where their rule enjoined silence, the public was warned of heir presence only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and alling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.head#CHAPTER VII—SOME SILHOUETTES OF THIS DARKNESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.1#During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825, the prioress of the etit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur, whose name, in religion, was Mother nnocente. She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur, author of _Lives of he Saints of the Order of Saint-Benoît_. She had been re-elected. She was a oman about sixty years of age, short, thick, “singing like a cracked pot,” says he letter which we have already quoted; an excellent woman, moreover, and the nly merry one in the whole convent, and for that reason adored. She was earned, erudite, wise, competent, curiously proficient in history, crammed with atin, stuffed with Greek, full of Hebrew, and more of a Benedictine monk than a enedictine nun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.2#The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun, Mother Cineres, who was almost lind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.3#The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine; the reasurer, Mother Sainte-Gertrude, the chief mistress of the novices; other-Saint-Ange, the assistant mistress; Mother Annonciation, the sacristan; other Saint-Augustin, the nurse, the only one in the convent who was malicious; hen Mother Sainte-Mechtilde (Mademoiselle Gauvain), very young and with a eautiful voice; Mother des Anges (Mademoiselle Drouet), who had been in the onvent of the Filles-Dieu, and in the convent du Trésor, between Gisors and agny; Mother Saint-Joseph (Mademoiselle de Cogolludo), Mother Sainte-Adélaide Mademoiselle d’Auverney), Mother Miséricorde (Mademoiselle de Cifuentes, who ould not resist austerities), Mother Compassion (Mademoiselle de la Miltière, eceived at the age of sixty in defiance of the rule, and very wealthy); Mother rovidence (Mademoiselle de Laudinière), Mother Présentation (Mademoiselle de iguenza), who was prioress in 1847; and finally, Mother Sainte-Céligne (sister f the sculptor Ceracchi), who went mad; Mother Sainte-Chantal (Mademoiselle de uzon), who went mad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.4#There was also, among the prettiest of them, a charming girl of three and wenty, who was from the Isle de Bourbon, a descendant of the Chevalier Roze, hose name had been Mademoiselle Roze, and who was called Mother Assumption.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.5#Mother Sainte-Mechtilde, intrusted with the singing and the choir, was fond f making use of the pupils in this quarter. She usually took a complete scale f them, that is to say, seven, from ten to sixteen years of age, inclusive, of ssorted voices and sizes, whom she made sing standing, drawn up in a line, side y side, according to age, from the smallest to the largest. This presented to he eye, something in the nature of a reed-pipe of young girls, a sort of living an-pipe made of angels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.6#Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister uphrasie, Sister Sainte-Marguérite, Sister Sainte-Marthe, who was in her otage, and Sister Sainte-Michel, whose long nose made them laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.7#All these women were gentle with the children. The nuns were severe only owards themselves. No fire was lighted except in the school, and the food was hoice compared to that in the convent. Moreover, they lavished a thousand cares n their scholars. Only, when a child passed near a nun and addressed her, the un never replied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.8#This rule of silence had had this effect, that throughout the whole onvent, speech had been withdrawn from human creatures, and bestowed on nanimate objects. Now it was the church-bell which spoke, now it was the ardener’s bell. A very sonorous bell, placed beside the portress, and which was udible throughout the house, indicated by its varied peals, which formed a sort f acoustic telegraph, all the actions of material life which were to be erformed, and summoned to the parlor, in case of need, such or such an nhabitant of the house. Each person and each thing had its own peal. The rioress had one and one, the sub-prioress one and two. Six-five announced essons, so that the pupils never said “to go to lessons,” but “to go to ix-five.” Four-four was Madame de Genlis’s signal. It was very often heard. C’est le diable a quatre,”—it’s the very deuce—said the uncharitable. Tennine trokes announced a great event. It was the opening of _the door of seclusion_, frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts which only turned on its hinges n the presence of the archbishop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.9#With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener, no man entered the onvent, as we have already said. The schoolgirls saw two others: one, the haplain, the Abbé Banés, old and ugly, whom they were permitted to contemplate n the choir, through a grating; the other the drawing-master, M. Ansiaux, whom he letter, of which we have perused a few lines, calls _M. Anciot_, and escribes as _a frightful old hunchback_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.10#It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.7.11#Such was this curious house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—POST CORDA LAPIDES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.8.1#After having sketched its moral face, it will not prove unprofitable to oint out, in a few words, its material configuration. The reader already has ome idea of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.8.2#The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the whole of he vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue Polonceau, he Rue Droit-Mur, the Rue Petit-Picpus, and the unused lane, called Rue umarais on old plans. These four streets surrounded this trapezium like a moat. he convent was composed of several buildings and a garden. The principal uilding, taken in its entirety, was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions hich, viewed from a bird’s-eye view, outlined, with considerable exactness, a ibbet laid flat on the ground. The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of he fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and the ue Polonceau; the lesser arm was a lofty, gray, severe grated façade which aced the Rue Petit-Picpus; the carriage entrance No. 62 marked its extremity. owards the centre of this façade was a low, arched door, whitened with dust and shes, where the spiders wove their webs, and which was open only for an hour or wo on Sundays, and on rare occasions, when the coffin of a nun left the onvent. This was the public entrance of the church. The elbow of the gibbet was square hall which was used as the servants’ hall, and which the nuns called the buttery_. In the main arm were the cells of the mothers, the sisters, and he novices. In the lesser arm lay the kitchens, the refectory, backed up by the loisters and the church. Between the door No. 62 and the corner of the closed umarais Lane, was the school, which was not visible from without. The remainder f the trapezium formed the garden, which was much lower than the level of the ue Polonceau, which caused the walls to be very much higher on the inside than n the outside. The garden, which was slightly arched, had in its centre, on the ummit of a hillock, a fine pointed and conical fir-tree, whence ran, as from he peaked boss of a shield, four grand alleys, and, ranged by twos in between he branchings of these, eight small ones, so that, if the enclosure had been ircular, the geometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross uperposed on a wheel. As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of he garden, they were of unequal length. They were bordered with currant bushes. t the bottom, an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins of the old convent, hich was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the house of the Little Convent, hich was at the angle of the Aumarais Lane. In front of the Little Convent was hat was called the little garden. To this whole, let the reader add a ourtyard, all sorts of varied angles formed by the interior buildings, prison alls, the long black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue olonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood, and he will be able to form or himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines of the etit-Picpus was forty years ago. This holy house had been built on the precise ite of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the sixteenth century, which as called the “tennis-ground of the eleven thousand devils.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.8.3#All these streets, moreover, were more ancient than Paris. These names, roit-Mur and Aumarais, are very ancient; the streets which bear them are very uch more ancient still. Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane; the Rue roit-Mur was called the Rue des Églantiers, for God opened flowers before man ut stones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.9.head#CHAPTER IX—A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.9.1#Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the etit-Picpus was in former times, and since we have ventured to open a window on hat discreet retreat, the reader will permit us one other little digression, tterly foreign to this book, but characteristic and useful, since it shows that he cloister even has its original figures.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.9.2#In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey of ontevrault. She had even been in society before the Revolution. She talked a reat deal of M. de Miromesnil, Keeper of the Seals under Louis XVI. and of a residentess Duplat, with whom she had been very intimate. It was her pleasure nd her vanity to drag in these names on every pretext. She told wonders of the bbey of Fontevrault,—that it was like a city, and that there were streets in he monastery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.9.3#She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils. Every year, she olemnly renewed her vows, and at the moment of taking the oath, she said to the riest, “Monseigneur Saint-François gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Julien, onseigneur Saint-Julien gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius, Monseigneur aint-Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Procopius, etc., etc.; and thus I ive it to you, father.” And the school-girls would begin to laugh, not in their leeves, but under their veils; charming little stifled laughs which made the ocal mothers frown.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.9.4#On another occasion, the centenarian was telling stories. She said that _in er youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as the mousquetaires_. It as a century which spoke through her, but it was the eighteenth century. She old about the custom of the four wines, which existed before the Revolution in hampagne and Bourgogne. When a great personage, a marshal of France, a prince, duke, and a peer, traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne, the city fathers ame out to harangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which hey had poured four different sorts of wine. On the first goblet this nscription could be read, _monkey wine_; on the second, _lion wine_; on the hird, _sheep wine_; on the fourth, _hog wine_. These four legends express the our stages descended by the drunkard; the first, intoxication, which enlivens; he second, that which irritates; the third, that which dulls; and the fourth, hat which brutalizes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.9.5#In a cupboard, under lock and key, she kept a mysterious object of which he thought a great deal. The rule of Fontevrault did not forbid this. She would ot show this object to anyone. She shut herself up, which her rule allowed her o do, and hid herself, every time that she desired to contemplate it. If she eard a footstep in the corridor, she closed the cupboard again as hastily as it as possible with her aged hands. As soon as it was mentioned to her, she became ilent, she who was so fond of talking. The most curious were baffled by her ilence and the most tenacious by her obstinacy. Thus it furnished a subject of omment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent. What could hat treasure of the centenarian be, which was so precious and so secret? Some oly book, no doubt? Some unique chaplet? Some authentic relic? They lost hemselves in conjectures. When the poor old woman died, they rushed to her upboard more hastily than was fitting, perhaps, and opened it. They found the bject beneath a triple linen cloth, like some consecrated paten. It was a aenza platter representing little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary ads armed with enormous syringes. The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical ostures. One of the charming little Loves is already fairly spitted. He is esisting, fluttering his tiny wings, and still making an effort to fly, but the ancer is laughing with a satanical air. Moral: Love conquered by the colic. his platter, which is very curious, and which had, possibly, the honor of urnishing Molière with an idea, was still in existence in September, 1845; it as for sale by a bric-à-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.9.6#This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside _because_, aid she, the _parlor is too gloomy_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.10.head#CHAPTER X—ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.10.1#However, this almost sepulchral parlor, of which we have sought to convey n idea, is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity n other convents. At the convent of the Rue du Temple, in particular, which elonged, in truth, to another order, the black shutters were replaced by brown urtains, and the parlor itself was a salon with a polished wood floor, whose indows were draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts f frames, a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face, painted bouquets, nd even the head of a Turk.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.10.2#It is in that garden of the Temple convent, that stood that famous hestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in France, and hich bore the reputation among the good people of the eighteenth century of eing _the father of all the chestnut trees of the realm_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.10.3#As we have said, this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines of he Perpetual Adoration, Benedictines quite different from those who depended on îteaux. This order of the Perpetual Adoration is not very ancient and does not o back more than two hundred years. In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on wo occasions a few days apart, in two churches in Paris, at Saint-Sulpice and t Saint-Jean en Grève, a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole town n an uproar. M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Prés ordered a olemn procession of all his clergy, in which the Pope’s Nuncio officiated. But his expiation did not satisfy two sainted women, Madame Courtin, Marquise de oucs, and the Comtesse de Châteauvieux. This outrage committed on “the most oly sacrament of the altar,” though but temporary, would not depart from these oly souls, and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a Perpetual Adoration” in some female monastery. Both of them, one in 1652, the ther in 1653, made donations of notable sums to Mother Catherine de Bar, called f the Holy Sacrament, a Benedictine nun, for the purpose of founding, to this ious end, a monastery of the order of Saint-Benoît; the first permission for his foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz, Abbé of aint-Germain, “on condition that no woman could be received unless she ontributed three hundred livres income, which amounts to six thousand livres, o the principal.” After the Abbé of Saint-Germain, the king accorded etters-patent; and all the rest, abbatial charter, and royal letters, was onfirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.10.4#Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment of the enedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament at Paris. Their irst convent was “a new building” in the Rue Cassette, out of the contributions f Mesdames de Boucs and de Châteauvieux.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.10.5#This order, as it will be seen, was not to be confounded with the enedictine nuns of Cîteaux. It mounted back to the Abbé of Saint-Germain des rés, in the same manner that the ladies of the Sacred Heart go back to the eneral of the Jesuits, and the sisters of charity to the general of the azarists.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.10.6#It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus, hose interior we have just shown. In 1657, Pope Alexander VII. had authorized, y a special brief, the Bernardines of the Rue Petit-Picpus, to practise the erpetual Adoration like the Benedictine nuns of the Holy Sacrament. But the two rders remained distinct nonetheless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.head#CHAPTER XI—END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.1#At the beginning of the Restoration, the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in ts decay; this forms a part of the general death of the order, which, after the ighteenth century, has been disappearing like all the religious orders. ontemplation is, like prayer, one of humanity’s needs; but, like everything hich the Revolution touched, it will be transformed, and from being hostile to ocial progress, it will become favorable to it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.2#The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated. In 1840, he Little Convent had disappeared, the school had disappeared. There were no onger any old women, nor young girls; the first were dead, the latter had taken heir departure. _Volaverunt_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.3#The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature that it larms, vocations recoil before it, the order receives no recruits. In 1845, it till obtained lay-sisters here and there. But of professed nuns, none at all. orty years ago, the nuns numbered nearly a hundred; fifteen years ago there ere not more than twenty-eight of them. How many are there to-day? In 1847, the rioress was young, a sign that the circle of choice was restricted. She was not orty years old. In proportion as the number diminishes, the fatigue increases, he service of each becomes more painful; the moment could then be seen drawing ear when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the heavy ule of Saint-Benoît. The burden is implacable, and remains the same for the few s for the many. It weighs down, it crushes. Thus they die. At the period when he author of this book still lived in Paris, two died. One was twenty-five ears old, the other twenty-three. This latter can say, like Julia Alpinula: “Hic jaceo. Vixi annos viginti et tres.” _ It is in consequence of this decay hat the convent gave up the education of girls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.4#We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house without ntering it, and without introducing the minds which accompany us, and which are istening to our tale, to the profit of some, perchance, of the melancholy istory of Jean Valjean. We have penetrated into this community, full of those ld practices which seem so novel to-day. It is the closed garden, _hortus onclusus_. We have spoken of this singular place in detail, but with respect, n so far, at least, as detail and respect are compatible. We do not understand ll, but we insult nothing. We are equally far removed from the hosanna of oseph de Maistre, who wound up by anointing the executioner, and from the sneer f Voltaire, who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.5#An illogical act on Voltaire’s part, we may remark, by the way; for oltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas; and even for those who eny superhuman incarnations, what does the crucifix represent? The assassinated age.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.6#In this nineteenth century, the religious idea is undergoing a crisis. eople are unlearning certain things, and they do well, provided that, while nlearning them they learn this: There is no vacuum in the human heart. Certain emolitions take place, and it is well that they do, but on condition that they re followed by reconstructions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.7#In the meantime, let us study things which are no more. It is necessary to now them, if only for the purpose of avoiding them. The counterfeits of the ast assume false names, and gladly call themselves the future. This spectre, his past, is given to falsifying its own passport. Let us inform ourselves of he trap. Let us be on our guard. The past has a visage, superstition, and a ask, hypocrisy. Let us denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.6.11.8#As for convents, they present a complex problem,—a question of ivilization, which condemns them; a question of liberty, which protects hem.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.head#BOOK SEVENTH—PARENTHESIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.1.1#This book is a drama, whose leading personage is the Infinite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.1.2#Man is the second.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.1.3#Such being the case, and a convent having happened to be on our road, it as been our duty to enter it. Why? Because the convent, which is common to the rient as well as to the Occident, to antiquity as well as to modern times, to aganism, to Buddhism, to Mahometanism, as well as to Christianity, is one of he optical apparatuses applied by man to the Infinite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.1.4#This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certain ideas; evertheless, while absolutely maintaining our reserves, our restrictions, and ven our indignations, we must say that every time we encounter man in the nfinite, either well or ill understood, we feel ourselves overpowered with espect. There is, in the synagogue, in the mosque, in the pagoda, in the igwam, a hideous side which we execrate, and a sublime side, which we adore. hat a contemplation for the mind, and what endless food for thought, is the everberation of God upon the human wall!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.1#From the point of view of history, of reason, and of truth, monasticism is ondemned. Monasteries, when they abound in a nation, are clogs in its irculation, cumbrous establishments, centres of idleness where centres of labor hould exist. Monastic communities are to the great social community what the istletoe is to the oak, what the wart is to the human body. Their prosperity nd their fatness mean the impoverishment of the country. The monastic regime, ood at the beginning of civilization, useful in the reduction of the brutal by he spiritual, is bad when peoples have reached their manhood. Moreover, when it ecomes relaxed, and when it enters into its period of disorder, it becomes bad or the very reasons which rendered it salutary in its period of purity, because t still continues to set the example.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.2#Claustration has had its day. Cloisters, useful in the early education of odern civilization, have embarrassed its growth, and are injurious to its evelopment. So far as institution and formation with relation to man are oncerned, monasteries, which were good in the tenth century, questionable in he fifteenth, are detestable in the nineteenth. The leprosy of monasticism has nawed nearly to a skeleton two wonderful nations, Italy and Spain; the one the ight, the other the splendor of Europe for centuries; and, at the present day, hese two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce, thanks to he healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.3#The convent—the ancient female convent in particular, such as it still resents itself on the threshold of this century, in Italy, in Austria, in pain—is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages. The cloister, hat cloister, is the point of intersection of horrors. The Catholic cloister, roperly speaking, is wholly filled with the black radiance of death.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.4#The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all. There rise, in obscurity, eneath vaults filled with gloom, beneath domes vague with shadow, massive ltars of Babel, as high as cathedrals; there immense white crucifixes hang from hains in the dark; there are extended, all nude on the ebony, great Christs of vory; more than bleeding,—bloody; hideous and magnificent, with their elbows isplaying the bones, their knee-pans showing their integuments, their wounds howing their flesh, crowned with silver thorns, nailed with nails of gold, with lood drops of rubies on their brows, and diamond tears in their eyes. The iamonds and rubies seem wet, and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep, heir sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges, their reasts crushed with wicker hurdles, their knees excoriated with prayer; women ho think themselves wives, spectres who think themselves seraphim. Do these omen think? No. Have they any will? No. Do they love? No. Do they live? No. heir nerves have turned to bone; their bones have turned to stone. Their veil s of woven night. Their breath under their veil resembles the indescribably ragic respiration of death. The abbess, a spectre, sanctifies them and errifies them. The immaculate one is there, and very fierce. Such are the ncient monasteries of Spain. Liars of terrible devotion, caverns of virgins, erocious places.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.5#Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself. The Spanish convent was, bove all others, the Catholic convent. There was a flavor of the Orient about t. The archbishop, the kislar-aga of heaven, locked up and kept watch over this eraglio of souls reserved for God. The nun was the odalisque, the priest was he eunuch. The fervent were chosen in dreams and possessed Christ. At night, he beautiful, nude young man descended from the cross and became the ecstasy of he cloistered one. Lofty walls guarded the mystic sultana, who had the rucified for her sultan, from all living distraction. A glance on the outer orld was infidelity. The _in pace_ replaced the leather sack. That which was ast into the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West. In both uarters, women wrung their hands; the waves for the first, the grave for the ast; here the drowned, there the buried. Monstrous parallel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.6#To-day the upholders of the past, unable to deny these things, have adopted he expedient of smiling at them. There has come into fashion a strange and easy anner of suppressing the revelations of history, of invalidating the ommentaries of philosophy, of eliding all embarrassing facts and all gloomy uestions. _A matter for declamations_, say the clever. Declamations, repeat the oolish. Jean-Jacques a declaimer; Diderot a declaimer; Voltaire on Calas, abarre, and Sirven, declaimers. I know not who has recently discovered that acitus was a declaimer, that Nero was a victim, and that pity is decidedly due o “that poor Holofernes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.2.7#Facts, however, are awkward things to disconcert, and they are obstinate. he author of this book has seen, with his own eyes, eight leagues distant from russels,—there are relics of the Middle Ages there which are attainable for verybody,—at the Abbey of Villers, the hole of the oubliettes, in the middle of he field which was formerly the courtyard of the cloister, and on the banks of he Thil, four stone dungeons, half under ground, half under the water. They ere _in pace_. Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door, a vault, nd a grated opening which, on the outside, is two feet above the level of the iver, and on the inside, six feet above the level of the ground. Four feet of iver flow past along the outside wall. The ground is always soaked. The ccupant of the _in pace_ had this wet soil for his bed. In one of these ungeons, there is a fragment of an iron necklet riveted to the wall; in nother, there can be seen a square box made of four slabs of granite, too short or a person to lie down in, too low for him to stand upright in. A human being as put inside, with a coverlid of stone on top. This exists. It can be seen. It an be touched. These _in pace_, these dungeons, these iron hinges, these ecklets, that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river’s current, that box of tone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb, with this difference, that the ead man here was a living being, that soil which is but mud, that vault hole, hose oozing walls,—what declaimers!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.head#CHAPTER III—ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.1#Monasticism, such as it existed in Spain, and such as it still exists in hibet, is a sort of phthisis for civilization. It stops life short. It simply epopulates. Claustration, castration. It has been the scourge of Europe. Add to his the violence so often done to the conscience, the forced vocations, eudalism bolstered up by the cloister, the right of the first-born pouring the xcess of the family into monasticism, the ferocities of which we have just poken, the _in pace_, the closed mouths, the walled-up brains, so many nfortunate minds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows, the taking of the abit, the interment of living souls. Add individual tortures to national egradations, and, whoever you may be, you will shudder before the frock and the eil,—those two winding-sheets of human devising. Nevertheless, at certain oints and in certain places, in spite of philosophy, in spite of progress, the pirit of the cloister persists in the midst of the nineteenth century, and a ingular ascetic recrudescence is, at this moment, astonishing the civilized orld. The obstinacy of antiquated institutions in perpetuating themselves esembles the stubbornness of the rancid perfume which should claim our hair, he pretensions of the spoiled fish which should persist in being eaten, the ersecution of the child’s garment which should insist on clothing the man, the enderness of corpses which should return to embrace the living.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.2#“Ingrates!” says the garment, “I protected you in inclement weather. Why ill you have nothing to do with me?” “I have just come from the deep sea,” says he fish. “I have been a rose,” says the perfume. “I have loved you,” says the orpse. “I have civilized you,” says the convent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.3#To this there is but one reply: “In former days.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.4#To dream of the indefinite prolongation of defunct things, and of the overnment of men by embalming, to restore dogmas in a bad condition, to regild hrines, to patch up cloisters, to rebless reliquaries, to refurnish uperstitions, to revictual fanaticisms, to put new handles on holy water rushes and militarism, to reconstitute monasticism and militarism, to believe n the salvation of society by the multiplication of parasites, to force the ast on the present,—this seems strange. Still, there are theorists who hold uch theories. These theorists, who are in other respects people of ntelligence, have a very simple process; they apply to the past a glazing which hey call social order, divine right, morality, family, the respect of elders, ntique authority, sacred tradition, legitimacy, religion; and they go about houting, “Look! take this, honest people.” This logic was known to the ncients. The soothsayers practise it. They rubbed a black heifer over with halk, and said, “She is white, _Bos cretatus_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.5#As for us, we respect the past here and there, and we spare it, above all, rovided that it consents to be dead. If it insists on being alive, we attack t, and we try to kill it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.6#Superstitions, bigotries, affected devotion, prejudices, those forms, all orms as they are, are tenacious of life; they have teeth and nails in their moke, and they must be clasped close, body to body, and war must be made on hem, and that without truce; for it is one of the fatalities of humanity to be ondemned to eternal combat with phantoms. It is difficult to seize darkness by he throat, and to hurl it to the earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.7#A convent in France, in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century, is a ollege of owls facing the light. A cloister, caught in the very act of sceticism, in the very heart of the city of ’89 and of 1830 and of 1848, Rome lossoming out in Paris, is an anachronism. In ordinary times, in order to issolve an anachronism and to cause it to vanish, one has only to make it spell ut the date. But we are not in ordinary times.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.8#Let us fight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.9#Let us fight, but let us make a distinction. The peculiar property of truth s never to commit excesses. What need has it of exaggeration? There is that hich it is necessary to destroy, and there is that which it is simply necessary o elucidate and examine. What a force is kindly and serious examination! Let us ot apply a flame where only a light is required.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.10#So, given the nineteenth century, we are opposed, as a general roposition, and among all peoples, in Asia as well as in Europe, in India as ell as in Turkey, to ascetic claustration. Whoever says cloister, says marsh. heir putrescence is evident, their stagnation is unhealthy, their fermentation nfects people with fever, and etiolates them; their multiplication becomes a lague of Egypt. We cannot think without affright of those lands where fakirs, onzes, santons, Greek monks, marabouts, talapoins, and dervishes multiply even ike swarms of vermin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.3.11#This said, the religious question remains. This question has certain ysterious, almost formidable sides; may we be permitted to look at it ixedly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE CONVENT FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF PRINCIPLES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.1#Men unite themselves and dwell in communities. By virtue of what right? By irtue of the right of association.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.2#They shut themselves up at home. By virtue of what right? By virtue of the ight which every man has to open or shut his door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.3#They do not come forth. By virtue of what right? By virtue of the right to o and come, which implies the right to remain at home.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.4#There, at home, what do they do?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.5#They speak in low tones; they drop their eyes; they toil. They renounce the orld, towns, sensualities, pleasures, vanities, pride, interests. They are lothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen. Not one of them possesses in his own ight anything whatever. On entering there, each one who was rich makes himself oor. What he has, he gives to all. He who was what is called noble, a gentleman nd a lord, is the equal of him who was a peasant. The cell is identical for ll. All undergo the same tonsure, wear the same frock, eat the same black read, sleep on the same straw, die on the same ashes. The same sack on their acks, the same rope around their loins. If the decision has been to go arefoot, all go barefoot. There may be a prince among them; that prince is the ame shadow as the rest. No titles. Even family names have disappeared. They ear only first names. All are bowed beneath the equality of baptismal names. hey have dissolved the carnal family, and constituted in their community a piritual family. They have no other relatives than all men. They succor the oor, they care for the sick. They elect those whom they obey. They call each ther “my brother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.6#You stop me and exclaim, “But that is the ideal convent!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.7#It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent, that I should take otice of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.8#Thence it results that, in the preceding book, I have spoken of a convent ith respectful accents. The Middle Ages cast aside, Asia cast aside, the istorical and political question held in reserve, from the purely philosophical oint of view, outside the requirements of militant policy, on condition that he monastery shall be absolutely a voluntary matter and shall contain only onsenting parties, I shall always consider a cloistered community with a ertain attentive, and, in some respects, a deferential gravity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.9#Wherever there is a community, there is a commune; where there is a ommune, there is right. The monastery is the product of the formula: Equality, raternity. Oh! how grand is liberty! And what a splendid transfiguration! iberty suffices to transform the monastery into a republic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.10#Let us continue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.11#But these men, or these women who are behind these four walls. They dress hemselves in coarse woollen, they are equals, they call each other brothers, hat is well; but they do something else?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.12#Yes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.13#What?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.14#They gaze on the darkness, they kneel, and they clasp their hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.4.15#What does this signify?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.head#CHAPTER V—PRAYER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.1#They pray.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.2#To whom?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.3#To God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.4#To pray to God,—what is the meaning of these words?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.5#Is there an infinite beyond us? Is that infinite there, inherent, ermanent; necessarily substantial, since it is infinite; and because, if it acked matter it would be bounded; necessarily intelligent, since it is nfinite, and because, if it lacked intelligence, it would end there? Does this nfinite awaken in us the idea of essence, while we can attribute to ourselves nly the idea of existence? In other terms, is it not the absolute, of which we re only the relative?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.6#At the same time that there is an infinite without us, is there not an nfinite within us? Are not these two infinites (what an alarming plural!) uperposed, the one upon the other? Is not this second infinite, so to speak, ubjacent to the first? Is it not the latter’s mirror, reflection, echo, an byss which is concentric with another abyss? Is this second infinity ntelligent also? Does it think? Does it love? Does it will? If these two nfinities are intelligent, each of them has a will principle, and there is an I_ in the upper infinity as there is an _I_ in the lower infinity. The _I_ elow is the soul; the _I_ on high is God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.7#To place the infinity here below in contact, by the medium of thought, with he infinity on high, is called praying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.8#Let us take nothing from the human mind; to suppress is bad. We must reform nd transform. Certain faculties in man are directed towards the Unknown; hought, reverie, prayer. The Unknown is an ocean. What is conscience? It is the ompass of the Unknown. Thought, reverie, prayer,—these are great and mysterious adiations. Let us respect them. Whither go these majestic irradiations of the oul? Into the shadow; that is to say, to the light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.9#The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing of umanity. Close to the right of the man, beside it, at the least, there exists he right of the soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.5.10#To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite, such is the law. Let us ot confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of creation, and o the contemplation of its branches full of stars. We have a duty to labor over he human soul, to defend the mystery against the miracle, to adore the ncomprehensible and reject the absurd, to admit, as an inexplicable fact, only hat is necessary, to purify belief, to remove superstitions from above eligion; to clear God of caterpillars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.1#With regard to the modes of prayer, all are good, provided that they are incere. Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.2#There is, as we know, a philosophy which denies the infinite. There is also philosophy, pathologically classified, which denies the sun; this philosophy s called blindness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.3#To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth, is a fine blind an’s self-sufficiency.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.4#The curious thing is the haughty, superior, and compassionate airs which his groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy which beholds God. One ancies he hears a mole crying, “I pity them with their sun!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.5#There are, as we know, powerful and illustrious atheists. At bottom, led ack to the truth by their very force, they are not absolutely sure that they re atheists; it is with them only a question of definition, and in any case, if hey do not believe in God, being great minds, they prove God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.6#We salute them as philosophers, while inexorably denouncing their hilosophy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.7#Let us go on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.8#The remarkable thing about it is, also, their facility in paying themselves ff with words. A metaphysical school of the North, impregnated to some extent ith fog, has fancied that it has worked a revolution in human understanding by eplacing the word Force with the word Will.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.9#To say: “the plant wills,” instead of: “the plant grows”: this would be ecund in results, indeed, if we were to add: “the universe wills.” Why? Because t would come to this: the plant wills, therefore it has an _I_; the universe ills, therefore it has a God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.10#As for us, who, however, in contradistinction to this school, reject othing _a priori_, a will in the plant, accepted by this school, appears to us ore difficult to admit than a will in the universe denied by it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.11#To deny the will of the infinite, that is to say, God, is impossible on ny other conditions than a denial of the infinite. We have demonstrated his.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.12#The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism. Everything ecomes “a mental conception.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.13#With nihilism, no discussion is possible; for the nihilist logic doubts he existence of its interlocutor, and is not quite sure that it exists tself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.14#From its point of view, it is possible that it may be for itself, only “a ental conception.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.15#Only, it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits in the ump, simply by the utterance of the word, mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.16#In short, no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes all nd in the monosyllable, No.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.17#To No there is only one reply, Yes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.18#Nihilism has no point.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.19#There is no such thing as nothingness. Zero does not exist. Everything is omething. Nothing is nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.20#Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.21#Even to see and to show does not suffice. Philosophy should be an energy; t should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition of man. ocrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius; in other words, the an of wisdom should be made to emerge from the man of felicity. Eden should be hanged into a Lyceum. Science should be a cordial. To enjoy,—what a sad aim, nd what a paltry ambition! The brute enjoys. To offer thought to the thirst of en, to give them all as an elixir the notion of God, to make conscience and cience fraternize in them, to render them just by this mysterious onfrontation; such is the function of real philosophy. Morality is a blossoming ut of truths. Contemplation leads to action. The absolute should be racticable. It is necessary that the ideal should be breathable, drinkable, and atable to the human mind. It is the ideal which has the right to say: _Take, his is my body, this is my blood_. Wisdom is holy communion. It is on this ondition that it ceases to be a sterile love of science and becomes the one and overeign mode of human rallying, and that philosophy herself is promoted to eligion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.22#Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it at ts ease, without any other result than that of being convenient to uriosity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.23#For our part, adjourning the development of our thought to another ccasion, we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither understand man as point of departure nor progress as an end, without those two forces which are heir two motors: faith and love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.24#Progress is the goal, the ideal is the type.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.25#What is this ideal? It is God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.6.26#Ideal, absolute, perfection, infinity: identical words.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.head#CHAPTER VII—PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.1#History and philosophy have eternal duties, which are, at the same time, imple duties; to combat Caiphas the High-priest, Draco the Lawgiver, Trimalcion he Legislator, Tiberius the Emperor; this is clear, direct, and limpid, and ffers no obscurity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.2#But the right to live apart, even with its inconveniences and its abuses, nsists on being stated and taken into account. Cenobitism is a human roblem.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.3#When one speaks of convents, those abodes of error, but of innocence, of berration but of good-will, of ignorance but of devotion, of torture but of artyrdom, it always becomes necessary to say either yes or no.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.4#A convent is a contradiction. Its object, salvation; its means thereto, acrifice. The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme bnegation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.5#To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device of onasticism.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.6#In the cloister, one suffers in order to enjoy. One draws a bill of xchange on death. One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light. In the loister, hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on paradise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.7#The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with ternity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.8#It does not seem to us, that on such a subject mockery is permissible. All bout it is serious, the good as well as the bad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.7.9#The just man frowns, but never smiles with a malicious sneer. We understand rath, but not malice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—FAITH, LAW
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.1#A few words more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.2#We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues, we despise the piritual which is harsh toward the temporal; but we everywhere honor the houghtful man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.3#We salute the man who kneels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.4#A faith; this is a necessity for man. Woe to him who believes nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.5#One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed. There is visible labor and nvisible labor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.6#To contemplate is to labor, to think is to act.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.7#Folded arms toil, clasped hands work. A gaze fixed on heaven is a work.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.8#Thales remained motionless for four years. He founded philosophy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.9#In our opinion, cenobites are not lazy men, and recluses are not dlers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.10#To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.11#Without invalidating anything that we have just said, we believe that a erpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living. On this point, the priest nd the philosopher agree. _We must die_. The Abbé de la Trappe replies to orace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.12#To mingle with one’s life a certain presence of the sepulchre,—this is the aw of the sage; and it is the law of the ascetic. In this respect, the ascetic nd the sage converge. There is a material growth; we admit it. There is a moral randeur; we hold to that. Thoughtless and vivacious spirits say:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.13#“What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery? What urpose do they serve? What do they do?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.14#Alas! In the presence of the darkness which environs us, and which awaits s, in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make of us, we reply: There is probably no work more divine than that performed by these souls.” And e add: “There is probably no work which is more useful.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.15#There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who never pray t all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.16#In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought that is ingled with prayer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.17#Leibnitz praying is grand, Voltaire adoring is fine. _Deo erexit oltaire_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.18#We are for religion as against religions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.19#We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons, and the ublimity of prayer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.20#Moreover, at this minute which we are now traversing,—a minute which will ot, fortunately, leave its impress on the nineteenth century,—at this hour, hen so many men have low brows and souls but little elevated, among so many ortals whose morality consists in enjoyment, and who are busied with the brief nd misshapen things of matter, whoever exiles himself seems worthy of eneration to us.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.21#The monastery is a renunciation. Sacrifice wrongly directed is still acrifice. To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of its own.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.22#Taken by itself, and ideally, and in order to examine the truth on all ides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted, the monastery, the emale convent in particular,—for in our century it is woman who suffers the ost, and in this exile of the cloister there is something of protestation,—the emale convent has incontestably a certain majesty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.23#This cloistered existence which is so austere, so depressing, a few of hose features we have just traced, is not life, for it is not liberty; it is ot the tomb, for it is not plenitude; it is the strange place whence one eholds, as from the crest of a lofty mountain, on one side the abyss where we re, on the other, the abyss whither we shall go; it is the narrow and misty rontier separating two worlds, illuminated and obscured by both at the same ime, where the ray of life which has become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ay of death; it is the half obscurity of the tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.7.8.24#We, who do not believe what these women believe, but who, like them, live y faith,—we have never been able to think without a sort of tender and eligious terror, without a sort of pity, that is full of envy, of those evoted, trembling and trusting creatures, of these humble and august souls, who are to dwell on the very brink of the mystery, waiting between the world which s closed and heaven which is not yet open, turned towards the light which one annot see, possessing the sole happiness of thinking that they know where it s, aspiring towards the gulf, and the unknown, their eyes fixed motionless on he darkness, kneeling, bewildered, stupefied, shuddering, half lifted, at imes, by the deep breaths of eternity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.head#BOOK EIGHTH—CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.head#CHAPTER I—WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.1#It was into this house that Jean Valjean had, as Fauchelevent expressed it, fallen from the sky.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.2#He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the Rue olonceau. That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle of the ight, was the nuns chanting matins; that hall, of which he had caught a glimpse n the gloom, was the chapel. That phantom which he had seen stretched on the round was the sister who was making reparation; that bell, the sound of which ad so strangely surprised him, was the gardener’s bell attached to the knee of ather Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.3#Cosette once put to bed, Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had, as we have lready seen, supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a good, rackling fire; then, the only bed in the hut being occupied by Cosette, each hrew himself on a truss of straw.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.4#Before he shut his eyes, Jean Valjean said: “I must remain here enceforth.” This remark trotted through Fauchelevent’s head all night long.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.5#To tell the truth, neither of them slept.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.6#Jean Valjean, feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on his cent, understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned to Paris. Then he new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded him in this cloister. ean Valjean had, henceforth, but one thought,—to remain there. Now, for an nfortunate man in his position, this convent was both the safest and the most angerous of places; the most dangerous, because, as no men might enter there, f he were discovered, it was a flagrant offence, and Jean Valjean would find ut one step intervening between the convent and prison; the safest, because, if e could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there, who would ever eek him in such a place? To dwell in an impossible place was safety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.7#On his side, Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains. He began by declaring o himself that he understood nothing of the matter. How had M. Madeleine got here, when the walls were what they were? Cloister walls are not to be stepped ver. How did he get there with a child? One cannot scale a perpendicular wall ith a child in one’s arms. Who was that child? Where did they both come from? ince Fauchelevent had lived in the convent, he had heard nothing of M. sur M., nd he knew nothing of what had taken place there. Father Madeleine had an air hich discouraged questions; and besides, Fauchelevent said to himself: “One oes not question a saint.” M. Madeleine had preserved all his prestige in auchelevent’s eyes. Only, from some words which Jean Valjean had let fall, the ardener thought he could draw the inference that M. Madeleine had probably ecome bankrupt through the hard times, and that he was pursued by his reditors; or that he had compromised himself in some political affair, and was n hiding; which last did not displease Fauchelevent, who, like many of our easants of the North, had an old fund of Bonapartism about him. While in iding, M. Madeleine had selected the convent as a refuge, and it was quite imple that he should wish to remain there. But the inexplicable point, to which auchelevent returned constantly and over which he wearied his brain, was that . Madeleine should be there, and that he should have that little girl with him. auchelevent saw them, touched them, spoke to them, and still did not believe it ossible. The incomprehensible had just made its entrance into Fauchelevent’s ut. Fauchelevent groped about amid conjectures, and could see nothing clearly ut this: “M. Madeleine saved my life.” This certainty alone was sufficient and ecided his course. He said to himself: “It is my turn now.” He added in his onscience: “M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate when it was a question of hrusting himself under the cart for the purpose of dragging me out.” He made up is mind to save M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.8#Nevertheless, he put many questions to himself and made himself divers eplies: “After what he did for me, would I save him if he were a thief? Just he same. If he were an assassin, would I save him? Just the same. Since he is a aint, shall I save him? Just the same.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.9#But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent! auchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical undertaking; his poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder than his self-devotion, is good will, and a little of that old rustic cunning, on this occasion nlisted in the service of a generous enterprise, undertook to scale the ifficulties of the cloister, and the steep escarpments of the rule of aint-Benoît. Father Fauchelevent was an old man who had been an egoist all his ife, and who, towards the end of his days, halt, infirm, with no interest left o him in the world, found it sweet to be grateful, and perceiving a generous ction to be performed, flung himself upon it like a man, who at the moment when e is dying, should find close to his hand a glass of good wine which he had ever tasted, and should swallow it with avidity. We may add, that the air which e had breathed for many years in this convent had destroyed all personality in im, and had ended by rendering a good action of some kind absolutely necessary o him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.10#So he took his resolve: to devote himself to M. Madeleine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.11#We have just called him a _poor peasant of Picardy_. That description is ust, but incomplete. At the point of this story which we have now reached, a ittle of Father Fauchelevent’s physiology becomes useful. He was a peasant, but e had been a notary, which added trickery to his cunning, and penetration to is ingenuousness. Having, through various causes, failed in his business, he ad descended to the calling of a carter and a laborer. But, in spite of oaths nd lashings, which horses seem to require, something of the notary had lingered n him. He had some natural wit; he talked good grammar; he conversed, which is rare thing in a village; and the other peasants said of him: “He talks almost ike a gentleman with a hat.” Fauchelevent belonged, in fact, to that species, hich the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the last century qualified as demi-bourgeois, demi-lout_, and which the metaphors showered by the château pon the thatched cottage ticketed in the pigeon-hole of the plebeian: _rather ustic, rather citified; pepper and salt_. Fauchelevent, though sorely tried and arshly used by fate, worn out, a sort of poor, threadbare old soul, was, evertheless, an impulsive man, and extremely spontaneous in his actions; a recious quality which prevents one from ever being wicked. His defects and his ices, for he had some, were all superficial; in short, his physiognomy was of he kind which succeeds with an observer. His aged face had none of those isagreeable wrinkles at the top of the forehead, which signify malice or tupidity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.12#At daybreak, Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes, after having done an normous deal of thinking, and beheld M. Madeleine seated on his truss of straw, nd watching Cosette’s slumbers. Fauchelevent sat up and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.13#“Now that you are here, how are you going to contrive to enter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.14#This remark summed up the situation and aroused Jean Valjean from his everie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.15#The two men took counsel together.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.16#“In the first place,” said Fauchelevent, “you will begin by not setting oot outside of this chamber, either you or the child. One step in the garden nd we are done for.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.17#“That is true.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.18#“Monsieur Madeleine,” resumed Fauchelevent, “you have arrived at a very uspicious moment, I mean to say a very inauspicious moment; one of the ladies s very ill. This will prevent them from looking much in our direction. It seems hat she is dying. The prayers of the forty hours are being said. The whole ommunity is in confusion. That occupies them. The one who is on the point of eparture is a saint. In fact, we are all saints here; all the difference etween them and me is that they say ‘our cell,’ and that I say ‘my cabin.’ The rayers for the dying are to be said, and then the prayers for the dead. We hall be at peace here for to-day; but I will not answer for to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.19#“Still,” observed Jean Valjean, “this cottage is in the niche of the wall, t is hidden by a sort of ruin, there are trees, it is not visible from the onvent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.20#“And I add that the nuns never come near it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.21#“Well?” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.22#The interrogation mark which accentuated this “well” signified: “it seems o me that one may remain concealed here?” It was to this interrogation point hat Fauchelevent responded:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.23#“There are the little girls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.24#“What little girls?” asked Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.25#Just as Fauchelevent opened his mouth to explain the words which he had ttered, a bell emitted one stroke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.26#“The nun is dead,” said he. “There is the knell.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.27#And he made a sign to Jean Valjean to listen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.28#The bell struck a second time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.29#“It is the knell, Monsieur Madeleine. The bell will continue to strike nce a minute for twenty-four hours, until the body is taken from the hurch.—You see, they play. At recreation hours it suffices to have a ball roll side, to send them all hither, in spite of prohibitions, to hunt and rummage or it all about here. Those cherubs are devils.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.30#“Who?” asked Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.31#“The little girls. You would be very quickly discovered. They would hriek: ‘Oh! a man!’ There is no danger to-day. There will be no recreation our. The day will be entirely devoted to prayers. You hear the bell. As I told ou, a stroke each minute. It is the death knell.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.32#“I understand, Father Fauchelevent. There are pupils.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.33#And Jean Valjean thought to himself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.34#“Here is Cosette’s education already provided.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.35#Fauchelevent exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.36#“Pardine! There are little girls indeed! And they would bawl around you! nd they would rush off! To be a man here is to have the plague. You see how hey fasten a bell to my paw as though I were a wild beast.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.37#Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought.—“This convent would e our salvation,” he murmured.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.38#Then he raised his voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.39#“Yes, the difficulty is to remain here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.40#“No,” said Fauchelevent, “the difficulty is to get out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.41#Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.42#“To get out!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.43#“Yes, Monsieur Madeleine. In order to return here it is first necessary to et out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.44#And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded, auchelevent went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.45#“You must not be found here in this fashion. Whence come you? For me, you all from heaven, because I know you; but the nuns require one to enter by the oor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.46#All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.47#“Ah!” said Fauchelevent, “they are ringing up the vocal mothers. They are oing to the chapter. They always hold a chapter when any one dies. She died at aybreak. People generally do die at daybreak. But cannot you get out by the way n which you entered? Come, I do not ask for the sake of questioning you, but ow did you get in?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.48#Jean Valjean turned pale; the very thought of descending again into that errible street made him shudder. You make your way out of a forest filled with igers, and once out of it, imagine a friendly counsel that shall advise you to eturn thither! Jean Valjean pictured to himself the whole police force still ngaged in swarming in that quarter, agents on the watch, sentinels everywhere, rightful fists extended towards his collar, Javert at the corner of the ntersection of the streets perhaps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.49#“Impossible!” said he. “Father Fauchelevent, say that I fell from the ky.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.50#“But I believe it, I believe it,” retorted Fauchelevent. “You have no need o tell me that. The good God must have taken you in his hand for the purpose of etting a good look at you close to, and then dropped you. Only, he meant to lace you in a man’s convent; he made a mistake. Come, there goes another peal, hat is to order the porter to go and inform the municipality that the ead-doctor is to come here and view a corpse. All that is the ceremony of ying. These good ladies are not at all fond of that visit. A doctor is a man ho does not believe in anything. He lifts the veil. Sometimes he lifts omething else too. How quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time! hat is the matter? Your little one is still asleep. What is her name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.51#“Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.52#“She is your daughter? You are her grandfather, that is?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.53#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.54#“It will be easy enough for her to get out of here. I have my service door hich opens on the courtyard. I knock. The porter opens; I have my vintage asket on my back, the child is in it, I go out. Father Fauchelevent goes out ith his basket—that is perfectly natural. You will tell the child to keep very uiet. She will be under the cover. I will leave her for whatever time is equired with a good old friend, a fruit-seller whom I know in the Rue hemin-Vert, who is deaf, and who has a little bed. I will shout in the ruit-seller’s ear, that she is a niece of mine, and that she is to keep her for e until to-morrow. Then the little one will re-enter with you; for I will ontrive to have you re-enter. It must be done. But how will you manage to get ut?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.55#Jean Valjean shook his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.56#“No one must see me, the whole point lies there, Father Fauchelevent. Find ome means of getting me out in a basket, under cover, like Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.57#Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of his eft hand, a sign of serious embarrassment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.58#A third peal created a diversion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.59#“That is the dead-doctor taking his departure,” said Fauchelevent. “He has aken a look and said: ‘She is dead, that is well.’ When the doctor has signed he passport for paradise, the undertaker’s company sends a coffin. If it is a other, the mothers lay her out; if she is a sister, the sisters lay her out. fter which, I nail her up. That forms a part of my gardener’s duty. A gardener s a bit of a grave-digger. She is placed in a lower hall of the church which ommunicates with the street, and into which no man may enter save the doctor of he dead. I don’t count the undertaker’s men and myself as men. It is in that all that I nail up the coffin. The undertaker’s men come and get it, and whip p, coachman! that’s the way one goes to heaven. They fetch a box with nothing n it, they take it away again with something in it. That’s what a burial is ike. _De profundis_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.60#A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping osette, who lay with her mouth vaguely open, and had the air of an angel rinking in the light. Jean Valjean had fallen to gazing at her. He was no onger listening to Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.61#That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence. The good ld gardener went on tranquilly with his babble:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.62#“The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery. They declare that they are oing to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery. It is an ancient cemetery which is utside the regulations, which has no uniform, and which is going to retire. It s a shame, for it is convenient. I have a friend there, Father Mestienne, the rave-digger. The nuns here possess one privilege, it is to be taken to that emetery at nightfall. There is a special permission from the Prefecture on heir behalf. But how many events have happened since yesterday! Mother rucifixion is dead, and Father Madeleine—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.63#“Is buried,” said Jean Valjean, smiling sadly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.64#Fauchelevent caught the word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.65#“Goodness! if you were here for good, it would be a real burial.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.66#A fourth peal burst out. Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled knee-cap rom its nail and buckled it on his knee again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.67#“This time it is for me. The Mother Prioress wants me. Good, now I am ricking myself on the tongue of my buckle. Monsieur Madeleine, don’t stir from ere, and wait for me. Something new has come up. If you are hungry, there is ine, bread and cheese.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.68#And he hastened out of the hut, crying: “Coming! coming!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.69#Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his crooked eg would permit, casting a sidelong glance by the way on his melon patch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.70#Less than ten minutes later, Father Fauchelevent, whose bell put the nuns n his road to flight, tapped gently at a door, and a gentle voice replied: “Forever! Forever!” _ that is to say: _“Enter.” _
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.1.71#The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing the ardener on business. This parlor adjoined the chapter hall. The prioress, eated on the only chair in the parlor, was waiting for Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.head#CHAPTER II—FAUCHELEVENT IN THE PRESENCE OF A DIFFICULTY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.1#It is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions, notably riests and nuns, to wear a grave and agitated air on critical occasions. At the oment when Fauchelevent entered, this double form of preoccupation was mprinted on the countenance of the prioress, who was that wise and charming ademoiselle de Blemeur, Mother Innocente, who was ordinarily cheerful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.2#The gardener made a timid bow, and remained at the door of the cell. The rioress, who was telling her beads, raised her eyes and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.3#“Ah! it is you, Father Fauvent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.4#This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.5#Fauchelevent bowed again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.6#“Father Fauvent, I have sent for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.7#“Here I am, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.8#“I have something to say to you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.9#“And so have I,” said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused him inward error, “I have something to say to the very reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.10#The prioress stared at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.11#“Ah! you have a communication to make to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.12#“A request.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.13#“Very well, speak.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.14#Goodman Fauchelevent, the ex-notary, belonged to the category of peasants ho have assurance. A certain clever ignorance constitutes a force; you do not istrust it, and you are caught by it. Fauchelevent had been a success during he something more than two years which he had passed in the convent. Always olitary and busied about his gardening, he had nothing else to do than to ndulge his curiosity. As he was at a distance from all those veiled women assing to and fro, he saw before him only an agitation of shadows. By dint of ttention and sharpness he had succeeded in clothing all those phantoms with lesh, and those corpses were alive for him. He was like a deaf man whose sight rows keener, and like a blind man whose hearing becomes more acute. He had pplied himself to riddling out the significance of the different peals, and he ad succeeded, so that this taciturn and enigmatical cloister possessed no ecrets for him; the sphinx babbled all her secrets in his ear. Fauchelevent new all and concealed all; that constituted his art. The whole convent thought im stupid. A great merit in religion. The vocal mothers made much of auchelevent. He was a curious mute. He inspired confidence. Moreover, he was egular, and never went out except for well-demonstrated requirements of the rchard and vegetable garden. This discretion of conduct had inured to his redit. Nonetheless, he had set two men to chattering: the porter, in the onvent, and he knew the singularities of their parlor, and the grave-digger, at he cemetery, and he was acquainted with the peculiarities of their sepulture; n this way, he possessed a double light on the subject of these nuns, one as to heir life, the other as to their death. But he did not abuse his knowledge. The ongregation thought a great deal of him. Old, lame, blind to everything, robably a little deaf into the bargain,—what qualities! They would have found t difficult to replace him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.15#The goodman, with the assurance of a person who feels that he is ppreciated, entered into a rather diffuse and very deep rustic harangue to the everend prioress. He talked a long time about his age, his infirmities, the urcharge of years counting double for him henceforth, of the increasing demands f his work, of the great size of the garden, of nights which must be passed, ike the last, for instance, when he had been obliged to put straw mats over the elon beds, because of the moon, and he wound up as follows: “That he had a rother”—(the prioress made a movement),—“a brother no longer young”—(a second ovement on the part of the prioress, but one expressive of reassurance),—“that, f he might be permitted, this brother would come and live with him and help im, that he was an excellent gardener, that the community would receive from im good service, better than his own; that, otherwise, if his brother were not dmitted, as he, the elder, felt that his health was broken and that he was nsufficient for the work, he should be obliged, greatly to his regret, to go way; and that his brother had a little daughter whom he would bring with him, ho might be reared for God in the house, and who might, who knows, become a nun ome day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.16#When he had finished speaking, the prioress stayed the slipping of her osary between her fingers, and said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.17#“Could you procure a stout iron bar between now and this evening?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.18#“For what purpose?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.19#“To serve as a lever.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.20#“Yes, reverend Mother,” replied Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.2.21#The prioress, without adding a word, rose and entered the adjoining room, hich was the hall of the chapter, and where the vocal mothers were probably ssembled. Fauchelevent was left alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.head#CHAPTER III—MOTHER INNOCENTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.1#About a quarter of an hour elapsed. The prioress returned and seated erself once more on her chair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.2#The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied. We will present a stenographic eport of the dialogue which then ensued, to the best of our ability.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.3#“Father Fauvent!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.4#“Reverend Mother!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.5#“Do you know the chapel?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.6#“I have a little cage there, where I hear the mass and the offices.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.7#“And you have been in the choir in pursuance of your duties?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.8#“Two or three times.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.9#“There is a stone to be raised.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.10#“Heavy?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.11#“The slab of the pavement which is at the side of the altar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.12#“The slab which closes the vault?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.13#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.14#“It would be a good thing to have two men for it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.15#“Mother Ascension, who is as strong as a man, will help you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.16#“A woman is never a man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.17#“We have only a woman here to help you. Each one does what he can. Because om Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles of Saint Bernard, while erlonus Horstius only gives three hundred and sixty-seven, I do not despise erlonus Horstius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.18#“Neither do I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.19#“Merit consists in working according to one’s strength. A cloister is not dock-yard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.20#“And a woman is not a man. But my brother is the strong one, though!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.21#“And can you get a lever?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.22#“That is the only sort of key that fits that sort of door.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.23#“There is a ring in the stone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.24#“I will put the lever through it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.25#“And the stone is so arranged that it swings on a pivot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.26#“That is good, reverend Mother. I will open the vault.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.27#“And the four Mother Precentors will help you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.28#“And when the vault is open?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.29#“It must be closed again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.30#“Will that be all?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.31#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.32#“Give me your orders, very reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.33#“Fauvent, we have confidence in you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.34#“I am here to do anything you wish.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.35#“And to hold your peace about everything!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.36#“Yes, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.37#“When the vault is open—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.38#“I will close it again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.39#“But before that—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.40#“What, reverend Mother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.41#“Something must be lowered into it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.42#A silence ensued. The prioress, after a pout of the under lip which esembled hesitation, broke it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.43#“Father Fauvent!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.44#“Reverend Mother!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.45#“You know that a mother died this morning?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.46#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.47#“Did you not hear the bell?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.48#“Nothing can be heard at the bottom of the garden.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.49#“Really?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.50#“I can hardly distinguish my own signal.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.51#“She died at daybreak.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.52#“And then, the wind did not blow in my direction this morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.53#“It was Mother Crucifixion. A blessed woman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.54#The prioress paused, moved her lips, as though in mental prayer, and esumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.55#“Three years ago, Madame de Béthune, a Jansenist, turned orthodox, merely rom having seen Mother Crucifixion at prayer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.56#“Ah! yes, now I hear the knell, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.57#“The mothers have taken her to the dead-room, which opens on the hurch.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.58#“I know.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.59#“No other man than you can or must enter that chamber. See to that. A fine ight it would be, to see a man enter the dead-room!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.60#“More often!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.61#“Hey?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.62#“More often!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.63#“What do you say?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.64#“I say more often.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.65#“More often than what?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.66#“Reverend Mother, I did not say more often than what, I said more ften.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.67#“I don’t understand you. Why do you say more often?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.68#“In order to speak like you, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.69#“But I did not say ‘more often.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.70#At that moment, nine o’clock struck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.71#“At nine o’clock in the morning and at all hours, praised and adored be he most Holy Sacrament of the altar,” said the prioress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.72#“Amen,” said Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.73#The clock struck opportunely. It cut “more often” short. It is probable, hat had it not been for this, the prioress and Fauchelevent would never have nravelled that skein.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.74#Fauchelevent mopped his forehead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.75#The prioress indulged in another little inward murmur, probably sacred, hen raised her voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.76#“In her lifetime, Mother Crucifixion made converts; after her death, she ill perform miracles.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.77#“She will!” replied Father Fauchelevent, falling into step, and striving ot to flinch again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.78#“Father Fauvent, the community has been blessed in Mother Crucifixion. No oubt, it is not granted to every one to die, like Cardinal de Bérulle, while aying the holy mass, and to breathe forth their souls to God, while pronouncing hese words: _Hanc igitur oblationem_. But without attaining to such happiness, other Crucifixion’s death was very precious. She retained her consciousness to he very last moment. She spoke to us, then she spoke to the angels. She gave us er last commands. If you had a little more faith, and if you could have been in er cell, she would have cured your leg merely by touching it. She smiled. We elt that she was regaining her life in God. There was something of paradise in hat death.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.79#Fauchelevent thought that it was an orison which she was finishing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.80#“Amen,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.81#“Father Fauvent, what the dead wish must be done.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.82#The prioress took off several beads of her chaplet. Fauchelevent held his eace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.83#She went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.84#“I have consulted upon this point many ecclesiastics laboring in Our Lord, ho occupy themselves in the exercises of the clerical life, and who bear onderful fruit.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.85#“Reverend Mother, you can hear the knell much better here than in the arden.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.86#“Besides, she is more than a dead woman, she is a saint.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.87#“Like yourself, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.88#“She slept in her coffin for twenty years, by express permission of our oly Father, Pius VII.—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.89#“The one who crowned the Emp—Buonaparte.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.90#For a clever man like Fauchelevent, this allusion was an awkward one. ortunately, the prioress, completely absorbed in her own thoughts, did not hear t. She continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.91#“Father Fauvent?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.92#“Reverend Mother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.93#“Saint Didorus, Archbishop of Cappadocia, desired that this single word ight be inscribed on his tomb: _Acarus_, which signifies, a worm of the earth; his was done. Is this true?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.94#“Yes, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.95#“The blessed Mezzocane, Abbot of Aquila, wished to be buried beneath the allows; this was done.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.96#“That is true.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.97#“Saint Terentius, Bishop of Port, where the mouth of the Tiber empties nto the sea, requested that on his tomb might be engraved the sign which was laced on the graves of parricides, in the hope that passers-by would spit on is tomb. This was done. The dead must be obeyed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.98#“So be it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.99#“The body of Bernard Guidonis, born in France near Roche-Abeille, was, as e had ordered, and in spite of the king of Castile, borne to the church of the ominicans in Limoges, although Bernard Guidonis was Bishop of Tuy in Spain. Can he contrary be affirmed?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.100#“For that matter, no, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.101#“The fact is attested by Plantavit de la Fosse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.102#Several beads of the chaplet were told off, still in silence. The rioress resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.103#“Father Fauvent, Mother Crucifixion will be interred in the coffin in hich she has slept for the last twenty years.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.104#“That is just.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.105#“It is a continuation of her slumber.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.106#“So I shall have to nail up that coffin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.107#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.108#“And we are to reject the undertaker’s coffin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.109#“Precisely.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.110#“I am at the orders of the very reverend community.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.111#“The four Mother Precentors will assist you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.112#“In nailing up the coffin? I do not need them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.113#“No. In lowering the coffin.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.114#“Where?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.115#“Into the vault.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.116#“What vault?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.117#“Under the altar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.118#Fauchelevent started.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.119#“The vault under the altar?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.120#“Under the altar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.121#“But—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.122#“You will have an iron bar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.123#“Yes, but—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.124#“You will raise the stone with the bar by means of the ring.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.125#“But—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.126#“The dead must be obeyed. To be buried in the vault under the altar of he chapel, not to go to profane earth; to remain there in death where she rayed while living; such was the last wish of Mother Crucifixion. She asked it f us; that is to say, commanded us.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.127#“But it is forbidden.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.128#“Forbidden by men, enjoined by God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.129#“What if it became known?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.130#“We have confidence in you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.131#“Oh! I am a stone in your walls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.132#“The chapter assembled. The vocal mothers, whom I have just consulted gain, and who are now deliberating, have decided that Mother Crucifixion shall e buried, according to her wish, in her own coffin, under our altar. Think, ather Fauvent, if she were to work miracles here! What a glory of God for the ommunity! And miracles issue from tombs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.133#“But, reverend Mother, if the agent of the sanitary commission—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.134#“Saint Benoît II., in the matter of sepulture, resisted Constantine ogonatus.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.135#“But the commissary of police—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.136#“Chonodemaire, one of the seven German kings who entered among the Gauls nder the Empire of Constantius, expressly recognized the right of nuns to be uried in religion, that is to say, beneath the altar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.137#“But the inspector from the Prefecture—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.138#“The world is nothing in the presence of the cross. Martin, the eleventh eneral of the Carthusians, gave to his order this device: _Stat crux dum olvitur orbis_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.139#“Amen,” said Fauchelevent, who imperturbably extricated himself in this anner from the dilemma, whenever he heard Latin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.140#Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long. On he day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison, bearing in his body any dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in, he halted in front of he first tree which he came to, harangued it and made very great efforts to onvince it. The prioress, who was usually subjected to the barrier of silence, nd whose reservoir was overfull, rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam hich has broken away:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.141#“I have on my right Benoît and on my left Bernard. Who was Bernard? The irst abbot of Clairvaux. Fontaines in Burgundy is a country that is blest ecause it gave him birth. His father was named Técelin, and his mother Alèthe. e began at Cîteaux, to end in Clairvaux; he was ordained abbot by the bishop of hâlon-sur-Saône, Guillaume de Champeaux; he had seven hundred novices, and ounded a hundred and sixty monasteries; he overthrew Abeilard at the council of ens in 1140, and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple, and another sort of rring spirits who were called the Apostolics; he confounded Arnauld de Brescia, arted lightning at the monk Raoul, the murderer of the Jews, dominated the ouncil of Reims in 1148, caused the condemnation of Gilbert de Poréa, Bishop of oitiers, caused the condemnation of Éon de l‘Étoile, arranged the disputes of rinces, enlightened King Louis the Young, advised Pope Eugene III., regulated he Temple, preached the crusade, performed two hundred and fifty miracles uring his lifetime, and as many as thirty-nine in one day. Who was Benoît? He as the patriarch of Mont-Cassin; he was the second founder of the Sainteté laustrale, he was the Basil of the West. His order has produced forty popes, wo hundred cardinals, fifty patriarchs, sixteen hundred archbishops, four housand six hundred bishops, four emperors, twelve empresses, forty-six kings, orty-one queens, three thousand six hundred canonized saints, and has been in xistence for fourteen hundred years. On one side Saint Bernard, on the other he agent of the sanitary department! On one side Saint Benoît, on the other the nspector of public ways! The state, the road commissioners, the public ndertaker, regulations, the administration, what do we know of all that? There s not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to see how we are treated. e have not even the right to give our dust to Jesus Christ! Your sanitary epartment is a revolutionary invention. God subordinated to the commissary of olice; such is the age. Silence, Fauvent!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.142#Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath. The prioress ontinued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.143#“No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture. Only fanatics and hose in error deny it. We live in times of terrible confusion. We do not know hat which it is necessary to know, and we know that which we should ignore. We re ignorant and impious. In this age there exist people who do not distinguish etween the very great Saint Bernard and the Saint Bernard denominated of the oor Catholics, a certain good ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century. thers are so blasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI. to the cross f Jesus Christ. Louis XVI. was merely a king. Let us beware of God! There is no onger just nor unjust. The name of Voltaire is known, but not the name of César e Bus. Nevertheless, César de Bus is a man of blessed memory, and Voltaire one f unblessed memory. The last arch-bishop, the Cardinal de Périgord, did not ven know that Charles de Gondren succeeded to Berulle, and François Bourgoin to ondren, and Jean-François Senault to Bourgoin, and Father Sainte-Marthe to ean-François Senault. The name of Father Coton is known, not because he was one f the three who urged the foundation of the Oratorie, but because he furnished enri IV., the Huguenot king, with the material for an oath. That which pleases eople of the world in Saint François de Sales, is that he cheated at play. And hen, religion is attacked. Why? Because there have been bad priests, because agittaire, Bishop of Gap, was the brother of Salone, Bishop of Embrun, and ecause both of them followed Mommol. What has that to do with the question? oes that prevent Martin de Tours from being a saint, and giving half of his loak to a beggar? They persecute the saints. They shut their eyes to the truth. arkness is the rule. The most ferocious beasts are beasts which are blind. No ne thinks of hell as a reality. Oh! how wicked people are! By order of the king ignifies to-day, by order of the revolution. One no longer knows what is due to he living or to the dead. A holy death is prohibited. Burial is a civil matter. his is horrible. Saint Leo II. wrote two special letters, one to Pierre otaire, the other to the king of the Visigoths, for the purpose of combating nd rejecting, in questions touching the dead, the authority of the exarch and he supremacy of the Emperor. Gauthier, Bishop of Châlons, held his own in this atter against Otho, Duke of Burgundy. The ancient magistracy agreed with him. n former times we had voices in the chapter, even on matters of the day. The bbot of Cîteaux, the general of the order, was councillor by right of birth to he parliament of Burgundy. We do what we please with our dead. Is not the body f Saint Benoît himself in France, in the abbey of Fleury, called Saint enoît-sur-Loire, although he died in Italy at Mont-Cassin, on Saturday, the 1st of the month of March, of the year 543? All this is incontestable. I abhor salm-singers, I hate priors, I execrate heretics, but I should detest yet more ny one who should maintain the contrary. One has only to read Arnoul Wion, abriel Bucelin, Trithemus, Maurolics, and Dom Luc d’Achery.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.144#The prioress took breath, then turned to Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.145#“Is it settled, Father Fauvent?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.146#“It is settled, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.147#“We may depend on you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.148#“I will obey.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.149#“That is well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.150#“I am entirely devoted to the convent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.151#“That is understood. You will close the coffin. The sisters will carry it o the chapel. The office for the dead will then be said. Then we shall return o the cloister. Between eleven o’clock and midnight, you will come with your ron bar. All will be done in the most profound secrecy. There will be in the hapel only the four Mother Precentors, Mother Ascension and yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.152#“And the sister at the post?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.153#“She will not turn round.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.154#“But she will hear.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.155#“She will not listen. Besides, what the cloister knows the world learns ot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.156#A pause ensued. The prioress went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.157#“You will remove your bell. It is not necessary that the sister at the ost should perceive your presence.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.158#“Reverend Mother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.159#“What, Father Fauvent?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.160#“Has the doctor for the dead paid his visit?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.161#“He will pay it at four o’clock to-day. The peal which orders the doctor or the dead to be summoned has already been rung. But you do not understand any f the peals?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.162#“I pay no attention to any but my own.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.163#“That is well, Father Fauvent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.164#“Reverend Mother, a lever at least six feet long will be required.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.165#“Where will you obtain it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.166#“Where gratings are not lacking, iron bars are not lacking. I have my eap of old iron at the bottom of the garden.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.167#“About three-quarters of an hour before midnight; do not forget.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.168#“Reverend Mother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.169#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.170#“If you were ever to have any other jobs of this sort, my brother is the trong man for you. A perfect Turk!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.171#“You will do it as speedily as possible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.172#“I cannot work very fast. I am infirm; that is why I require an ssistant. I limp.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.173#“To limp is no sin, and perhaps it is a blessing. The Emperor Henry II., ho combated Antipope Gregory and re-established Benoît VIII., has two surnames, he Saint and the Lame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.174#“Two surtouts are a good thing,” murmured Fauchelevent, who really was a ittle hard of hearing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.175#“Now that I think of it, Father Fauvent, let us give a whole hour to it. hat is not too much. Be near the principal altar, with your iron bar, at eleven ’clock. The office begins at midnight. Everything must have been completed a ood quarter of an hour before that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.176#“I will do anything to prove my zeal towards the community. These are my rders. I am to nail up the coffin. At eleven o’clock exactly, I am to be in the hapel. The Mother Precentors will be there. Mother Ascension will be there. Two en would be better. However, never mind! I shall have my lever. We will open he vault, we will lower the coffin, and we will close the vault again. After hich, there will be no trace of anything. The government will have no uspicion. Thus all has been arranged, reverend Mother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.177#“No!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.178#“What else remains?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.179#“The empty coffin remains.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.180#This produced a pause. Fauchelevent meditated. The prioress editated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.181#“What is to be done with that coffin, Father Fauvent?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.182#“It will be given to the earth.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.183#“Empty?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.184#Another silence. Fauchelevent made, with his left hand, that sort of a esture which dismisses a troublesome subject.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.185#“Reverend Mother, I am the one who is to nail up the coffin in the asement of the church, and no one can enter there but myself, and I will cover he coffin with the pall.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.186#“Yes, but the bearers, when they place it in the hearse and lower it into he grave, will be sure to feel that there is nothing in it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.187#“Ah! the de—!” exclaimed Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.188#The prioress began to make the sign of the cross, and looked fixedly at he gardener. The _vil_ stuck fast in his throat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.189#He made haste to improvise an expedient to make her forget the oath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.190#“I will put earth in the coffin, reverend Mother. That will produce the ffect of a corpse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.191#“You are right. Earth, that is the same thing as man. So you will manage he empty coffin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.192#“I will make that my special business.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.193#The prioress’s face, up to that moment troubled and clouded, grew serene nce more. She made the sign of a superior dismissing an inferior to him. auchelevent went towards the door. As he was on the point of passing out, the rioress raised her voice gently:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.3.194#“I am pleased with you, Father Fauvent; bring your brother to me o-morrow, after the burial, and tell him to fetch his daughter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.head#CHAPTER IV—IN WHICH JEAN VALJEAN HAS QUITE THE AIR OF HAVING READ USTIN CASTILLEJO
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.1#The strides of a lame man are like the ogling glances of a one-eyed man; hey do not reach their goal very promptly. Moreover, Fauchelevent was in a ilemma. He took nearly a quarter of an hour to return to his cottage in the arden. Cosette had waked up. Jean Valjean had placed her near the fire. At the oment when Fauchelevent entered, Jean Valjean was pointing out to her the intner’s basket on the wall, and saying to her, “Listen attentively to me, my ittle Cosette. We must go away from this house, but we shall return to it, and e shall be very happy here. The good man who lives here is going to carry you ff on his back in that. You will wait for me at a lady’s house. I shall come to etch you. Obey, and say nothing, above all things, unless you want Madame hénardier to get you again!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.2#Cosette nodded gravely.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.3#Jean Valjean turned round at the noise made by Fauchelevent opening the oor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.4#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.5#“Everything is arranged, and nothing is,” said Fauchelevent. “I have ermission to bring you in; but before bringing you in you must be got out. hat’s where the difficulty lies. It is easy enough with the child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.6#“You will carry her out?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.7#“And she will hold her tongue?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.8#“I answer for that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.9#“But you, Father Madeleine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.10#And, after a silence, fraught with anxiety, Fauchelevent exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.11#“Why, get out as you came in!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.12#Jean Valjean, as in the first instance, contented himself with saying, Impossible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.13#Fauchelevent grumbled, more to himself than to Jean Valjean:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.14#“There is another thing which bothers me. I have said that I would put arth in it. When I come to think it over, the earth instead of the corpse will ot seem like the real thing, it won’t do, it will get displaced, it will move bout. The men will bear it. You understand, Father Madeleine, the government ill notice it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.15#Jean Valjean stared him straight in the eye and thought that he was aving.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.16#Fauchelevent went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.17#“How the de—uce are you going to get out? It must all be done by to-morrow orning. It is to-morrow that I am to bring you in. The prioress expects ou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.18#Then he explained to Jean Valjean that this was his recompense for a ervice which he, Fauchelevent, was to render to the community. That it fell mong his duties to take part in their burials, that he nailed up the coffins nd helped the grave-digger at the cemetery. That the nun who had died that orning had requested to be buried in the coffin which had served her for a bed, nd interred in the vault under the altar of the chapel. That the police egulations forbade this, but that she was one of those dead to whom nothing is efused. That the prioress and the vocal mothers intended to fulfil the wish of he deceased. That it was so much the worse for the government. That he, auchelevent, was to nail up the coffin in the cell, raise the stone in the hapel, and lower the corpse into the vault. And that, by way of thanks, the rioress was to admit his brother to the house as a gardener, and his niece as a upil. That his brother was M. Madeleine, and that his niece was Cosette. That he prioress had told him to bring his brother on the following evening, after he counterfeit interment in the cemetery. But that he could not bring M. adeleine in from the outside if M. Madeleine was not outside. That that was the irst problem. And then, that there was another: the empty coffin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.19#“What is that empty coffin?” asked Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.20#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.21#“The coffin of the administration.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.22#“What coffin? What administration?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.23#“A nun dies. The municipal doctor comes and says, ‘A nun has died.’ The overnment sends a coffin. The next day it sends a hearse and undertaker’s men o get the coffin and carry it to the cemetery. The undertaker’s men will come nd lift the coffin; there will be nothing in it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.24#“Put something in it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.25#“A corpse? I have none.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.26#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.27#“What then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.28#“A living person.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.29#“What person?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.30#“Me!” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.31#Fauchelevent, who was seated, sprang up as though a bomb had burst under is chair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.32#“You!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.33#“Why not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.34#Jean Valjean gave way to one of those rare smiles which lighted up his ace like a flash from heaven in the winter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.35#“You know, Fauchelevent, what you have said: ‘Mother Crucifixion is dead.’ nd I add: ‘and Father Madeleine is buried.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.36#“Ah! good, you can laugh, you are not speaking seriously.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.37#“Very seriously, I must get out of this place.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.38#“Certainly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.39#“l have told you to find a basket, and a cover for me also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.40#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.41#“The basket will be of pine, and the cover a black cloth.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.42#“In the first place, it will be a white cloth. Nuns are buried in hite.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.43#“Let it be a white cloth, then.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.44#“You are not like other men, Father Madeleine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.45#To behold such devices, which are nothing else than the savage and daring nventions of the galleys, spring forth from the peaceable things which urrounded him, and mingle with what he called the “petty course of life in the onvent,” caused Fauchelevent as much amazement as a gull fishing in the gutter f the Rue Saint-Denis would inspire in a passer-by.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.46#Jean Valjean went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.47#“The problem is to get out of here without being seen. This offers the eans. But give me some information, in the first place. How is it managed? here is this coffin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.48#“The empty one?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.49#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.50#“Downstairs, in what is called the dead-room. It stands on two trestles, nder the pall.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.51#“How long is the coffin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.52#“Six feet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.53#“What is this dead-room?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.54#“It is a chamber on the ground floor which has a grated window opening on he garden, which is closed on the outside by a shutter, and two doors; one eads into the convent, the other into the church.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.55#“What church?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.56#“The church in the street, the church which any one can enter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.57#“Have you the keys to those two doors?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.58#“No; I have the key to the door which communicates with the convent; the orter has the key to the door which communicates with the church.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.59#“When does the porter open that door?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.60#“Only to allow the undertaker’s men to enter, when they come to get the offin. When the coffin has been taken out, the door is closed again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.61#“Who nails up the coffin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.62#“I do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.63#“Who spreads the pall over it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.64#“I do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.65#“Are you alone?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.66#“Not another man, except the police doctor, can enter the dead-room. That s even written on the wall.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.67#“Could you hide me in that room to-night when every one is asleep?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.68#“No. But I could hide you in a small, dark nook which opens on the ead-room, where I keep my tools to use for burials, and of which I have the ey.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.69#“At what time will the hearse come for the coffin to-morrow?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.70#“About three o’clock in the afternoon. The burial will take place at the augirard cemetery a little before nightfall. It is not very near.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.71#“I will remain concealed in your tool-closet all night and all the orning. And how about food? I shall be hungry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.72#“I will bring you something.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.73#“You can come and nail me up in the coffin at two o’clock.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.74#Fauchelevent recoiled and cracked his finger-joints.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.75#“But that is impossible!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.76#“Bah! Impossible to take a hammer and drive some nails in a plank?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.77#What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was, we repeat, a simple matter o Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean had been in worse straits than this. Any man who as been a prisoner understands how to contract himself to fit the diameter of he escape. The prisoner is subject to flight as the sick man is subject to a risis which saves or kills him. An escape is a cure. What does not a man ndergo for the sake of a cure? To have himself nailed up in a case and carried ff like a bale of goods, to live for a long time in a box, to find air where here is none, to economize his breath for hours, to know how to stifle without ying—this was one of Jean Valjean’s gloomy talents.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.78#Moreover, a coffin containing a living being,—that convict’s expedient,—is lso an imperial expedient. If we are to credit the monk Austin Castillejo, this as the means employed by Charles the Fifth, desirous of seeing the Plombes for he last time after his abdication.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.79#He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery of Saint-Yuste in his manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.80#Fauchelevent, who had recovered himself a little, exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.81#“But how will you manage to breathe?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.82#“I will breathe.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.83#“In that box! The mere thought of it suffocates me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.84#“You surely must have a gimlet, you will make a few holes here and there, round my mouth, and you will nail the top plank on loosely.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.85#“Good! And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.86#“A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.87#And Jean Valjean added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.88#“Father Fauchelevent, we must come to a decision: I must either be caught ere, or accept this escape through the hearse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.89#Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing and lounging etween the two leaves of a half-shut door. Who is there who has not said to a at, “Do come in!” There are men who, when an incident stands half-open before hem, have the same tendency to halt in indecision between two resolutions, at he risk of getting crushed through the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate. he over-prudent, cats as they are, and because they are cats, sometimes incur ore danger than the audacious. Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature. But ean Valjean’s coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself. He rumbled:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.90#“Well, since there is no other means.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.91#Jean Valjean resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.92#“The only thing which troubles me is what will take place at the emetery.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.93#“That is the very point that is not troublesome,” exclaimed Fauchelevent. If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right, I am sure of getting you ut of the grave. The grave-digger is a drunkard, and a friend of mine. He is ather Mestienne. An old fellow of the old school. The grave-digger puts the orpses in the grave, and I put the grave-digger in my pocket. I will tell you hat will take place. They will arrive a little before dusk, three-quarters of n hour before the gates of the cemetery are closed. The hearse will drive irectly up to the grave. I shall follow; that is my business. I shall have a ammer, a chisel, and some pincers in my pocket. The hearse halts, the ndertaker’s men knot a rope around your coffin and lower you down. The priest ays the prayers, makes the sign of the cross, sprinkles the holy water, and akes his departure. I am left alone with Father Mestienne. He is my friend, I ell you. One of two things will happen, he will either be sober, or he will not e sober. If he is not drunk, I shall say to him: ‘Come and drink a bout while he _Bon Coing_ [the Good Quince] is open.’ I carry him off, I get him drunk,—it oes not take long to make Father Mestienne drunk, he always has the beginning f it about him,—I lay him under the table, I take his card, so that I can get nto the cemetery again, and I return without him. Then you have no longer any ne but me to deal with. If he is drunk, I shall say to him: ‘Be off; I will do our work for you.’ Off he goes, and I drag you out of the hole.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.94#Jean Valjean held out his hand, and Fauchelevent precipitated himself upon t with the touching effusion of a peasant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.95#“That is settled, Father Fauchelevent. All will go well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.4.96#“Provided nothing goes wrong,” thought Fauchelevent. “In that case, it ould be terrible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.head#CHAPTER V—IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BE DRUNK IN ORDER TO BE MMORTAL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.1#On the following day, as the sun was declining, the very rare passers-by on he Boulevard du Maine pulled off their hats to an old-fashioned hearse, rnamented with skulls, cross-bones, and tears. This hearse contained a coffin overed with a white cloth over which spread a large black cross, like a huge orpse with drooping arms. A mourning-coach, in which could be seen a priest in is surplice, and a choir boy in his red cap, followed. Two undertaker’s men in ray uniforms trimmed with black walked on the right and the left of the hearse. ehind it came an old man in the garments of a laborer, who limped along. The rocession was going in the direction of the Vaugirard cemetery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.2#The handle of a hammer, the blade of a cold chisel, and the antennæ of a air of pincers were visible, protruding from the man’s pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.3#The Vaugirard cemetery formed an exception among the cemeteries of Paris. t had its peculiar usages, just as it had its carriage entrance and its house oor, which old people in the quarter, who clung tenaciously to ancient words, till called the _porte cavalière_ and the _porte piétonne_.16 The ernardines-Benedictines of the Rue Petit-Picpus had obtained permission, as we ave already stated, to be buried there in a corner apart, and at night, the lot of land having formerly belonged to their community. The grave-diggers eing thus bound to service in the evening in summer and at night in winter, in his cemetery, they were subjected to a special discipline. The gates of the aris cemeteries closed, at that epoch, at sundown, and this being a municipal egulation, the Vaugirard cemetery was bound by it like the rest. The carriage ate and the house door were two contiguous grated gates, adjoining a pavilion uilt by the architect Perronet, and inhabited by the door-keeper of the emetery. These gates, therefore, swung inexorably on their hinges at the nstant when the sun disappeared behind the dome of the Invalides. If any rave-digger were delayed after that moment in the cemetery, there was but one ay for him to get out—his grave-digger’s card furnished by the department of ublic funerals. A sort of letter-box was constructed in the porter’s window. he grave-digger dropped his card into this box, the porter heard it fall, ulled the rope, and the small door opened. If the man had not his card, he entioned his name, the porter, who was sometimes in bed and asleep, rose, came ut and identified the man, and opened the gate with his key; the grave-digger tepped out, but had to pay a fine of fifteen francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.4#This cemetery, with its peculiarities outside the regulations, embarrassed he symmetry of the administration. It was suppressed a little later than 1830. he cemetery of Mont-Parnasse, called the Eastern cemetery, succeeded to it, and nherited that famous dram-shop next to the Vaugirard cemetery, which was urmounted by a quince painted on a board, and which formed an angle, one side n the drinkers’ tables, and the other on the tombs, with this sign: _Au Bon oing_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.5#The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery. It was alling into disuse. Dampness was invading it, the flowers were deserting it. he bourgeois did not care much about being buried in the Vaugirard; it hinted t poverty. Père-Lachaise if you please! to be buried in Père-Lachaise is quivalent to having furniture of mahogany. It is recognized as elegant. The augirard cemetery was a venerable enclosure, planted like an old-fashioned rench garden. Straight alleys, box, thuya-trees, holly, ancient tombs beneath ged cypress-trees, and very tall grass. In the evening it was tragic there. here were very lugubrious lines about it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.6#The sun had not yet set when the hearse with the white pall and the black ross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery. The lame man who followed it as no other than Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.7#The interment of Mother Crucifixion in the vault under the altar, the exit f Cosette, the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room,—all had been xecuted without difficulty, and there had been no hitch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.8#Let us remark in passing, that the burial of Mother Crucifixion under the ltar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence in our sight. It is one of he faults which resemble a duty. The nuns had committed it, not only without ifficulty, but even with the applause of their own consciences. In the loister, what is called the “government” is only an intermeddling with uthority, an interference which is always questionable. In the first place, the ule; as for the code, we shall see. Make as many laws as you please, men; but eep them for yourselves. The tribute to Cæsar is never anything but the emnants of the tribute to God. A prince is nothing in the presence of a rinciple.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.9#Fauchelevent limped along behind the hearse in a very contented frame of ind. His twin plots, the one with the nuns, the one for the convent, the other gainst it, the other with M. Madeleine, had succeeded, to all appearance. Jean aljean’s composure was one of those powerful tranquillities which are ontagious. Fauchelevent no longer felt doubtful as to his success.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.10#What remained to be done was a mere nothing. Within the last two years, he ad made good Father Mestienne, a chubby-cheeked person, drunk at least ten imes. He played with Father Mestienne. He did what he liked with him. He made im dance according to his whim. Mestienne’s head adjusted itself to the cap of auchelevent’s will. Fauchelevent’s confidence was perfect.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.11#At the moment when the convoy entered the avenue leading to the cemetery, auchelevent glanced cheerfully at the hearse, and said half aloud, as he rubbed is big hands:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.12#“Here’s a fine farce!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.13#All at once the hearse halted; it had reached the gate. The permission for nterment must be exhibited. The undertaker’s man addressed himself to the orter of the cemetery. During this colloquy, which always is productive of a elay of from one to two minutes, some one, a stranger, came and placed himself ehind the hearse, beside Fauchelevent. He was a sort of laboring man, who wore waistcoat with large pockets and carried a mattock under his arm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.14#Fauchelevent surveyed this stranger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.15#“Who are you?” he demanded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.16#“The man replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.17#“The grave-digger.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.18#If a man could survive the blow of a cannon-ball full in the breast, he ould make the same face that Fauchelevent made.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.19#“The grave-digger?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.20#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.21#“You?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.22#“I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.23#“Father Mestienne is the grave-digger.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.24#“He was.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.25#“What! He was?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.26#“He is dead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.27#Fauchelevent had expected anything but this, that a grave-digger could ie. It is true, nevertheless, that grave-diggers do die themselves. By dint of xcavating graves for other people, one hollows out one’s own.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.28#Fauchelevent stood there with his mouth wide open. He had hardly the trength to stammer:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.29#“But it is not possible!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.30#“It is so.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.31#“But,” he persisted feebly, “Father Mestienne is the grave-digger.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.32#“After Napoleon, Louis XVIII. After Mestienne, Gribier. Peasant, my name s Gribier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.33#Fauchelevent, who was deadly pale, stared at this Gribier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.34#He was a tall, thin, livid, utterly funereal man. He had the air of an nsuccessful doctor who had turned grave-digger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.35#Fauchelevent burst out laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.36#“Ah!” said he, “what queer things do happen! Father Mestienne is dead, but ong live little Father Lenoir! Do you know who little Father Lenoir is? He is a ug of red wine. It is a jug of Surêne, morbigou! of real Paris Surêne? Ah! So ld Mestienne is dead! I am sorry for it; he was a jolly fellow. But you are a olly fellow, too. Are you not, comrade? We’ll go and have a drink together resently.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.37#The man replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.38#“I have been a student. I passed my fourth examination. I never rink.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.39#The hearse had set out again, and was rolling up the grand alley of the emetery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.40#Fauchelevent had slackened his pace. He limped more out of anxiety than rom infirmity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.41#The grave-digger walked on in front of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.42#Fauchelevent passed the unexpected Gribier once more in review.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.43#He was one of those men who, though very young, have the air of age, and ho, though slender, are extremely strong.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.44#“Comrade!” cried Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.45#The man turned round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.46#“I am the convent grave-digger.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.47#“My colleague,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.48#Fauchelevent, who was illiterate but very sharp, understood that he had to eal with a formidable species of man, with a fine talker. He muttered:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.49#“So Father Mestienne is dead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.50#The man replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.51#“Completely. The good God consulted his note-book which shows when the ime is up. It was Father Mestienne’s turn. Father Mestienne died.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.52#Fauchelevent repeated mechanically: “The good God—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.53#“The good God,” said the man authoritatively. “According to the hilosophers, the Eternal Father; according to the Jacobins, the Supreme eing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.54#“Shall we not make each other’s acquaintance?” stammered Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.55#“It is made. You are a peasant, I am a Parisian.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.56#“People do not know each other until they have drunk together. He who mpties his glass empties his heart. You must come and have a drink with me. uch a thing cannot be refused.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.57#“Business first.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.58#Fauchelevent thought: “I am lost.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.59#They were only a few turns of the wheel distant from the small alley eading to the nuns’ corner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.60#The grave-digger resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.61#“Peasant, I have seven small children who must be fed. As they must eat, I annot drink.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.62#And he added, with the satisfaction of a serious man who is turning a hrase well:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.63#“Their hunger is the enemy of my thirst.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.64#The hearse skirted a clump of cypress-trees, quitted the grand alley, urned into a narrow one, entered the waste land, and plunged into a thicket. his indicated the immediate proximity of the place of sepulture. Fauchelevent lackened his pace, but he could not detain the hearse. Fortunately, the soil, hich was light and wet with the winter rains, clogged the wheels and retarded ts speed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.65#He approached the grave-digger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.66#“They have such a nice little Argenteuil wine,” murmured Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.67#“Villager,” retorted the man, “I ought not be a grave-digger. My father as a porter at the Prytaneum [Town-Hall]. He destined me for literature. But he ad reverses. He had losses on ‘change. I was obliged to renounce the profession f author. But I am still a public writer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.68#“So you are not a grave-digger, then?” returned Fauchelevent, clutching at his branch, feeble as it was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.69#“The one does not hinder the other. I cumulate.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.70#Fauchelevent did not understand this last word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.71#“Come have a drink,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.72#Here a remark becomes necessary. Fauchelevent, whatever his anguish, ffered a drink, but he did not explain himself on one point; who was to pay? enerally, Fauchelevent offered and Father Mestienne paid. An offer of a drink as the evident result of the novel situation created by the new grave-digger, nd it was necessary to make this offer, but the old gardener left the roverbial quarter of an hour named after Rabelais in the dark, and that not nintentionally. As for himself, Fauchelevent did not wish to pay, troubled as e was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.73#The grave-digger went on with a superior smile:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.74#“One must eat. I have accepted Father Mestienne’s reversion. One gets to e a philosopher when one has nearly completed his classes. To the labor of the and I join the labor of the arm. I have my scrivener’s stall in the market of he Rue de Sèvres. You know? the Umbrella Market. All the cooks of the Red Cross pply to me. I scribble their declarations of love to the raw soldiers. In the orning I write love letters; in the evening I dig graves. Such is life, ustic.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.75#The hearse was still advancing. Fauchelevent, uneasy to the last degree, as gazing about him on all sides. Great drops of perspiration trickled down rom his brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.76#“But,” continued the grave-digger, “a man cannot serve two mistresses. I ust choose between the pen and the mattock. The mattock is ruining my and.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.77#The hearse halted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.78#The choir boy alighted from the mourning-coach, then the priest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.79#One of the small front wheels of the hearse had run up a little on a pile f earth, beyond which an open grave was visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.5.80#“What a farce this is!” repeated Fauchelevent in consternation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.head#CHAPTER VI—BETWEEN FOUR PLANKS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.1#Who was in the coffin? The reader knows. Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.2#Jean Valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there, and he could lmost breathe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.3#It is a strange thing to what a degree security of conscience confers ecurity of the rest. Every combination thought out by Jean Valjean had been rogressing, and progressing favorably, since the preceding day. He, like auchelevent, counted on Father Mestienne. He had no doubt as to the end. Never as there a more critical situation, never more complete composure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.4#The four planks of the coffin breathe out a kind of terrible peace. It eemed as though something of the repose of the dead entered into Jean Valjean’s ranquillity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.5#From the depths of that coffin he had been able to follow, and he had ollowed, all the phases of the terrible drama which he was playing with eath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.6#Shortly after Fauchelevent had finished nailing on the upper plank, Jean aljean had felt himself carried out, then driven off. He knew, from the iminution in the jolting, when they left the pavements and reached the earth oad. He had divined, from a dull noise, that they were crossing the bridge of usterlitz. At the first halt, he had understood that they were entering the emetery; at the second halt, he said to himself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.7#“Here is the grave.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.8#Suddenly, he felt hands seize the coffin, then a harsh grating against the lanks; he explained it to himself as the rope which was being fastened round he casket in order to lower it into the cavity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.9#Then he experienced a giddiness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.10#The undertaker’s man and the grave-digger had probably allowed the coffin o lose its balance, and had lowered the head before the foot. He recovered imself fully when he felt himself horizontal and motionless. He had just ouched the bottom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.11#He had a certain sensation of cold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.12#A voice rose above him, glacial and solemn. He heard Latin words, which he id not understand, pass over him, so slowly that he was able to catch them one y one:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.13#_“Qui dormiunt in terræ pulvere, evigilabunt; alii in vitam æternam, et lii in approbrium, ut videant semper.” _
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.14#A child’s voice said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.15#_“De profundis.” _
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.16#The grave voice began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.17#_“Requiem æternam dona ei, Domine.” _
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.18#The child’s voice responded:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.19#_“Et lux perpetua luceat ei.” _
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.20#He heard something like the gentle patter of several drops of rain on the lank which covered him. It was probably the holy water.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.21#He thought: “This will be over soon now. Patience for a little while onger. The priest will take his departure. Fauchelevent will take Mestienne off o drink. I shall be left. Then Fauchelevent will return alone, and I shall get ut. That will be the work of a good hour.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.22#The grave voice resumed
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.23#_“Requiescat in pace.” _
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.24#And the child’s voice said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.25#_“Amen.” _
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.26#Jean Valjean strained his ears, and heard something like retreating ootsteps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.27#“There, they are going now,” thought he. “I am alone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.28#All at once, he heard over his head a sound which seemed to him to be a lap of thunder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.29#It was a shovelful of earth falling on the coffin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.30#A second shovelful fell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.31#One of the holes through which he breathed had just been stopped up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.32#A third shovelful of earth fell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.33#Then a fourth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.6.34#There are things which are too strong for the strongest man. Jean Valjean ost consciousness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.head#CHAPTER VII—IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE ORIGIN OF THE SAYING: DON’T OSE THE CARD
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.1#This is what had taken place above the coffin in which lay Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.2#When the hearse had driven off, when the priest and the choir boy had ntered the carriage again and taken their departure, Fauchelevent, who had not aken his eyes from the grave-digger, saw the latter bend over and grasp his hovel, which was sticking upright in the heap of dirt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.3#Then Fauchelevent took a supreme resolve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.4#He placed himself between the grave and the grave-digger, crossed his arms nd said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.5#“I am the one to pay!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.6#The grave-digger stared at him in amazement, and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.7#“What’s that, peasant?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.8#Fauchelevent repeated:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.9#“I am the one who pays!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.10#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.11#“For the wine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.12#“What wine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.13#“That Argenteuil wine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.14#“Where is the Argenteuil?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.15#“At the _Bon Coing_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.16#“Go to the devil!” said the grave-digger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.17#And he flung a shovelful of earth on the coffin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.18#The coffin gave back a hollow sound. Fauchelevent felt himself stagger and n the point of falling headlong into the grave himself. He shouted in a voice n which the strangling sound of the death rattle began to mingle:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.19#“Comrade! Before the _Bon Coing_ is shut!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.20#The grave-digger took some more earth on his shovel. Fauchelevent ontinued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.21#“I will pay.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.22#And he seized the man’s arm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.23#“Listen to me, comrade. I am the convent grave-digger, I have come to help ou. It is a business which can be performed at night. Let us begin, then, by oing for a drink.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.24#And as he spoke, and clung to this desperate insistence, this melancholy eflection occurred to him: “And if he drinks, will he get drunk?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.25#“Provincial,” said the man, “if you positively insist upon it, I consent. e will drink. After work, never before.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.26#And he flourished his shovel briskly. Fauchelevent held him back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.27#“It is Argenteuil wine, at six.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.28#“Oh, come,” said the grave-digger, “you are a bell-ringer. Ding dong, ding ong, that’s all you know how to say. Go hang yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.29#And he threw in a second shovelful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.30#Fauchelevent had reached a point where he no longer knew what he was aying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.31#“Come along and drink,” he cried, “since it is I who pays the bill.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.32#“When we have put the child to bed,” said the grave-digger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.33#He flung in a third shovelful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.34#Then he thrust his shovel into the earth and added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.35#“It’s cold to-night, you see, and the corpse would shriek out after us if e were to plant her there without a coverlet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.36#At that moment, as he loaded his shovel, the grave-digger bent over, and he pocket of his waistcoat gaped. Fauchelevent’s wild gaze fell mechanically nto that pocket, and there it stopped.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.37#The sun was not yet hidden behind the horizon; there was still light nough to enable him to distinguish something white at the bottom of that awning pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.38#The sum total of lightning that the eye of a Picard peasant can contain, raversed Fauchelevent’s pupils. An idea had just occurred to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.39#He thrust his hand into the pocket from behind, without the grave-digger, ho was wholly absorbed in his shovelful of earth, observing it, and pulled out he white object which lay at the bottom of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.40#The man sent a fourth shovelful tumbling into the grave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.41#Just as he turned round to get the fifth, Fauchelevent looked calmly at im and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.42#“By the way, you new man, have you your card?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.43#The grave-digger paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.44#“What card?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.45#“The sun is on the point of setting.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.46#“That’s good, it is going to put on its nightcap.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.47#“The gate of the cemetery will close immediately.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.48#“Well, what then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.49#“Have you your card?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.50#“Ah! my card?” said the grave-digger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.51#And he fumbled in his pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.52#Having searched one pocket, he proceeded to search the other. He passed on o his fobs, explored the first, returned to the second.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.53#“Why, no,” said he, “I have not my card. I must have forgotten it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.54#“Fifteen francs fine,” said Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.55#The grave-digger turned green. Green is the pallor of livid people.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.56#“Ah! Jésus-mon-Dieu-bancroche-à-bas-la-lune!”17 he exclaimed. “Fifteen rancs fine!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.57#“Three pieces of a hundred sous,” said Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.58#The grave-digger dropped his shovel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.59#Fauchelevent’s turn had come.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.60#“Ah, come now, conscript,” said Fauchelevent, “none of this despair. There s no question of committing suicide and benefiting the grave. Fifteen francs is ifteen francs, and besides, you may not be able to pay it. I am an old hand, ou are a new one. I know all the ropes and the devices. I will give you some riendly advice. One thing is clear, the sun is on the point of setting, it is ouching the dome now, the cemetery will be closed in five minutes more.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.61#“That is true,” replied the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.62#“Five minutes more and you will not have time to fill the grave, it is as ollow as the devil, this grave, and to reach the gate in season to pass it efore it is shut.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.63#“That is true.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.64#“In that case, a fine of fifteen francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.65#“Fifteen francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.66#“But you have time. Where do you live?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.67#“A couple of steps from the barrier, a quarter of an hour from here. No. 7 Rue de Vaugirard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.68#“You have just time to get out by taking to your heels at your best peed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.69#“That is exactly so.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.70#“Once outside the gate, you gallop home, you get your card, you return, he cemetery porter admits you. As you have your card, there will be nothing to ay. And you will bury your corpse. I’ll watch it for you in the meantime, so hat it shall not run away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.71#“I am indebted to you for my life, peasant.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.72#“Decamp!” said Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.73#The grave-digger, overwhelmed with gratitude, shook his hand and set off n a run.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.74#When the man had disappeared in the thicket, Fauchelevent listened until e heard his footsteps die away in the distance, then he leaned over the grave, nd said in a low tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.75#“Father Madeleine!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.76#There was no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.77#Fauchelevent was seized with a shudder. He tumbled rather than climbed nto the grave, flung himself on the head of the coffin and cried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.78#“Are you there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.79#Silence in the coffin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.80#Fauchelevent, hardly able to draw his breath for trembling, seized his old chisel and his hammer, and pried up the coffin lid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.81#Jean Valjean’s face appeared in the twilight; it was pale and his eyes ere closed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.82#Fauchelevent’s hair rose upright on his head, he sprang to his feet, then ell back against the side of the grave, ready to swoon on the coffin. He stared t Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.83#Jean Valjean lay there pallid and motionless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.84#Fauchelevent murmured in a voice as faint as a sigh:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.85#“He is dead!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.86#And, drawing himself up, and folding his arms with such violence that his lenched fists came in contact with his shoulders, he cried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.87#“And this is the way I save his life!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.88#Then the poor man fell to sobbing. He soliloquized the while, for it is an rror to suppose that the soliloquy is unnatural. Powerful emotion often talks loud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.89#“It is Father Mestienne’s fault. Why did that fool die? What need was here for him to give up the ghost at the very moment when no one was expecting t? It is he who has killed M. Madeleine. Father Madeleine! He is in the coffin. t is quite handy. All is over. Now, is there any sense in these things? Ah! my od! he is dead! Well! and his little girl, what am I to do with her? What will he fruit-seller say? The idea of its being possible for a man like that to die ike this! When I think how he put himself under that cart! Father Madeleine! ather Madeleine! Pardine! He was suffocated, I said so. He wouldn’t believe me. ell! Here’s a pretty trick to play! He is dead, that good man, the very best an out of all the good God’s good folks! And his little girl! Ah! In the first lace, I won’t go back there myself. I shall stay here. After having done such a hing as that! What’s the use of being two old men, if we are two old fools! ut, in the first place, how did he manage to enter the convent? That was the eginning of it all. One should not do such things. Father Madeleine! Father adeleine! Father Madeleine! Madeleine! Monsieur Madeleine! Monsieur le Maire! e does not hear me. Now get out of this scrape if you can!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.90#And he tore his hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.91#A grating sound became audible through the trees in the distance. It was he cemetery gate closing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.92#Fauchelevent bent over Jean Valjean, and all at once he bounded back and ecoiled so far as the limits of a grave permit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.93#Jean Valjean’s eyes were open and gazing at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.94#To see a corpse is alarming, to behold a resurrection is almost as much o. Fauchelevent became like stone, pale, haggard, overwhelmed by all these xcesses of emotion, not knowing whether he had to do with a living man or a ead one, and staring at Jean Valjean, who was gazing at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.95#“I fell asleep,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.96#And he raised himself to a sitting posture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.97#Fauchelevent fell on his knees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.98#“Just, good Virgin! How you frightened me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.99#Then he sprang to his feet and cried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.100#“Thanks, Father Madeleine!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.101#Jean Valjean had merely fainted. The fresh air had revived him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.102#Joy is the ebb of terror. Fauchelevent found almost as much difficulty in ecovering himself as Jean Valjean had.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.103#“So you are not dead! Oh! How wise you are! I called you so much that you ame back. When I saw your eyes shut, I said: ‘Good! there he is, stifled,’ I hould have gone raving mad, mad enough for a strait jacket. They would have put e in Bicêtre. What do you suppose I should have done if you had been dead? And our little girl? There’s that fruit-seller,—she would never have understood it! he child is thrust into your arms, and then—the grandfather is dead! What a tory! good saints of paradise, what a tale! Ah! you are alive, that’s the best f it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.104#“I am cold,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.105#This remark recalled Fauchelevent thoroughly to reality, and there was ressing need of it. The souls of these two men were troubled even when they had ecovered themselves, although they did not realize it, and there was about them omething uncanny, which was the sinister bewilderment inspired by the lace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.106#“Let us get out of here quickly,” exclaimed Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.107#He fumbled in his pocket, and pulled out a gourd with which he had rovided himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.108#“But first, take a drop,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.109#The flask finished what the fresh air had begun, Jean Valjean swallowed a outhful of brandy, and regained full possession of his faculties.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.110#He got out of the coffin, and helped Fauchelevent to nail on the lid gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.111#Three minutes later they were out of the grave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.112#Moreover, Fauchelevent was perfectly composed. He took his time. The emetery was closed. The arrival of the grave-digger Gribier was not to be pprehended. That “conscript” was at home busily engaged in looking for his ard, and at some difficulty in finding it in his lodgings, since it was in auchelevent’s pocket. Without a card, he could not get back into the emetery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.113#Fauchelevent took the shovel, and Jean Valjean the pick-axe, and together hey buried the empty coffin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.114#When the grave was full, Fauchelevent said to Jean Valjean:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.115#“Let us go. I will keep the shovel; do you carry off the mattock.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.116#Night was falling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.117#Jean Valjean experienced some difficulty in moving and in walking. He had tiffened himself in that coffin, and had become a little like a corpse. The igidity of death had seized upon him between those four planks. He had, in a anner, to thaw out, from the tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.118#“You are benumbed,” said Fauchelevent. “It is a pity that I have a game eg, for otherwise we might step out briskly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.119#“Bah!” replied Jean Valjean, “four paces will put life into my legs once ore.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.120#They set off by the alleys through which the hearse had passed. On rriving before the closed gate and the porter’s pavilion Fauchelevent, who held he grave-digger’s card in his hand, dropped it into the box, the porter pulled he rope, the gate opened, and they went out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.121#“How well everything is going!” said Fauchelevent; “what a capital idea hat was of yours, Father Madeleine!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.122#They passed the Vaugirard barrier in the simplest manner in the world. In he neighborhood of the cemetery, a shovel and pick are equal to two assports.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.123#The Rue Vaugirard was deserted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.124#“Father Madeleine,” said Fauchelevent as they went along, and raising his yes to the houses, “Your eyes are better than mine. Show me No. 87.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.125#“Here it is,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.126#“There is no one in the street,” said Fauchelevent. “Give me your mattock nd wait a couple of minutes for me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.127#Fauchelevent entered No. 87, ascended to the very top, guided by the nstinct which always leads the poor man to the garret, and knocked in the dark, t the door of an attic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.128#A voice replied: “Come in.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.129#It was Gribier’s voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.130#Fauchelevent opened the door. The grave-digger’s dwelling was, like all uch wretched habitations, an unfurnished and encumbered garret. A acking-case—a coffin, perhaps—took the place of a commode, a butter-pot served or a drinking-fountain, a straw mattress served for a bed, the floor served nstead of tables and chairs. In a corner, on a tattered fragment which had been piece of an old carpet, a thin woman and a number of children were piled in a eap. The whole of this poverty-stricken interior bore traces of having been verturned. One would have said that there had been an earthquake “for one.” The overs were displaced, the rags scattered about, the jug broken, the mother had een crying, the children had probably been beaten; traces of a vigorous and ll-tempered search. It was plain that the grave-digger had made a desperate earch for his card, and had made everybody in the garret, from the jug to his ife, responsible for its loss. He wore an air of desperation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.131#But Fauchelevent was in too great a hurry to terminate this adventure to ake any notice of this sad side of his success.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.132#He entered and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.133#“I have brought you back your shovel and pick.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.134#Gribier gazed at him in stupefaction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.135#“Is it you, peasant?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.136#“And to-morrow morning you will find your card with the porter of the emetery.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.137#And he laid the shovel and mattock on the floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.138#“What is the meaning of this?” demanded Gribier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.139#“The meaning of it is, that you dropped your card out of your pocket, hat I found it on the ground after you were gone, that I have buried the orpse, that I have filled the grave, that I have done your work, that the orter will return your card to you, and that you will not have to pay fifteen rancs. There you have it, conscript.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.7.140#“Thanks, villager!” exclaimed Gribier, radiant. “The next time I will pay or the drinks.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—A SUCCESSFUL INTERROGATORY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.1#An hour later, in the darkness of night, two men and a child presented hemselves at No. 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. The elder of the men lifted the knocker nd rapped.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.2#They were Fauchelevent, Jean Valjean, and Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.3#The two old men had gone to fetch Cosette from the fruiterer’s in the Rue u Chemin-Vert, where Fauchelevent had deposited her on the preceding day. osette had passed these twenty-four hours trembling silently and understanding othing. She trembled to such a degree that she wept. She had neither eaten nor lept. The worthy fruit-seller had plied her with a hundred questions, without btaining any other reply than a melancholy and unvarying gaze. Cosette had etrayed nothing of what she had seen and heard during the last two days. She ivined that they were passing through a crisis. She was deeply conscious that t was necessary to “be good.” Who has not experienced the sovereign power of hose two words, pronounced with a certain accent in the ear of a terrified ittle being: _Say nothing! _ Fear is mute. Moreover, no one guards a secret ike a child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.4#But when, at the expiration of these lugubrious twenty-four hours, she eheld Jean Valjean again, she gave vent to such a cry of joy, that any houghtful person who had chanced to hear that cry, would have guessed that it ssued from an abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.5#Fauchelevent belonged to the convent and knew the pass-words. All the doors pened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.6#Thus was solved the double and alarming problem of how to get out and how o get in.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.7#The porter, who had received his instructions, opened the little servant’s oor which connected the courtyard with the garden, and which could still be een from the street twenty years ago, in the wall at the bottom of the court, hich faced the carriage entrance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.8#The porter admitted all three of them through this door, and from that oint they reached the inner, reserved parlor where Fauchelevent, on the receding day, had received his orders from the prioress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.9#The prioress, rosary in hand, was waiting for them. A vocal mother, with er veil lowered, stood beside her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.10#A discreet candle lighted, one might almost say, made a show of lighting he parlor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.11#The prioress passed Jean Valjean in review. There is nothing which xamines like a downcast eye.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.12#Then she questioned him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.13#“You are the brother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.14#“Yes, reverend Mother,” replied Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.15#“What is your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.16#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.17#“Ultime Fauchelevent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.18#He really had had a brother named Ultime, who was dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.19#“Where do you come from?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.20#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.21#“From Picquigny, near Amiens.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.22#“What is your age?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.23#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.24#“Fifty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.25#“What is your profession?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.26#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.27#“Gardener.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.28#“Are you a good Christian?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.29#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.30#“Every one is in the family.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.31#“Is this your little girl?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.32#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.33#“Yes, reverend Mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.34#“You are her father?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.35#Fauchelevent replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.36#“Her grandfather.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.37#The vocal mother said to the prioress in a low voice
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.38#“He answers well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.39#Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.40#The prioress looked attentively at Cosette, and said half aloud to the ocal mother:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.41#“She will grow up ugly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.42#The two mothers consulted for a few moments in very low tones in the orner of the parlor, then the prioress turned round and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.43#“Father Fauvent, you will get another knee-cap with a bell. Two will be equired now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.44#On the following day, therefore, two bells were audible in the garden, and he nuns could not resist the temptation to raise the corner of their veils. At he extreme end of the garden, under the trees, two men, Fauvent and another an, were visible as they dug side by side. An enormous event. Their silence was roken to the extent of saying to each other: “He is an assistant gardener.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.45#The vocal mothers added: “He is a brother of Father Fauvent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.46#Jean Valjean was, in fact, regularly installed; he had his belled nee-cap; henceforth he was official. His name was Ultime Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.47#The most powerful determining cause of his admission had been the rioress’s observation upon Cosette: “She will grow up ugly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.48#The prioress, that pronounced prognosticator, immediately took a fancy to osette and gave her a place in the school as a charity pupil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.49#There is nothing that is not strictly logical about this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.50#It is in vain that mirrors are banished from the convent, women are onscious of their faces; now, girls who are conscious of their beauty do not asily become nuns; the vocation being voluntary in inverse proportion to their ood looks, more is to be hoped from the ugly than from the pretty. Hence a ively taste for plain girls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.51#The whole of this adventure increased the importance of good, old auchelevent; he won a triple success; in the eyes of Jean Valjean, whom he had aved and sheltered; in those of grave-digger Gribier, who said to himself: “He pared me that fine”; with the convent, which, being enabled, thanks to him, to etain the coffin of Mother Crucifixion under the altar, eluded Cæsar and atisfied God. There was a coffin containing a body in the Petit-Picpus, and a offin without a body in the Vaugirard cemetery, public order had no doubt been eeply disturbed thereby, but no one was aware of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.8.52#As for the convent, its gratitude to Fauchelevent was very great. auchelevent became the best of servitors and the most precious of gardeners. pon the occasion of the archbishop’s next visit, the prioress recounted the ffair to his Grace, making something of a confession at the same time, and yet oasting of her deed. On leaving the convent, the archbishop mentioned it with pproval, and in a whisper to M. de Latil, Monsieur’s confessor, afterwards rchbishop of Reims and Cardinal. This admiration for Fauchelevent became idespread, for it made its way to Rome. We have seen a note addressed by the hen reigning Pope, Leo XII., to one of his relatives, a Monsignor in the uncio’s establishment in Paris, and bearing, like himself, the name of Della enga; it contained these lines: “It appears that there is in a convent in Paris n excellent gardener, who is also a holy man, named Fauvent.” Nothing of this riumph reached Fauchelevent in his hut; he went on grafting, weeding, and overing up his melon beds, without in the least suspecting his excellences and is sanctity. Neither did he suspect his glory, any more than a Durham or Surrey ull whose portrait is published in the _London Illustrated News_, with this nscription: “Bull which carried off the prize at the Cattle Show.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.head#CHAPTER IX—CLOISTERED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.1#Cosette continued to hold her tongue in the convent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.2#It was quite natural that Cosette should think herself Jean Valjean’s aughter. Moreover, as she knew nothing, she could say nothing, and then, she ould not have said anything in any case. As we have just observed, nothing rains children to silence like unhappiness. Cosette had suffered so much, that he feared everything, even to speak or to breathe. A single word had so often rought down an avalanche upon her. She had hardly begun to regain her onfidence since she had been with Jean Valjean. She speedily became accustomed o the convent. Only she regretted Catherine, but she dared not say so. Once, owever, she did say to Jean Valjean: “Father, if I had known, I would have rought her away with me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.3#Cosette had been obliged, on becoming a scholar in the convent, to don the arb of the pupils of the house. Jean Valjean succeeded in getting them to estore to him the garments which she laid aside. This was the same mourning uit which he had made her put on when she had quitted the Thénardiers’ inn. It as not very threadbare even now. Jean Valjean locked up these garments, plus he stockings and the shoes, with a quantity of camphor and all the aromatics in hich convents abound, in a little valise which he found means of procuring. He et this valise on a chair near his bed, and he always carried the key about his erson. “Father,” Cosette asked him one day, “what is there in that box which mells so good?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.4#Father Fauchelevent received other recompense for his good action, in ddition to the glory which we just mentioned, and of which he knew nothing; in he first place it made him happy; next, he had much less work, since it was hared. Lastly, as he was very fond of snuff, he found the presence of M. adeleine an advantage, in that he used three times as much as he had done reviously, and that in an infinitely more luxurious manner, seeing that M. adeleine paid for it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.5#The nuns did not adopt the name of Ultime; they called Jean Valjean _the ther Fauvent_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.6#If these holy women had possessed anything of Javert’s glance, they would ventually have noticed that when there was any errand to be done outside in the ehalf of the garden, it was always the elder Fauchelevent, the old, the infirm, he lame man, who went, and never the other; but whether it is that eyes onstantly fixed on God know not how to spy, or whether they were, by reference, occupied in keeping watch on each other, they paid no heed to his.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.7#Moreover, it was well for Jean Valjean that he kept close and did not stir ut. Javert watched the quarter for more than a month.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.8#This convent was for Jean Valjean like an island surrounded by gulfs. enceforth, those four walls constituted his world. He saw enough of the sky here to enable him to preserve his serenity, and Cosette enough to remain appy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.9#A very sweet life began for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.10#He inhabited the old hut at the end of the garden, in company with auchelevent. This hovel, built of old rubbish, which was still in existence in 845, was composed, as the reader already knows, of three chambers, all of which ere utterly bare and had nothing beyond the walls. The principal one had been iven up, by force, for Jean Valjean had opposed it in vain, to M. Madeleine, by ather Fauchelevent. The walls of this chamber had for ornament, in addition to he two nails whereon to hang the knee-cap and the basket, a Royalist bank-note f ’93, applied to the wall over the chimney-piece, and of which the following s an exact facsimile:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.11#Royalist Bank-note 2b8-9-banknote
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.12#This specimen of Vendean paper money had been nailed to the wall by the receding gardener, an old Chouan, who had died in the convent, and whose place auchelevent had taken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.13#Jean Valjean worked in the garden every day and made himself very useful. e had formerly been a pruner of trees, and he gladly found himself a gardener nce more. It will be remembered that he knew all sorts of secrets and receipts or agriculture. He turned these to advantage. Almost all the trees in the rchard were ungrafted, and wild. He budded them and made them produce excellent ruit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.14#Cosette had permission to pass an hour with him every day. As the sisters ere melancholy and he was kind, the child made comparisons and adored him. At he appointed hour she flew to the hut. When she entered the lowly cabin, she illed it with paradise. Jean Valjean blossomed out and felt his happiness ncrease with the happiness which he afforded Cosette. The joy which we inspire as this charming property, that, far from growing meagre, like all reflections, t returns to us more radiant than ever. At recreation hours, Jean Valjean atched her running and playing in the distance, and he distinguished her laugh rom that of the rest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.15#For Cosette laughed now.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.16#Cosette’s face had even undergone a change, to a certain extent. The gloom ad disappeared from it. A smile is the same as sunshine; it banishes winter rom the human countenance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.17#Recreation over, when Cosette went into the house again, Jean Valjean azed at the windows of her class-room, and at night he rose to look at the indows of her dormitory.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.18#God has his own ways, moreover; the convent contributed, like Cosette, to phold and complete the Bishop’s work in Jean Valjean. It is certain that virtue djoins pride on one side. A bridge built by the devil exists there. Jean aljean had been, unconsciously, perhaps, tolerably near that side and that ridge, when Providence cast his lot in the convent of the Petit-Picpus; so long s he had compared himself only to the Bishop, he had regarded himself as nworthy and had remained humble; but for some time past he had been comparing imself to men in general, and pride was beginning to spring up. Who knows? He ight have ended by returning very gradually to hatred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.19#The convent stopped him on that downward path.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.20#This was the second place of captivity which he had seen. In his youth, in hat had been for him the beginning of his life, and later on, quite recently gain, he had beheld another,—a frightful place, a terrible place, whose everities had always appeared to him the iniquity of justice, and the crime of he law. Now, after the galleys, he saw the cloister; and when he meditated how e had formed a part of the galleys, and that he now, so to speak, was a pectator of the cloister, he confronted the two in his own mind with nxiety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.21#Sometimes he crossed his arms and leaned on his hoe, and slowly descended he endless spirals of reverie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.22#He recalled his former companions: how wretched they were; they rose at awn, and toiled until night; hardly were they permitted to sleep; they lay on amp beds, where nothing was tolerated but mattresses two inches thick, in rooms hich were heated only in the very harshest months of the year; they were lothed in frightful red blouses; they were allowed, as a great favor, linen rousers in the hottest weather, and a woollen carter’s blouse on their backs hen it was very cold; they drank no wine, and ate no meat, except when they ent on “fatigue duty.” They lived nameless, designated only by numbers, and onverted, after a manner, into ciphers themselves, with downcast eyes, with owered voices, with shorn heads, beneath the cudgel and in disgrace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.23#Then his mind reverted to the beings whom he had under his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.24#These beings also lived with shorn heads, with downcast eyes, with lowered oices, not in disgrace, but amid the scoffs of the world, not with their backs ruised with the cudgel, but with their shoulders lacerated with their iscipline. Their names, also, had vanished from among men; they no longer xisted except under austere appellations. They never ate meat and they never rank wine; they often remained until evening without food; they were attired, ot in a red blouse, but in a black shroud, of woollen, which was heavy in ummer and thin in winter, without the power to add or subtract anything from t; without having even, according to the season, the resource of the linen arment or the woollen cloak; and for six months in the year they wore serge hemises which gave them fever. They dwelt, not in rooms warmed only during igorous cold, but in cells where no fire was ever lighted; they slept, not on attresses two inches thick, but on straw. And finally, they were not even llowed their sleep; every night, after a day of toil, they were obliged, in the eariness of their first slumber, at the moment when they were falling sound sleep and beginning to get warm, to rouse themselves, to rise and to go and ray in an ice-cold and gloomy chapel, with their knees on the stones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.25#On certain days each of these beings in turn had to remain for twelve uccessive hours in a kneeling posture, or prostrate, with face upon the avement, and arms outstretched in the form of a cross.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.26#The others were men; these were women.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.27#What had those men done? They had stolen, violated, pillaged, murdered, ssassinated. They were bandits, counterfeiters, poisoners, incendiaries, urderers, parricides. What had these women done? They had done nothing hatever.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.28#On the one hand, highway robbery, fraud, deceit, violence, sensuality, omicide, all sorts of sacrilege, every variety of crime; on the other, one hing only, innocence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.29#Perfect innocence, almost caught up into heaven in a mysterious ssumption, attached to the earth by virtue, already possessing something of eaven through holiness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.30#On the one hand, confidences over crimes, which are exchanged in whispers; n the other, the confession of faults made aloud. And what crimes! And what aults!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.31#On the one hand, miasms; on the other, an ineffable perfume. On the one and, a moral pest, guarded from sight, penned up under the range of cannon, and iterally devouring its plague-stricken victims; on the other, the chaste flame f all souls on the same hearth. There, darkness; here, the shadow; but a shadow illed with gleams of light, and of gleams full of radiance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.32#Two strongholds of slavery; but in the first, deliverance possible, a egal limit always in sight, and then, escape. In the second, perpetuity; the ole hope, at the distant extremity of the future, that faint light of liberty hich men call death.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.33#In the first, men are bound only with chains; in the other, chained by aith.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.34#What flowed from the first? An immense curse, the gnashing of teeth, atred, desperate viciousness, a cry of rage against human society, a sarcasm gainst heaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.35#What results flowed from the second? Blessings and love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.36#And in these two places, so similar yet so unlike, these two species of eings who were so very unlike, were undergoing the same work, expiation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.37#Jean Valjean understood thoroughly the expiation of the former; that ersonal expiation, the expiation for one’s self. But he did not understand that f these last, that of creatures without reproach and without stain, and he rembled as he asked himself: The expiation of what? What expiation?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.38#A voice within his conscience replied: “The most divine of human enerosities, the expiation for others.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.39#Here all personal theory is withheld; we are only the narrator; we place urselves at Jean Valjean’s point of view, and we translate his impressions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.40#Before his eyes he had the sublime summit of abnegation, the highest ossible pitch of virtue; the innocence which pardons men their faults, and hich expiates in their stead; servitude submitted to, torture accepted, unishment claimed by souls which have not sinned, for the sake of sparing it to ouls which have fallen; the love of humanity swallowed up in the love of God, ut even there preserving its distinct and mediatorial character; sweet and eeble beings possessing the misery of those who are punished and the smile of hose who are recompensed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.41#And he remembered that he had dared to murmur!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.42#Often, in the middle of the night, he rose to listen to the grateful song f those innocent creatures weighed down with severities, and the blood ran cold n his veins at the thought that those who were justly chastised raised their oices heavenward only in blasphemy, and that he, wretch that he was, had shaken is fist at God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.43#There was one striking thing which caused him to meditate deeply, like a arning whisper from Providence itself: the scaling of that wall, the passing of hose barriers, the adventure accepted even at the risk of death, the painful nd difficult ascent, all those efforts even, which he had made to escape from hat other place of expiation, he had made in order to gain entrance into this ne. Was this a symbol of his destiny? This house was a prison likewise and bore melancholy resemblance to that other one whence he had fled, and yet he had ever conceived an idea of anything similar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.44#Again he beheld gratings, bolts, iron bars—to guard whom? Angels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.45#These lofty walls which he had seen around tigers, he now beheld once more round lambs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.46#This was a place of expiation, and not of punishment; and yet, it was till more austere, more gloomy, and more pitiless than the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.47#These virgins were even more heavily burdened than the convicts. A cold, arsh wind, that wind which had chilled his youth, traversed the barred and adlocked grating of the vultures; a still harsher and more biting breeze blew n the cage of these doves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.48#Why?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.49#When he thought on these things, all that was within him was lost in mazement before this mystery of sublimity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.50#In these meditations, his pride vanished. He scrutinized his own heart in ll manner of ways; he felt his pettiness, and many a time he wept. All that had ntered into his life for the last six months had led him back towards the ishop’s holy injunctions; Cosette through love, the convent through umility.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.51#Sometimes at eventide, in the twilight, at an hour when the garden was eserted, he could be seen on his knees in the middle of the walk which skirted he chapel, in front of the window through which he had gazed on the night of is arrival, and turned towards the spot where, as he knew, the sister was aking reparation, prostrated in prayer. Thus he prayed as he knelt before the ister.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.52#It seemed as though he dared not kneel directly before God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.53#Everything that surrounded him, that peaceful garden, those fragrant lowers, those children who uttered joyous cries, those grave and simple women, hat silent cloister, slowly permeated him, and little by little, his soul ecame compounded of silence like the cloister, of perfume like the flowers, of implicity like the women, of joy like the children. And then he reflected that hese had been two houses of God which had received him in succession at two ritical moments in his life: the first, when all doors were closed and when uman society rejected him; the second, at a moment when human society had again et out in pursuit of him, and when the galleys were again yawning; and that, ad it not been for the first, he should have relapsed into crime, and had it ot been for the second, into torment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.54#His whole heart melted in gratitude, and he loved more and more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.55#Many years passed in this manner; Cosette was growing up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:2.8.9.56#[THE END OF VOLUME II “COSETTE”]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.head#VOLUME III—MARIUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.head#BOOK FIRST—PARIS STUDIED IN ITS ATOM
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.1.head#CHAPTER I—PARVULUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.1.1#Paris has a child, and the forest has a bird; the bird is called the parrow; the child is called the gamin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.1.2#Couple these two ideas which contain, the one all the furnace, the other ll the dawn; strike these two sparks together, Paris, childhood; there leaps ut from them a little being. _Homuncio_, Plautus would say.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.1.3#This little being is joyous. He has not food every day, and he goes to the lay every evening, if he sees good. He has no shirt on his body, no shoes on is feet, no roof over his head; he is like the flies of heaven, who have none f these things. He is from seven to thirteen years of age, he lives in bands, oams the streets, lodges in the open air, wears an old pair of trousers of his ather’s, which descend below his heels, an old hat of some other father, which escends below his ears, a single suspender of yellow listing; he runs, lies in ait, rummages about, wastes time, blackens pipes, swears like a convict, haunts he wine-shop, knows thieves, calls gay women _thou_, talks slang, sings obscene ongs, and has no evil in his heart. This is because he has in his heart a earl, innocence; and pearls are not to be dissolved in mud. So long as man is n his childhood, God wills that he shall be innocent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.1.4#If one were to ask that enormous city: “What is this?” she would reply: “It s my little one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.2.head#CHAPTER II—SOME OF HIS PARTICULAR CHARACTERISTICS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.2.1#The gamin—the street Arab—of Paris is the dwarf of the giant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.2.2#Let us not exaggerate, this cherub of the gutter sometimes has a shirt, ut, in that case, he owns but one; he sometimes has shoes, but then they have o soles; he sometimes has a lodging, and he loves it, for he finds his mother here; but he prefers the street, because there he finds liberty. He has his own ames, his own bits of mischief, whose foundation consists of hatred for the ourgeois; his peculiar metaphors: to be dead is _to eat dandelions by the oot_; his own occupations, calling hackney-coaches, letting down arriage-steps, establishing means of transit between the two sides of a street n heavy rains, which he calls _making the bridge of arts_, crying discourses ronounced by the authorities in favor of the French people, cleaning out the racks in the pavement; he has his own coinage, which is composed of all the ittle morsels of worked copper which are found on the public streets. This urious money, which receives the name of _loques_—rags—has an invariable and ell-regulated currency in this little Bohemia of children.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.2.3#Lastly, he has his own fauna, which he observes attentively in the corners; he lady-bird, the death’s-head plant-louse, the daddy-long-legs, “the devil,” a lack insect, which menaces by twisting about its tail armed with two horns. He as his fabulous monster, which has scales under its belly, but is not a lizard, hich has pustules on its back, but is not a toad, which inhabits the nooks of ld lime-kilns and wells that have run dry, which is black, hairy, sticky, which rawls sometimes slowly, sometimes rapidly, which has no cry, but which has a ook, and is so terrible that no one has ever beheld it; he calls this monster the deaf thing.” The search for these “deaf things” among the stones is a joy f formidable nature. Another pleasure consists in suddenly prying up a aving-stone, and taking a look at the wood-lice. Each region of Paris is elebrated for the interesting treasures which are to be found there. There are ar-wigs in the timber-yards of the Ursulines, there are millepeds in the antheon, there are tadpoles in the ditches of the Champs-de-Mars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.2.4#As far as sayings are concerned, this child has as many of them as alleyrand. He is no less cynical, but he is more honest. He is endowed with a ertain indescribable, unexpected joviality; he upsets the composure of the hopkeeper with his wild laughter. He ranges boldly from high comedy to arce.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.2.5#A funeral passes by. Among those who accompany the dead there is a doctor. Hey there!” shouts some street Arab, “how long has it been customary for octors to carry home their own work?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.2.6#Another is in a crowd. A grave man, adorned with spectacles and trinkets, urns round indignantly: “You good-for-nothing, you have seized my wife’s aist!”—“I, sir? Search me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.3.head#CHAPTER III—HE IS AGREEABLE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.3.1#In the evening, thanks to a few sous, which he always finds means to rocure, the _homuncio_ enters a theatre. On crossing that magic threshold, he ecomes transfigured; he was the street Arab, he becomes the titi.18 Theatres re a sort of ship turned upside down with the keel in the air. It is in that eel that the titi huddle together. The titi is to the gamin what the moth is to he larva; the same being endowed with wings and soaring. It suffices for him to e there, with his radiance of happiness, with his power of enthusiasm and joy, ith his hand-clapping, which resembles a clapping of wings, to confer on that arrow, dark, fetid, sordid, unhealthy, hideous, abominable keel, the name of aradise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.3.2#Bestow on an individual the useless and deprive him of the necessary, and ou have the gamin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.3.3#The gamin is not devoid of literary intuition. His tendency, and we say it ith the proper amount of regret, would not constitute classic taste. He is not ery academic by nature. Thus, to give an example, the popularity of ademoiselle Mars among that little audience of stormy children was seasoned ith a touch of irony. The gamin called her _Mademoiselle Muche_—“hide ourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.3.4#This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights, has rags like a baby nd tatters like a philosopher, fishes in the sewer, hunts in the cesspool, xtracts mirth from foulness, whips up the squares with his wit, grins and ites, whistles and sings, shouts, and shrieks, tempers Alleluia with atanturlurette, chants every rhythm from the De Profundis to the Jack-pudding, inds without seeking, knows what he is ignorant of, is a Spartan to the point f thieving, is mad to wisdom, is lyrical to filth, would crouch down on lympus, wallows in the dunghill and emerges from it covered with stars. The amin of Paris is Rabelais in this youth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.3.5#He is not content with his trousers unless they have a watch-pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.3.6#He is not easily astonished, he is still less easily terrified, he makes ongs on superstitions, he takes the wind out of exaggerations, he twits ysteries, he thrusts out his tongue at ghosts, he takes the poetry out of tilted things, he introduces caricature into epic extravaganzas. It is not that e is prosaic; far from that; but he replaces the solemn vision by the farcical hantasmagoria. If Adamastor were to appear to him, the street Arab would say: Hi there! The bugaboo!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.4.head#CHAPTER IV—HE MAY BE OF USE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.4.1#Paris begins with the lounger and ends with the street Arab, two beings of hich no other city is capable; the passive acceptance, which contents itself ith gazing, and the inexhaustible initiative; Prudhomme and Fouillou. Paris lone has this in its natural history. The whole of the monarchy is contained in he lounger; the whole of anarchy in the gamin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.4.2#This pale child of the Parisian faubourgs lives and develops, makes onnections, “grows supple” in suffering, in the presence of social realities nd of human things, a thoughtful witness. He thinks himself heedless; and he is ot. He looks and is on the verge of laughter; he is on the verge of something lse also. Whoever you may be, if your name is Prejudice, Abuse, Ignorance, ppression, Iniquity, Despotism, Injustice, Fanaticism, Tyranny, beware of the aping gamin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.4.3#The little fellow will grow up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.4.4#Of what clay is he made? Of the first mud that comes to hand. A handful of irt, a breath, and behold Adam. It suffices for a God to pass by. A God has lways passed over the street Arab. Fortune labors at this tiny being. By the ord “fortune” we mean chance, to some extent. That pigmy kneaded out of common arth, ignorant, unlettered, giddy, vulgar, low. Will that become an Ionian or a œotian? Wait, _currit rota_, the Spirit of Paris, that demon which creates the hildren of chance and the men of destiny, reversing the process of the Latin otter, makes of a jug an amphora.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.head#CHAPTER V—HIS FRONTIERS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.1#The gamin loves the city, he also loves solitude, since he has something of he sage in him. _Urbis amator_, like Fuscus; _ruris amator_, like Flaccus.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.2#To roam thoughtfully about, that is to say, to lounge, is a fine employment f time in the eyes of the philosopher; particularly in that rather illegitimate pecies of campaign, which is tolerably ugly but odd and composed of two atures, which surrounds certain great cities, notably Paris. To study the uburbs is to study the amphibious animal. End of the trees, beginning of the oofs; end of the grass, beginning of the pavements; end of the furrows, eginning of the shops, end of the wheel-ruts, beginning of the passions; end of he divine murmur, beginning of the human uproar; hence an extraordinary nterest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.3#Hence, in these not very attractive places, indelibly stamped by the assing stroller with the epithet: _melancholy_, the apparently objectless romenades of the dreamer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.4#He who writes these lines has long been a prowler about the barriers of aris, and it is for him a source of profound souvenirs. That close-shaven turf, hose pebbly paths, that chalk, those pools, those harsh monotonies of waste and allow lands, the plants of early market-garden suddenly springing into sight in bottom, that mixture of the savage and the citizen, those vast desert nooks here the garrison drums practise noisily, and produce a sort of lisping of attle, those hermits by day and cut-throats by night, that clumsy mill which urns in the wind, the hoisting-wheels of the quarries, the tea-gardens at the orners of the cemeteries; the mysterious charm of great, sombre walls squarely ntersecting immense, vague stretches of land inundated with sunshine and full f butterflies,—all this attracted him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.5#There is hardly any one on earth who is not acquainted with those singular pots, the Glacière, the Cunette, the hideous wall of Grenelle all speckled with alls, Mont-Parnasse, the Fosse-aux-Loups, Aubiers on the bank of the Marne, ont-Souris, the Tombe-Issoire, the Pierre-Plate de Châtillon, where there is an ld, exhausted quarry which no longer serves any purpose except to raise ushrooms, and which is closed, on a level with the ground, by a trap-door of otten planks. The campagna of Rome is one idea, the banlieue of Paris is nother; to behold nothing but fields, houses, or trees in what a stretch of ountry offers us, is to remain on the surface; all aspects of things are houghts of God. The spot where a plain effects its junction with a city is lways stamped with a certain piercing melancholy. Nature and humanity both ppeal to you at the same time there. Local originalities there make their ppearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.6#Any one who, like ourselves, has wandered about in these solitudes ontiguous to our faubourgs, which may be designated as the limbos of Paris, has een here and there, in the most desert spot, at the most unexpected moment, ehind a meagre hedge, or in the corner of a lugubrious wall, children grouped umultuously, fetid, muddy, dusty, ragged, dishevelled, playing hide-and-seek, nd crowned with corn-flowers. All of them are little ones who have made their scape from poor families. The outer boulevard is their breathing space; the uburbs belong to them. There they are eternally playing truant. There they nnocently sing their repertory of dirty songs. There they are, or rather, there hey exist, far from every eye, in the sweet light of May or June, kneeling ound a hole in the ground, snapping marbles with their thumbs, quarrelling over alf-farthings, irresponsible, volatile, free and happy; and, no sooner do they atch sight of you than they recollect that they have an industry, and that they ust earn their living, and they offer to sell you an old woollen stocking illed with cockchafers, or a bunch of lilacs. These encounters with strange hildren are one of the charming and at the same time poignant graces of the nvirons of Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.7#Sometimes there are little girls among the throng of boys,—are they their isters?—who are almost young maidens, thin, feverish, with sunburnt hands, overed with freckles, crowned with poppies and ears of rye, gay, haggard, arefooted. They can be seen devouring cherries among the wheat. In the evening hey can be heard laughing. These groups, warmly illuminated by the full glow of idday, or indistinctly seen in the twilight, occupy the thoughtful man for a ery long time, and these visions mingle with his dreams.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.5.8#Paris, centre, banlieue, circumference; this constitutes all the earth to hose children. They never venture beyond this. They can no more escape from the arisian atmosphere than fish can escape from the water. For them, nothing xists two leagues beyond the barriers: Ivry, Gentilly, Arcueil, Belleville, ubervilliers, Ménilmontant, Choisy-le-Roi, Billancourt, Meudon, Issy, Vanvre, èvres, Puteaux, Neuilly, Gennevilliers, Colombes, Romainville, Chatou, snières, Bougival, Nanterre, Enghien, Noisy-le-Sec, Nogent, Gournay, Drancy, onesse; the universe ends there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.head#CHAPTER VI—A BIT OF HISTORY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.1#At the epoch, nearly contemporary by the way, when the action of this book akes place, there was not, as there is to-day, a policeman at the corner of very street (a benefit which there is no time to discuss here); stray children bounded in Paris. The statistics give an average of two hundred and sixty omeless children picked up annually at that period, by the police patrols, in nenclosed lands, in houses in process of construction, and under the arches of he bridges. One of these nests, which has become famous, produced “the swallows f the bridge of Arcola.” This is, moreover, the most disastrous of social ymptoms. All crimes of the man begin in the vagabondage of the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.2#Let us make an exception in favor of Paris, nevertheless. In a relative easure, and in spite of the souvenir which we have just recalled, the exception s just. While in any other great city the vagabond child is a lost man, while early everywhere the child left to itself is, in some sort, sacrificed and bandoned to a kind of fatal immersion in the public vices which devour in him onesty and conscience, the street boy of Paris, we insist on this point, owever defaced and injured on the surface, is almost intact on the interior. It s a magnificent thing to put on record, and one which shines forth in the plendid probity of our popular revolutions, that a certain incorruptibility esults from the idea which exists in the air of Paris, as salt exists in the ater of the ocean. To breathe Paris preserves the soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.3#What we have just said takes away nothing of the anguish of heart which one xperiences every time that one meets one of these children around whom one ancies that he beholds floating the threads of a broken family. In the ivilization of the present day, incomplete as it still is, it is not a very bnormal thing to behold these fractured families pouring themselves out into he darkness, not knowing clearly what has become of their children, and llowing their own entrails to fall on the public highway. Hence these obscure estinies. This is called, for this sad thing has given rise to an expression, to be cast on the pavements of Paris.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.4#Let it be said by the way, that this abandonment of children was not iscouraged by the ancient monarchy. A little of Egypt and Bohemia in the lower egions suited the upper spheres, and compassed the aims of the powerful. The atred of instruction for the children of the people was a dogma. What is the se of “half-lights”? Such was the countersign. Now, the erring child is the orollary of the ignorant child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.5#Besides this, the monarchy sometimes was in need of children, and in that ase it skimmed the streets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.6#Under Louis XIV., not to go any further back, the king rightly desired to reate a fleet. The idea was a good one. But let us consider the means. There an be no fleet, if, beside the sailing ship, that plaything of the winds, and or the purpose of towing it, in case of necessity, there is not the vessel hich goes where it pleases, either by means of oars or of steam; the galleys ere then to the marine what steamers are to-day. Therefore, galleys were ecessary; but the galley is moved only by the galley-slave; hence, alley-slaves were required. Colbert had the commissioners of provinces and the arliaments make as many convicts as possible. The magistracy showed a great eal of complaisance in the matter. A man kept his hat on in the presence of a rocession—it was a Huguenot attitude; he was sent to the galleys. A child was ncountered in the streets; provided that he was fifteen years of age and did ot know where he was to sleep, he was sent to the galleys. Grand reign; grand entury.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.6.7#Under Louis XV. children disappeared in Paris; the police carried them off, or what mysterious purpose no one knew. People whispered with terror monstrous onjectures as to the king’s baths of purple. Barbier speaks ingenuously of hese things. It sometimes happened that the exempts of the guard, when they ran hort of children, took those who had fathers. The fathers, in despair, attacked he exempts. In that case, the parliament intervened and had some one hung. Who? he exempts? No, the fathers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OF NDIA
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.1#The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste. One might lmost say: Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.2#This word _gamin_ was printed for the first time, and reached popular peech through the literary tongue, in 1834. It is in a little work entitled Claude Gueux_ that this word made its appearance. The horror was lively. The ord passed into circulation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.3#The elements which constitute the consideration of the gamins for each ther are very various. We have known and associated with one who was greatly espected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fall from the top of the ower of Notre-Dame; another, because he had succeeded in making his way into he rear courtyard where the statues of the dome of the Invalides had been emporarily deposited, and had “prigged” some lead from them; a third, because e had seen a diligence tip over; still another, because he “knew” a soldier who ame near putting out the eye of a citizen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.4#This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin, a profound piphonema, which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending,— _Dieu de ieu! What ill-luck I do have! to think that I have never yet seen anybody umble from a fifth-story window! _ (_I have_ pronounced _I’ave_ and _fifth_ ronounced _fift’_.)
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.5#Surely, this saying of a peasant is a fine one: “Father So-and-So, your ife has died of her malady; why did you not send for the doctor?” “What would ou have, sir, we poor folks _die of ourselves_.” But if the peasant’s whole assivity lies in this saying, the whole of the free-thinking anarchy of the rat of the faubourgs is, assuredly, contained in this other saying. A man ondemned to death is listening to his confessor in the tumbrel. The child of aris exclaims: “He is talking to his black cap! Oh, the sneak!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.6#A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin. To be trong-minded is an important item.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.7#To be present at executions constitutes a duty. He shows himself at the uillotine, and he laughs. He calls it by all sorts of pet names: The End of the oup, The Growler, The Mother in the Blue (the sky), The Last Mouthful, etc., tc. In order not to lose anything of the affair, he scales the walls, he hoists imself to balconies, he ascends trees, he suspends himself to gratings, he lings fast to chimneys. The gamin is born a tiler as he is born a mariner. A oof inspires him with no more fear than a mast. There is no festival which omes up to an execution on the Place de Grève. Samson and the Abbé Montès are he truly popular names. They hoot at the victim in order to encourage him. They ometimes admire him. Lacenaire, when a gamin, on seeing the hideous Dautin die ravely, uttered these words which contain a future: “I was jealous of him.” In he brotherhood of gamins Voltaire is not known, but Papavoine is. “Politicians” re confused with assassins in the same legend. They have a tradition as to verybody’s last garment. It is known that Tolleron had a fireman’s cap, Avril n otter cap, Losvel a round hat, that old Delaporte was bald and bareheaded, hat Castaing was all ruddy and very handsome, that Bories had a romantic small eard, that Jean Martin kept on his suspenders, that Lecouffé and his mother uarrelled. “Don’t reproach each other for your basket,” shouted a gamin to hem. Another, in order to get a look at Debacker as he passed, and being too mall in the crowd, caught sight of the lantern on the quay and climbed it. A endarme stationed opposite frowned. “Let me climb up, m’sieu le gendarme,” said he gamin. And, to soften the heart of the authorities he added: “I will not all.” “I don’t care if you do,” retorted the gendarme.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.8#In the brotherhood of gamins, a memorable accident counts for a great deal. ne reaches the height of consideration if one chances to cut one’s self very eeply, “to the very bone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.7.9#The fist is no mediocre element of respect. One of the things that the amin is fondest of saying is: “I am fine and strong, come now!” To be eft-handed renders you very enviable. A squint is highly esteemed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—IN WHICH THE READER WILL FIND A CHARMING SAYING OF THE AST KING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.8.1#In summer, he metamorphoses himself into a frog; and in the evening, when ight is falling, in front of the bridges of Austerlitz and Jena, from the tops f coal wagons, and the washerwomen’s boats, he hurls himself headlong into the eine, and into all possible infractions of the laws of modesty and of the olice. Nevertheless the police keep an eye on him, and the result is a highly ramatic situation which once gave rise to a fraternal and memorable cry; that ry which was celebrated about 1830, is a strategic warning from gamin to gamin; t scans like a verse from Homer, with a notation as inexpressible as the leusiac chant of the Panathenæa, and in it one encounters again the ancient vohe. Here it is: “Ohé, Titi, ohééé! Here comes the bobby, here comes the ’lice, pick up your duds and be off, through the sewer with you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.8.2#Sometimes this gnat—that is what he calls himself—knows how to read; ometimes he knows how to write; he always knows how to daub. He does not esitate to acquire, by no one knows what mysterious mutual instruction, all the alents which can be of use to the public; from 1815 to 1830, he imitated the ry of the turkey; from 1830 to 1848, he scrawled pears on the walls. One summer vening, when Louis Philippe was returning home on foot, he saw a little fellow, o higher than his knee, perspiring and climbing up to draw a gigantic pear in harcoal on one of the pillars of the gate of Neuilly; the King, with that ood-nature which came to him from Henry IV., helped the gamin, finished the ear, and gave the child a louis, saying: “The pear is on that also."19 The amin loves uproar. A certain state of violence pleases him. He execrates “the urés.” One day, in the Rue de l’Université, one of these scamps was putting his humb to his nose at the carriage gate of No. 69. “Why are you doing that at the ate?” a passer-by asked. The boy replied: “There is a curé there.” It was here, in fact, that the Papal Nuncio lived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.8.3#Nevertheless, whatever may be the Voltairianism of the small gamin, if the ccasion to become a chorister presents itself, it is quite possible that he ill accept, and in that case he serves the mass civilly. There are two things o which he plays Tantalus, and which he always desires without ever attaining hem: to overthrow the government, and to get his trousers sewed up again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.8.4#The gamin in his perfect state possesses all the policemen of Paris, and an always put the name to the face of any one which he chances to meet. He can ell them off on the tips of his fingers. He studies their habits, and he has pecial notes on each one of them. He reads the souls of the police like an open ook. He will tell you fluently and without flinching: “Such an one is a traitor_; such another is very _malicious_; such another is _great_; such nother is _ridiculous_.” (All these words: traitor, malicious, great, idiculous, have a particular meaning in his mouth.) That one imagines that he wns the Pont-Neuf, and he prevents _people_ from walking on the cornice outside he parapet; that other has a mania for pulling _person’s_ ears; etc., etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.9.head#CHAPTER IX—THE OLD SOUL OF GAUL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.9.1#There was something of that boy in Poquelin, the son of the fish-market; eaumarchais had something of it. Gaminerie is a shade of the Gallic spirit. ingled with good sense, it sometimes adds force to the latter, as alcohol does o wine. Sometimes it is a defect. Homer repeats himself eternally, granted; one ay say that Voltaire plays the gamin. Camille Desmoulins was a native of the aubourgs. Championnet, who treated miracles brutally, rose from the pavements f Paris; he had, when a small lad, inundated the porticos of Saint-Jean de eauvais, and of Saint-Étienne du Mont; he had addressed the shrine of ainte-Geneviève familiarly to give orders to the phial of Saint Januarius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.9.2#The gamin of Paris is respectful, ironical, and insolent. He has villainous eeth, because he is badly fed and his stomach suffers, and handsome eyes ecause he has wit. If Jehovah himself were present, he would go hopping up the teps of paradise on one foot. He is strong on boxing. All beliefs are possible o him. He plays in the gutter, and straightens himself up with a revolt; his ffrontery persists even in the presence of grape-shot; he was a scapegrace, he s a hero; like the little Theban, he shakes the skin from the lion; Barra the rummer-boy was a gamin of Paris; he Shouts: “Forward!” as the horse of cripture says “Vah!” and in a moment he has passed from the small brat to the iant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.9.3#This child of the puddle is also the child of the ideal. Measure that pread of wings which reaches from Molière to Barra.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.9.4#To sum up the whole, and in one word, the gamin is a being who amuses imself, because he is unhappy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.head#CHAPTER X—ECCE PARIS, ECCE HOMO
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.1#To sum it all up once more, the Paris gamin of to-day, like the _græculus_ f Rome in days gone by, is the infant populace with the wrinkle of the old orld on his brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.2#The gamin is a grace to the nation, and at the same time a disease; a isease which must be cured, how? By light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.3#Light renders healthy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.4#Light kindles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.5#All generous social irradiations spring from science, letters, arts, ducation. Make men, make men. Give them light that they may warm you. Sooner or ater the splendid question of universal education will present itself with the rresistible authority of the absolute truth; and then, those who govern under he superintendence of the French idea will have to make this choice; the hildren of France or the gamins of Paris; flames in the light or ill-o’-the-wisps in the gloom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.6#The gamin expresses Paris, and Paris expresses the world.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.7#For Paris is a total. Paris is the ceiling of the human race. The whole of his prodigious city is a foreshortening of dead manners and living manners. He ho sees Paris thinks he sees the bottom of all history with heaven and onstellations in the intervals. Paris has a capital, the Town-Hall, a arthenon, Notre-Dame, a Mount Aventine, the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, an sinarium, the Sorbonne, a Pantheon, the Pantheon, a Via Sacra, the Boulevard es Italiens, a temple of the winds, opinion; and it replaces the Gemoniæ by idicule. Its _majo_ is called “faraud,” its Transteverin is the man of the aubourgs, its _hammal_ is the market-porter, its lazzarone is the pègre, its ockney is the native of Ghent. Everything that exists elsewhere exists at aris. The fishwoman of Dumarsais can retort on the herb-seller of Euripides, he discobols Vejanus lives again in the Forioso, the tight-rope dancer. herapontigonus Miles could walk arm in arm with Vadeboncœur the grenadier, amasippus the second-hand dealer would be happy among bric-à-brac merchants, incennes could grasp Socrates in its fist as just as Agora could imprison iderot, Grimod de la Reynière discovered larded roast beef, as Curtillus nvented roast hedgehog, we see the trapeze which figures in Plautus reappear nder the vault of the Arc of l’Etoile, the sword-eater of Pœcilus encountered y Apuleius is a sword-swallower on the Pont-Neuf, the nephew of Rameau and urculio the parasite make a pair, Ergasilus could get himself presented to ambacères by d’Aigrefeuille; the four dandies of Rome: Alcesimarchus, hœdromus, Diabolus, and Argyrippus, descend from Courtille in Labatut’s osting-chaise; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in front of Congrio than ould Charles Nodier in front of Punchinello; Marto is not a tigress, but ardalisca was not a dragon; Pantolabus the wag jeers in the Café Anglais at omentanus the fast liver, Hermogenus is a tenor in the Champs-Élysées, and ound him, Thracius the beggar, clad like Bobèche, takes up a collection; the ore who stops you by the button of your coat in the Tuileries makes you repeat fter a lapse of two thousand years Thesprion’s apostrophe: _Quis properantem me rehendit pallio? _ The wine on Surêne is a parody of the wine of Alba, the red order of Desaugiers forms a balance to the great cutting of Balatro, ère-Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains the same gleams as the Esquiliæ, nd the grave of the poor bought for five years, is certainly the equivalent of he slave’s hived coffin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.8#Seek something that Paris has not. The vat of Trophonius contains nothing hat is not in Mesmer’s tub; Ergaphilas lives again in Cagliostro; the Brahmin âsaphantâ become incarnate in the Comte de Saint-Germain; the cemetery of aint-Médard works quite as good miracles as the Mosque of Oumoumié at amascus.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.9#Paris has an Æsop-Mayeux, and a Canidia, Mademoiselle Lenormand. It is errified, like Delphos at the fulgurating realities of the vision; it makes ables turn as Dodona did tripods. It places the grisette on the throne, as Rome laced the courtesan there; and, taking it altogether, if Louis XV. is worse han Claudian, Madame Dubarry is better than Messalina. Paris combines in an nprecedented type, which has existed and which we have elbowed, Grecian nudity, he Hebraic ulcer, and the Gascon pun. It mingles Diogenes, Job, and ack-pudding, dresses up a spectre in old numbers of the _Constitutional_, and akes Chodruc Duclos.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.10#Although Plutarch says: _the tyrant never grows old_, Rome, under Sylla as nder Domitian, resigned itself and willingly put water in its wine. The Tiber as a Lethe, if the rather doctrinary eulogium made of it by Varus Vibiscus is o be credited: _Contra Gracchos Tiberim habemus, Bibere Tiberim, id est editionem oblivisci_. Paris drinks a million litres of water a day, but that oes not prevent it from occasionally beating the general alarm and ringing the ocsin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.11#With that exception, Paris is amiable. It accepts everything royally; it s not too particular about its Venus; its Callipyge is Hottentot; provided that t is made to laugh, it condones; ugliness cheers it, deformity provokes it to aughter, vice diverts it; be eccentric and you may be an eccentric; even ypocrisy, that supreme cynicism, does not disgust it; it is so literary that it oes not hold its nose before Basile, and is no more scandalized by the prayer f Tartuffe than Horace was repelled by the “hiccup” of Priapus. No trait of the niversal face is lacking in the profile of Paris. The bal Mabile is not the olymnia dance of the Janiculum, but the dealer in ladies’ wearing apparel there evours the lorette with her eyes, exactly as the procuress Staphyla lay in wait or the virgin Planesium. The Barrière du Combat is not the Coliseum, but people re as ferocious there as though Cæsar were looking on. The Syrian hostess has ore grace than Mother Saguet, but, if Virgil haunted the Roman wine-shop, David ’Angers, Balzac and Charlet have sat at the tables of Parisian taverns. Paris eigns. Geniuses flash forth there, the red tails prosper there. Adonaï passes n his chariot with its twelve wheels of thunder and lightning; Silenus makes is entry there on his ass. For Silenus read Ramponneau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.12#Paris is the synonym of Cosmos, Paris is Athens, Sybaris, Jerusalem, antin. All civilizations are there in an abridged form, all barbarisms also. aris would greatly regret it if it had not a guillotine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.10.13#A little of the Place de Grève is a good thing. What would all that ternal festival be without this seasoning? Our laws are wisely provided, and hanks to them, this blade drips on this Shrove Tuesday.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.head#CHAPTER XI—TO SCOFF, TO REIGN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.1#There is no limit to Paris. No city has had that domination which sometimes erides those whom it subjugates. To please you, O Athenians! exclaimed lexander. Paris makes more than the law, it makes the fashion; Paris sets more han the fashion, it sets the routine. Paris may be stupid, if it sees fit; it ometimes allows itself this luxury; then the universe is stupid in company with t; then Paris awakes, rubs its eyes, says: “How stupid I am!” and bursts out aughing in the face of the human race. What a marvel is such a city! it is a trange thing that this grandioseness and this burlesque should be amicable eighbors, that all this majesty should not be thrown into disorder by all this arody, and that the same mouth can to-day blow into the trump of the Judgment ay, and to-morrow into the reed-flute! Paris has a sovereign joviality. Its ayety is of the thunder and its farce holds a sceptre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.2#Its tempest sometimes proceeds from a grimace. Its explosions, its days, ts masterpieces, its prodigies, its epics, go forth to the bounds of the niverse, and so also do its cock-and-bull stories. Its laugh is the mouth of a olcano which spatters the whole earth. Its jests are sparks. It imposes its aricatures as well as its ideal on people; the highest monuments of human ivilization accept its ironies and lend their eternity to its mischievous ranks. It is superb; it has a prodigious 14th of July, which delivers the lobe; it forces all nations to take the oath of tennis; its night of the 4th of ugust dissolves in three hours a thousand years of feudalism; it makes of its ogic the muscle of unanimous will; it multiplies itself under all sorts of orms of the sublime; it fills with its light Washington, Kosciusko, Bolivar, ozzaris, Riego, Bem, Manin, Lopez, John Brown, Garibaldi; it is everywhere here the future is being lighted up, at Boston in 1779, at the Isle de Léon in 820, at Pesth in 1848, at Palermo in 1860, it whispers the mighty countersign: iberty, in the ear of the American abolitionists grouped about the boat at arper’s Ferry, and in the ear of the patriots of Ancona assembled in the hadow, to the Archi before the Gozzi inn on the seashore; it creates Canaris; t creates Quiroga; it creates Pisacane; it irradiates the great on earth; it as while proceeding whither its breath urge them, that Byron perished at issolonghi, and that Mazet died at Barcelona; it is the tribune under the feet f Mirabeau, and a crater under the feet of Robespierre; its books, its theatre, ts art, its science, its literature, its philosophy, are the manuals of the uman race; it has Pascal, Régnier, Corneille, Descartes, Jean-Jacques: Voltaire or all moments, Molière for all centuries; it makes its language to be talked y the universal mouth, and that language becomes the word; it constructs in all inds the idea of progress, the liberating dogmas which it forges are for the enerations trusty friends, and it is with the soul of its thinkers and its oets that all heroes of all nations have been made since 1789; this does not revent vagabondism, and that enormous genius which is called Paris, while ransfiguring the world by its light, sketches in charcoal Bouginier’s nose on he wall of the temple of Theseus and writes _Credeville the thief_ on the yramids.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.3#Paris is always showing its teeth; when it is not scolding it is aughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.4#Such is Paris. The smoke of its roofs forms the ideas of the universe. A eap of mud and stone, if you will, but, above all, a moral being. It is more han great, it is immense. Why? Because it is daring.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.5#To dare; that is the price of progress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.6#All sublime conquests are, more or less, the prizes of daring. In order hat the Revolution should take place, it does not suffice that Montesquieu hould foresee it, that Diderot should preach it, that Beaumarchais should nnounce it, that Condorcet should calculate it, that Arouet should prepare it, hat Rousseau should premeditate it; it is necessary that Danton should dare t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.11.7#The cry: _Audacity! _ is a _Fiat lux_. It is necessary, for the sake of the orward march of the human race, that there should be proud lessons of courage ermanently on the heights. Daring deeds dazzle history and are one of man’s reat sources of light. The dawn dares when it rises. To attempt, to brave, to ersist, to persevere, to be faithful to one’s self, to grasp fate bodily, to stound catastrophe by the small amount of fear that it occasions us, now to ffront unjust power, again to insult drunken victory, to hold one’s position, o stand one’s ground; that is the example which nations need, that is the light hich electrifies them. The same formidable lightning proceeds from the torch of rometheus to Cambronne’s short pipe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.12.head#CHAPTER XII—THE FUTURE LATENT IN THE PEOPLE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.12.1#As for the Parisian populace, even when a man grown, it is always the treet Arab; to paint the child is to paint the city; and it is for that reason hat we have studied this eagle in this arrant sparrow. It is in the faubourgs, bove all, we maintain, that the Parisian race appears; there is the pure blood; here is the true physiognomy; there this people toils and suffers, and uffering and toil are the two faces of man. There exist there immense numbers f unknown beings, among whom swarm types of the strangest, from the porter of a Râpée to the knacker of Montfaucon. _Fex urbis_, exclaims Cicero; _mob_, adds urke, indignantly; rabble, multitude, populace. These are words and quickly ttered. But so be it. What does it matter? What is it to me if they do go arefoot! They do not know how to read; so much the worse. Would you abandon hem for that? Would you turn their distress into a malediction? Cannot the ight penetrate these masses? Let us return to that cry: Light! and let us bstinately persist therein! Light! Light! Who knows whether these opacities ill not become transparent? Are not revolutions transfigurations? Come, hilosophers, teach, enlighten, light up, think aloud, speak aloud, hasten oyously to the great sun, fraternize with the public place, announce the good ews, spend your alphabets lavishly, proclaim rights, sing the Marseillaises, ow enthusiasms, tear green boughs from the oaks. Make a whirlwind of the idea. his crowd may be rendered sublime. Let us learn how to make use of that vast onflagration of principles and virtues, which sparkles, bursts forth and uivers at certain hours. These bare feet, these bare arms, these rags, these gnorances, these abjectnesses, these darknesses, may be employed in the onquest of the ideal. Gaze past the people, and you will perceive truth. Let hat vile sand which you trample under foot be cast into the furnace, let it elt and seethe there, it will become a splendid crystal, and it is thanks to it hat Galileo and Newton will discover stars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.head#CHAPTER XIII—LITTLE GAVROCHE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.1#Eight or nine years after the events narrated in the second part of this tory, people noticed on the Boulevard du Temple, and in the regions of the hâteau-d’Eau, a little boy eleven or twelve years of age, who would have ealized with tolerable accuracy that ideal of the gamin sketched out above, if, ith the laugh of his age on his lips, he had not had a heart absolutely sombre nd empty. This child was well muffled up in a pair of man’s trousers, but he id not get them from his father, and a woman’s chemise, but he did not get it rom his mother. Some people or other had clothed him in rags out of charity. till, he had a father and a mother. But his father did not think of him, and is mother did not love him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.2#He was one of those children most deserving of pity, among all, one of hose who have father and mother, and who are orphans nevertheless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.3#This child never felt so well as when he was in the street. The pavements ere less hard to him than his mother’s heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.4#His parents had despatched him into life with a kick.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.5#He simply took flight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.6#He was a boisterous, pallid, nimble, wide-awake, jeering, lad, with a ivacious but sickly air. He went and came, sang, played at hopscotch, scraped he gutters, stole a little, but, like cats and sparrows, gayly laughed when he as called a rogue, and got angry when called a thief. He had no shelter, no read, no fire, no love; but he was merry because he was free.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.7#When these poor creatures grow to be men, the millstones of the social rder meet them and crush them, but so long as they are children, they escape ecause of their smallness. The tiniest hole saves them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.8#Nevertheless, abandoned as this child was, it sometimes happened, every two r three months, that he said, “Come, I’ll go and see mamma!” Then he quitted he boulevard, the Cirque, the Porte Saint-Martin, descended to the quays, rossed the bridges, reached the suburbs, arrived at the Salpêtrière, and came o a halt, where? Precisely at that double number 50-52 with which the reader is cquainted—at the Gorbeau hovel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.9#At that epoch, the hovel 50-52 generally deserted and eternally decorated ith the placard: “Chambers to let,” chanced to be, a rare thing, inhabited by umerous individuals who, however, as is always the case in Paris, had no onnection with each other. All belonged to that indigent class which begins to eparate from the lowest of petty bourgeoisie in straitened circumstances, and hich extends from misery to misery into the lowest depths of society down to hose two beings in whom all the material things of civilization end, the ewer-man who sweeps up the mud, and the rag-picker who collects scraps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.10#The “principal lodger” of Jean Valjean’s day was dead and had been eplaced by another exactly like her. I know not what philosopher has said: “Old omen are never lacking.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.11#This new old woman was named Madame Bourgon, and had nothing remarkable bout her life except a dynasty of three paroquets, who had reigned in uccession over her soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.12#The most miserable of those who inhabited the hovel were a family of four ersons, consisting of father, mother, and two daughters, already well grown, ll four of whom were lodged in the same attic, one of the cells which we have lready mentioned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.13#At first sight, this family presented no very special feature except its xtreme destitution; the father, when he hired the chamber, had stated that his ame was Jondrette. Some time after his moving in, which had borne a singular esemblance to _the entrance of nothing at all_, to borrow the memorable xpression of the principal tenant, this Jondrette had said to the woman, who, ike her predecessor, was at the same time portress and stair-sweeper: “Mother o-and-So, if any one should chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an talian, or even a Spaniard, perchance, it is I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.14#This family was that of the merry barefoot boy. He arrived there and found istress, and, what is still sadder, no smile; a cold hearth and cold hearts. hen he entered, he was asked: “Whence come you?” He replied: “From the street.” hen he went away, they asked him: “Whither are you going?” He replied: “Into he streets.” His mother said to him: “What did you come here for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.15#This child lived, in this absence of affection, like the pale plants which pring up in cellars. It did not cause him suffering, and he blamed no one. He id not know exactly how a father and mother should be.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.16#Nevertheless, his mother loved his sisters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.17#We have forgotten to mention, that on the Boulevard du Temple this child as called Little Gavroche. Why was he called Little Gavroche?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.18#Probably because his father’s name was Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.19#It seems to be the instinct of certain wretched families to break the hread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.20#The chamber which the Jondrettes inhabited in the Gorbeau hovel was the ast at the end of the corridor. The cell next to it was occupied by a very poor oung man who was called M. Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.1.13.21#Let us explain who this M. Marius was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.head#BOOK SECOND—THE GREAT BOURGEOIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.1.head#CHAPTER I—NINETY YEARS AND THIRTY-TWO TEETH
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.1.1#In the Rue Boucherat, Rue de Normandie and the Rue de Saintonge there still xist a few ancient inhabitants who have preserved the memory of a worthy man amed M. Gillenormand, and who mention him with complaisance. This good man was ld when they were young. This silhouette has not yet entirely disappeared—for hose who regard with melancholy that vague swarm of shadows which is called the ast—from the labyrinth of streets in the vicinity of the Temple to which, under ouis XIV., the names of all the provinces of France were appended exactly as in ur day, the streets of the new Tivoli quarter have received the names of all he capitals of Europe; a progression, by the way, in which progress is isible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.1.2#M. Gillenormand, who was as much alive as possible in 1831, was one of hose men who had become curiosities to be viewed, simply because they have ived a long time, and who are strange because they formerly resembled verybody, and now resemble nobody. He was a peculiar old man, and in very ruth, a man of another age, the real, complete and rather haughty bourgeois of he eighteenth century, who wore his good, old bourgeoisie with the air with hich marquises wear their marquisates. He was over ninety years of age, his alk was erect, he talked loudly, saw clearly, drank neat, ate, slept, and nored. He had all thirty-two of his teeth. He only wore spectacles when he ead. He was of an amorous disposition, but declared that, for the last ten ears, he had wholly and decidedly renounced women. He could no longer please, e said; he did not add: “I am too old,” but: “I am too poor.” He said: “If I ere not ruined—Héée!” All he had left, in fact, was an income of about fifteen housand francs. His dream was to come into an inheritance and to have a hundred housand livres income for mistresses. He did not belong, as the reader will erceive, to that puny variety of octogenaries who, like M. de Voltaire, have een dying all their life; his was no longevity of a cracked pot; this jovial ld man had always had good health. He was superficial, rapid, easily angered. e flew into a passion at everything, generally quite contrary to all reason. hen contradicted, he raised his cane; he beat people as he had done in the reat century. He had a daughter over fifty years of age, and unmarried, whom he hastised severely with his tongue, when in a rage, and whom he would have liked o whip. She seemed to him to be eight years old. He boxed his servants’ ears oundly, and said: “Ah! carogne!” One of his oaths was: “By the pantoufloche of he pantouflochade!” He had singular freaks of tranquillity; he had himself haved every day by a barber who had been mad and who detested him, being ealous of M. Gillenormand on account of his wife, a pretty and coquettish arberess. M. Gillenormand admired his own discernment in all things, and eclared that he was extremely sagacious; here is one of his sayings: “I have, n truth, some penetration; I am able to say when a flea bites me, from what oman it came.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.1.3#The words which he uttered the most frequently were: _the sensible man_, nd _nature_. He did not give to this last word the grand acceptation which our poch has accorded to it, but he made it enter, after his own fashion, into his ittle chimney-corner satires: “Nature,” he said, “in order that civilization ay have a little of everything, gives it even specimens of its amusing arbarism. Europe possesses specimens of Asia and Africa on a small scale. The at is a drawing-room tiger, the lizard is a pocket crocodile. The dancers at he opera are pink female savages. They do not eat men, they crunch them; or, agicians that they are, they transform them into oysters and swallow them. The aribbeans leave only the bones, they leave only the shell. Such are our morals. e do not devour, we gnaw; we do not exterminate, we claw.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.2.head#CHAPTER II—LIKE MASTER, LIKE HOUSE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.2.1#He lived in the Marais, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6. He owned the ouse. This house has since been demolished and rebuilt, and the number has robably been changed in those revolutions of numeration which the streets of aris undergo. He occupied an ancient and vast apartment on the first floor, etween street and gardens, furnished to the very ceilings with great Gobelins nd Beauvais tapestries representing pastoral scenes; the subjects of the eilings and the panels were repeated in miniature on the armchairs. He nveloped his bed in a vast, nine-leaved screen of Coromandel lacquer. Long, ull curtains hung from the windows, and formed great, broken folds that were ery magnificent. The garden situated immediately under his windows was attached o that one of them which formed the angle, by means of a staircase twelve or ifteen steps long, which the old gentleman ascended and descended with great gility. In addition to a library adjoining his chamber, he had a boudoir of hich he thought a great deal, a gallant and elegant retreat, with magnificent angings of straw, with a pattern of flowers and fleurs-de-lys made on the alleys of Louis XIV. and ordered of his convicts by M. de Vivonne for his istress. M. Gillenormand had inherited it from a grim maternal great-aunt, who ad died a centenarian. He had had two wives. His manners were something between hose of the courtier, which he had never been, and the lawyer, which he might ave been. He was gay, and caressing when he had a mind. In his youth he had een one of those men who are always deceived by their wives and never by their istresses, because they are, at the same time, the most sullen of husbands and he most charming of lovers in existence. He was a connoisseur of painting. He ad in his chamber a marvellous portrait of no one knows whom, painted by ordaens, executed with great dashes of the brush, with millions of details, in confused and hap-hazard manner. M. Gillenormand’s attire was not the habit of ouis XIV. nor yet that of Louis XVI.; it was that of the Incroyables of the irectory. He had thought himself young up to that period and had followed the ashions. His coat was of light-weight cloth with voluminous revers, a long wallow-tail and large steel buttons. With this he wore knee-breeches and buckle hoes. He always thrust his hands into his fobs. He said authoritatively: “The rench Revolution is a heap of blackguards.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.3.head#CHAPTER III—LUC-ESPRIT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.3.1#At the age of sixteen, one evening at the opera, he had had the honor to be tared at through opera-glasses by two beauties at the same time—ripe and elebrated beauties then, and sung by Voltaire, the Camargo and the Sallé. aught between two fires, he had beaten a heroic retreat towards a little ancer, a young girl named Nahenry, who was sixteen like himself, obscure as a at, and with whom he was in love. He abounded in memories. He was accustomed to xclaim: “How pretty she was—that Guimard-Guimardini-Guimardinette, the last ime I saw her at Longchamps, her hair curled in sustained sentiments, with her ome-and-see of turquoises, her gown of the color of persons newly arrived, and er little agitation muff!” He had worn in his young manhood a waistcoat of ain-Londrin, which he was fond of talking about effusively. “I was dressed like Turk of the Levant Levantin,” said he. Madame de Boufflers, having seen him by hance when he was twenty, had described him as “a charming fool.” He was orrified by all the names which he saw in politics and in power, regarding them s vulgar and bourgeois. He read the journals, the _newspapers, the gazettes_ as e said, stifling outbursts of laughter the while. “Oh!” he said, “what people hese are! Corbière! Humann! Casimir Périer! There’s a minister for you! I can magine this in a journal: ‘M. Gillenorman, minister!’ that would be a farce. ell! They are so stupid that it would pass”; he merrily called everything by ts name, whether decent or indecent, and did not restrain himself in the least efore ladies. He uttered coarse speeches, obscenities, and filth with a certain ranquillity and lack of astonishment which was elegant. It was in keeping with he unceremoniousness of his century. It is to be noted that the age of eriphrase in verse was the age of crudities in prose. His god-father had redicted that he would turn out a man of genius, and had bestowed on him these wo significant names: Luc-Esprit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.4.head#CHAPTER IV—A CENTENARIAN ASPIRANT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.4.1#He had taken prizes in his boyhood at the College of Moulins, where he was orn, and he had been crowned by the hand of the Duc de Nivernais, whom he alled the Duc de Nevers. Neither the Convention, nor the death of Louis XVI., or the Napoleon, nor the return of the Bourbons, nor anything else had been ble to efface the memory of this crowning. _The Duc de Nevers_ was, in his yes, the great figure of the century. “What a charming grand seigneur,” he aid, “and what a fine air he had with his blue ribbon!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.4.2#In the eyes of M. Gillenormand, Catherine the Second had made reparation or the crime of the partition of Poland by purchasing, for three thousand oubles, the secret of the elixir of gold, from Bestucheff. He grew animated on his subject: “The elixir of gold,” he exclaimed, “the yellow dye of Bestucheff, eneral Lamotte’s drops, in the eighteenth century,—this was the great remedy or the catastrophes of love, the panacea against Venus, at one louis the alf-ounce phial. Louis XV. sent two hundred phials of it to the Pope.” He would ave been greatly irritated and thrown off his balance, had any one told him hat the elixir of gold is nothing but the perchloride of iron. M. Gillenormand dored the Bourbons, and had a horror of 1789; he was forever narrating in what anner he had saved himself during the Terror, and how he had been obliged to isplay a vast deal of gayety and cleverness in order to escape having his head ut off. If any young man ventured to pronounce an eulogium on the Republic in is presence, he turned purple and grew so angry that he was on the point of wooning. He sometimes alluded to his ninety years, and said, “I hope that I hall not see ninety-three twice.” On these occasions, he hinted to people that e meant to live to be a hundred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.5.head#CHAPTER V—BASQUE AND NICOLETTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.5.1#He had theories. Here is one of them: “When a man is passionately fond of omen, and when he has himself a wife for whom he cares but little, who is omely, cross, legitimate, with plenty of rights, perched on the code, and ealous at need, there is but one way of extricating himself from the quandry nd of procuring peace, and that is to let his wife control the purse-strings. his abdication sets him free. Then his wife busies herself, grows passionately ond of handling coin, gets her fingers covered with verdigris in the process, ndertakes the education of half-share tenants and the training of farmers, onvokes lawyers, presides over notaries, harangues scriveners, visits limbs of he law, follows lawsuits, draws up leases, dictates contracts, feels herself he sovereign, sells, buys, regulates, promises and compromises, binds fast and nnuls, yields, concedes and retrocedes, arranges, disarranges, hoards, avishes; she commits follies, a supreme and personal delight, and that consoles er. While her husband disdains her, she has the satisfaction of ruining her usband.” This theory M. Gillenormand had himself applied, and it had become his istory. His wife—the second one—had administered his fortune in such a manner hat, one fine day, when M. Gillenormand found himself a widower, there remained o him just sufficient to live on, by sinking nearly the whole of it in an nnuity of fifteen thousand francs, three-quarters of which would expire with im. He had not hesitated on this point, not being anxious to leave a property ehind him. Besides, he had noticed that patrimonies are subject to adventures, nd, for instance, become _national property_; he had been present at the vatars of consolidated three per cents, and he had no great faith in the Great ook of the Public Debt. “All that’s the Rue Quincampois!” he said. His house in he Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire belonged to him, as we have already stated. He ad two servants, “a male and a female.” When a servant entered his stablishment, M. Gillenormand re-baptized him. He bestowed on the men the name f their province: Nîmois, Comtois, Poitevin, Picard. His last valet was a big, oundered, short-winded fellow of fifty-five, who was incapable of running wenty paces; but, as he had been born at Bayonne, M. Gillenormand called him Basque_. All the female servants in his house were called Nicolette (even the agnon, of whom we shall hear more farther on). One day, a haughty cook, a ordon bleu, of the lofty race of porters, presented herself. “How much wages do ou want a month?” asked M. Gillenormand. “Thirty francs.” “What is your name?” Olympie.” “You shall have fifty francs, and you shall be called Nicolette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.6.head#CHAPTER VI—IN WHICH MAGNON AND HER TWO CHILDREN ARE SEEN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.6.1#With M. Gillenormand, sorrow was converted into wrath; he was furious at eing in despair. He had all sorts of prejudices and took all sorts of iberties. One of the facts of which his exterior relief and his internal atisfaction was composed, was, as we have just hinted, that he had remained a risk spark, and that he passed energetically for such. This he called having royal renown.” This royal renown sometimes drew down upon him singular indfalls. One day, there was brought to him in a basket, as though it had been basket of oysters, a stout, newly born boy, who was yelling like the deuce, nd duly wrapped in swaddling-clothes, which a servant-maid, dismissed six onths previously, attributed to him. M. Gillenormand had, at that time, fully ompleted his eighty-fourth year. Indignation and uproar in the establishment. nd whom did that bold hussy think she could persuade to believe that? What udacity! What an abominable calumny! M. Gillenormand himself was not at all nraged. He gazed at the brat with the amiable smile of a good man who is lattered by the calumny, and said in an aside: “Well, what now? What’s the atter? You are finely taken aback, and really, you are excessively ignorant. M. e Duc d’Angoulême, the bastard of his Majesty Charles IX., married a silly jade f fifteen when he was eighty-five; M. Virginal, Marquis d’Alluye, brother to he Cardinal de Sourdis, Archbishop of Bordeaux, had, at the age of ighty-three, by the maid of Madame la Présidente Jacquin, a son, a real child f love, who became a Chevalier of Malta and a counsellor of state; one of the reat men of this century, the Abbé Tabaraud, is the son of a man of ighty-seven. There is nothing out of the ordinary in these things. And then, he Bible! Upon that I declare that this little gentleman is none of mine. Let im be taken care of. It is not his fault.” This manner of procedure was ood-tempered. The woman, whose name was Magnon, sent him another parcel in the ollowing year. It was a boy again. Thereupon, M. Gillenormand capitulated. He ent the two brats back to their mother, promising to pay eighty francs a month or their maintenance, on the condition that the said mother would not do so any ore. He added: “I insist upon it that the mother shall treat them well. I shall o to see them from time to time.” And this he did. He had had a brother who was priest, and who had been rector of the Academy of Poitiers for three and hirty years, and had died at seventy-nine. “I lost him young,” said he. This rother, of whom but little memory remains, was a peaceable miser, who, being a riest, thought himself bound to bestow alms on the poor whom he met, but he ever gave them anything except bad or demonetized sous, thereby discovering a eans of going to hell by way of paradise. As for M. Gillenormand the elder, he ever haggled over his alms-giving, but gave gladly and nobly. He was kindly, brupt, charitable, and if he had been rich, his turn of mind would have been agnificent. He desired that all which concerned him should be done in a grand anner, even his rogueries. One day, having been cheated by a business man in a atter of inheritance, in a gross and apparent manner, he uttered this solemn xclamation: “That was indecently done! I am really ashamed of this pilfering. verything has degenerated in this century, even the rascals. Morbleu! this is ot the way to rob a man of my standing. I am robbed as though in a forest, but adly robbed. _Silvæ sint consule dignæ! _” He had had two wives, as we have lready mentioned; by the first he had had a daughter, who had remained nmarried, and by the second another daughter, who had died at about the age of hirty, who had wedded, through love, or chance, or otherwise, a soldier of ortune who had served in the armies of the Republic and of the Empire, who had on the cross at Austerlitz and had been made colonel at Waterloo. _“He is the isgrace of my family,” _ said the old bourgeois. He took an immense amount of nuff, and had a particularly graceful manner of plucking at his lace ruffle ith the back of one hand. He believed very little in God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.7.head#CHAPTER VII—RULE: RECEIVE NO ONE EXCEPT IN THE EVENING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.7.1#Such was M. Luc-Esprit Gillenormand, who had not lost his hair,—which was ray rather than white,—and which was always dressed in “dog’s ears.” To sum up, e was venerable in spite of all this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.7.2#He had something of the eighteenth century about him; frivolous and reat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.7.3#In 1814 and during the early years of the Restoration, M. Gillenormand, who as still young,—he was only seventy-four,—lived in the Faubourg Saint Germain, ue Servandoni, near Saint-Sulpice. He had only retired to the Marais when he uitted society, long after attaining the age of eighty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.7.4#And, on abandoning society, he had immured himself in his habits. The rincipal one, and that which was invariable, was to keep his door absolutely losed during the day, and never to receive any one whatever except in the vening. He dined at five o’clock, and after that his door was open. That had een the fashion of his century, and he would not swerve from it. “The day is ulgar,” said he, “and deserves only a closed shutter. Fashionable people only ight up their minds when the zenith lights up its stars.” And he barricaded imself against every one, even had it been the king himself. This was the ntiquated elegance of his day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—TWO DO NOT MAKE A PAIR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.1#We have just spoken of M. Gillenormand’s two daughters. They had come into he world ten years apart. In their youth they had borne very little resemblance o each other, either in character or countenance, and had also been as little ike sisters to each other as possible. The youngest had a charming soul, which urned towards all that belongs to the light, was occupied with flowers, with erses, with music, which fluttered away into glorious space, enthusiastic, thereal, and was wedded from her very youth, in ideal, to a vague and heroic igure. The elder had also her chimera; she espied in the azure some very ealthy purveyor, a contractor, a splendidly stupid husband, a million made man, r even a prefect; the receptions of the Prefecture, an usher in the antechamber ith a chain on his neck, official balls, the harangues of the town-hall, to be Madame la Préfète,”—all this had created a whirlwind in her imagination. Thus he two sisters strayed, each in her own dream, at the epoch when they were oung girls. Both had wings, the one like an angel, the other like a goose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.2#No ambition is ever fully realized, here below at least. No paradise ecomes terrestrial in our day. The younger wedded the man of her dreams, but he died. The elder did not marry at all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.3#At the moment when she makes her entrance into this history which we are elating, she was an antique virtue, an incombustible prude, with one of the harpest noses, and one of the most obtuse minds that it is possible to see. A haracteristic detail; outside of her immediate family, no one had ever known er first name. She was called _Mademoiselle Gillenormand, the elder_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.4#In the matter of _cant_, Mademoiselle Gillenormand could have given points o a miss. Her modesty was carried to the other extreme of blackness. She herished a frightful memory of her life; one day, a man had beheld her arter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.5#Age had only served to accentuate this pitiless modesty. Her guimpe was ever sufficiently opaque, and never ascended sufficiently high. She multiplied lasps and pins where no one would have dreamed of looking. The peculiarity of rudery is to place all the more sentinels in proportion as the fortress is the ess menaced.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.6#Nevertheless, let him who can explain these antique mysteries of innocence, he allowed an officer of the Lancers, her grand nephew, named Théodule, to mbrace her without displeasure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.7#In spite of this favored Lancer, the label: _Prude_, under which we have lassed her, suited her to absolute perfection. Mademoiselle Gillenormand was a ort of twilight soul. Prudery is a demi-virtue and a demi-vice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.8#To prudery she added bigotry, a well-assorted lining. She belonged to the ociety of the Virgin, wore a white veil on certain festivals, mumbled special risons, revered “the holy blood,” venerated “the sacred heart,” remained for ours in contemplation before a rococo-jesuit altar in a chapel which was naccessible to the rank and file of the faithful, and there allowed her soul to oar among little clouds of marble, and through great rays of gilded wood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.9#She had a chapel friend, an ancient virgin like herself, named Mademoiselle aubois, who was a positive blockhead, and beside whom Mademoiselle Gillenormand ad the pleasure of being an eagle. Beyond the Agnus Dei and Ave Maria, ademoiselle Vaubois had no knowledge of anything except of the different ways f making preserves. Mademoiselle Vaubois, perfect in her style, was the ermine f stupidity without a single spot of intelligence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.10#Let us say it plainly, Mademoiselle Gillenormand had gained rather than ost as she grew older. This is the case with passive natures. She had never een malicious, which is relative kindness; and then, years wear away the ngles, and the softening which comes with time had come to her. She was elancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did not herself know the secret. here breathed from her whole person the stupor of a life that was finished, and hich had never had a beginning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.11#She kept house for her father. M. Gillenormand had his daughter near him, s we have seen that Monseigneur Bienvenu had his sister with him. These ouseholds comprised of an old man and an old spinster are not rare, and always ave the touching aspect of two weaknesses leaning on each other for upport.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.12#There was also in this house, between this elderly spinster and this old an, a child, a little boy, who was always trembling and mute in the presence of . Gillenormand. M. Gillenormand never addressed this child except in a severe oice, and sometimes, with uplifted cane: “Here, sir! rascal, scoundrel, come ere!—Answer me, you scamp! Just let me see you, you good-for-nothing!” etc., tc. He idolized him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.2.8.13#This was his grandson. We shall meet with this child again later on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.head#BOOK THIRD—THE GRANDFATHER AND THE GRANDSON
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.head#CHAPTER I—AN ANCIENT SALON
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.1#When M. Gillenormand lived in the Rue Servandoni, he had frequented many ery good and very aristocratic salons. Although a bourgeois, M. Gillenormand as received in society. As he had a double measure of wit, in the first place, hat which was born with him, and secondly, that which was attributed to him, he as even sought out and made much of. He never went anywhere except on condition f being the chief person there. There are people who will have influence at any rice, and who will have other people busy themselves over them; when they annot be oracles, they turn wags. M. Gillenormand was not of this nature; his omination in the Royalist salons which he frequented cost his self-respect othing. He was an oracle everywhere. It had happened to him to hold his own gainst M. de Bonald, and even against M. Bengy-Puy-Vallée.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.2#About 1817, he invariably passed two afternoons a week in a house in his wn neighborhood, in the Rue Férou, with Madame la Baronne de T., a worthy and espectable person, whose husband had been Ambassador of France to Berlin under ouis XVI. Baron de T., who, during his lifetime, had gone very passionately nto ecstasies and magnetic visions, had died bankrupt, during the emigration, eaving, as his entire fortune, some very curious Memoirs about Mesmer and his ub, in ten manuscript volumes, bound in red morocco and gilded on the edges. adame de T. had not published the memoirs, out of pride, and maintained herself n a meagre income which had survived no one knew how.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.3#Madame de T. lived far from the Court; “a very mixed society,” as she said, n a noble isolation, proud and poor. A few friends assembled twice a week about er widowed hearth, and these constituted a purely Royalist salon. They sipped ea there, and uttered groans or cries of horror at the century, the charter, he Bonapartists, the prostitution of the blue ribbon, or the Jacobinism of ouis XVIII., according as the wind veered towards elegy or dithyrambs; and they poke in low tones of the hopes which were presented by Monsieur, afterwards harles X.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.4#The songs of the fishwomen, in which Napoleon was called _Nicolas_, were eceived there with transports of joy. Duchesses, the most delicate and charming omen in the world, went into ecstasies over couplets like the following, ddressed to “the federates”:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.5#Refoncez dans vos culottes Le bout d’ chemis’ qui vous pend. Qu’on n’ dis’ as qu’ les patriotes Ont arboré l’ drapeau blanc?20
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.6#There they amused themselves with puns which were considered terrible, with nnocent plays upon words which they supposed to be venomous, with quatrains, ith distiches even; thus, upon the Dessolles ministry, a moderate cabinet, of hich MM. Decazes and Deserre were members:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.7#Pour raffermir le trône ébranlé sur sa base, Il faut changer de sol, et de erre et de case.21
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.8#Or they drew up a list of the chamber of peers, “an abominably Jacobin hamber,” and from this list they combined alliances of names, in such a manner s to form, for example, phrases like the following: _Damas. Sabran. ouvion-Saint-Cyr_.—All this was done merrily. In that society, they parodied he Revolution. They used I know not what desires to give point to the same rath in inverse sense. They sang their little _Ça ira: _—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.9#Ah! ça ira ça ira ça ira! Les Bonapartistes à la lanterne!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.10#Songs are like the guillotine; they chop away indifferently, to-day this ead, to-morrow that. It is only a variation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.11#In the Fualdès affair, which belongs to this epoch, 1816, they took part or Bastide and Jausion, because Fualdès was “a Buonapartist.” They designated he liberals as f_riends and brothers_; this constituted the most deadly nsult.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.12#Like certain church towers, Madame de T.‘s salon had two cocks. One of hem was M. Gillenormand, the other was Comte de Lamothe-Valois, of whom it was hispered about, with a sort of respect: “Do you know? That is the Lamothe of he affair of the necklace.” These singular amnesties do occur in parties.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.13#Let us add the following: in the bourgeoisie, honored situations decay hrough too easy relations; one must beware whom one admits; in the same way hat there is a loss of caloric in the vicinity of those who are cold, there is diminution of consideration in the approach of despised persons. The ancient ociety of the upper classes held themselves above this law, as above every ther. Marigny, the brother of the Pompadour, had his entry with M. le Prince de oubise. In spite of? No, because. Du Barry, the god-father of the Vaubernier, as very welcome at the house of M. le Maréchal de Richelieu. This society is lympus. Mercury and the Prince de Guémenée are at home there. A thief is dmitted there, provided he be a god.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.14#The Comte de Lamothe, who, in 1815, was an old man seventy-five years of ge, had nothing remarkable about him except his silent and sententious air, his old and angular face, his perfectly polished manners, his coat buttoned up to is cravat, and his long legs always crossed in long, flabby trousers of the hue f burnt sienna. His face was the same color as his trousers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.15#This M. de Lamothe was “held in consideration” in this salon on account of is “celebrity” and, strange to say, though true, because of his name of alois.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.16#As for M. Gillenormand, his consideration was of absolutely first-rate uality. He had, in spite of his levity, and without its interfering in any way ith his dignity, a certain manner about him which was imposing, dignified, onest, and lofty, in a bourgeois fashion; and his great age added to it. One is ot a century with impunity. The years finally produce around a head a venerable ishevelment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.17#In addition to this, he said things which had the genuine sparkle of the ld rock. Thus, when the King of Prussia, after having restored Louis XVIII., ame to pay the latter a visit under the name of the Count de Ruppin, he was eceived by the descendant of Louis XIV. somewhat as though he had been the arquis de Brandebourg, and with the most delicate impertinence. M. Gillenormand pproved: “All kings who are not the King of France,” said he, “are provincial ings.” One day, the following question was put and the following answer eturned in his presence: “To what was the editor of the _Courrier Français_ ondemned?” “To be suspended.” “_Sus_ is superfluous,” observed M. illenormand.22 Remarks of this nature found a situation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.18#At the Te Deum on the anniversary of the return of the Bourbons, he said, n seeing M. de Talleyrand pass by: “There goes his Excellency the Evil ne.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.19#M. Gillenormand was always accompanied by his daughter, that tall ademoiselle, who was over forty and looked fifty, and by a handsome little boy f seven years, white, rosy, fresh, with happy and trusting eyes, who never ppeared in that salon without hearing voices murmur around him: “How handsome e is! What a pity! Poor child!” This child was the one of whom we dropped a ord a while ago. He was called “poor child,” because he had for a father “a rigand of the Loire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.1.20#This brigand of the Loire was M. Gillenormand’s son-in-law, who has lready been mentioned, and whom M. Gillenormand called “the disgrace of his amily.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.head#CHAPTER II—ONE OF THE RED SPECTRES OF THAT EPOCH
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.1#Any one who had chanced to pass through the little town of Vernon at this poch, and who had happened to walk across that fine monumental bridge, which ill soon be succeeded, let us hope, by some hideous iron cable bridge, might ave observed, had he dropped his eyes over the parapet, a man about fifty years f age wearing a leather cap, and trousers and a waistcoat of coarse gray cloth, o which something yellow which had been a red ribbon, was sewn, shod with ooden sabots, tanned by the sun, his face nearly black and his hair nearly hite, a large scar on his forehead which ran down upon his cheek, bowed, bent, rematurely aged, who walked nearly every day, hoe and sickle in hand, in one of hose compartments surrounded by walls which abut on the bridge, and border the eft bank of the Seine like a chain of terraces, charming enclosures full of lowers of which one could say, were they much larger: “these are gardens,” and ere they a little smaller: “these are bouquets.” All these enclosures abut upon he river at one end, and on a house at the other. The man in the waistcoat and he wooden shoes of whom we have just spoken, inhabited the smallest of these nclosures and the most humble of these houses about 1817. He lived there alone nd solitary, silently and poorly, with a woman who was neither young nor old, either homely nor pretty, neither a peasant nor a bourgeoise, who served him. he plot of earth which he called his garden was celebrated in the town for the eauty of the flowers which he cultivated there. These flowers were his ccupation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.2#By dint of labor, of perseverance, of attention, and of buckets of water, e had succeeded in creating after the Creator, and he had invented certain ulips and certain dahlias which seemed to have been forgotten by nature. He was ngenious; he had forestalled Soulange Bodin in the formation of little clumps f earth of heath mould, for the cultivation of rare and precious shrubs from merica and China. He was in his alleys from the break of day, in summer, lanting, cutting, hoeing, watering, walking amid his flowers with an air of indness, sadness, and sweetness, sometimes standing motionless and thoughtful or hours, listening to the song of a bird in the trees, the babble of a child n a house, or with his eyes fixed on a drop of dew at the tip of a spear of rass, of which the sun made a carbuncle. His table was very plain, and he drank ore milk than wine. A child could make him give way, and his servant scolded im. He was so timid that he seemed shy, he rarely went out, and he saw no one ut the poor people who tapped at his pane and his curé, the Abbé Mabeuf, a good ld man. Nevertheless, if the inhabitants of the town, or strangers, or any hance comers, curious to see his tulips, rang at his little cottage, he opened is door with a smile. He was the “brigand of the Loire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.3#Any one who had, at the same time, read military memoirs, biographies, the Moniteur_, and the bulletins of the grand army, would have been struck by a ame which occurs there with tolerable frequency, the name of Georges Pontmercy. hen very young, this Georges Pontmercy had been a soldier in Saintonge’s egiment. The revolution broke out. Saintonge’s regiment formed a part of the rmy of the Rhine; for the old regiments of the monarchy preserved their names f provinces even after the fall of the monarchy, and were only divided into rigades in 1794. Pontmercy fought at Spire, at Worms, at Neustadt, at Turkheim, t Alzey, at Mayence, where he was one of the two hundred who formed Houchard’s earguard. It was the twelfth to hold its ground against the corps of the Prince f Hesse, behind the old rampart of Andernach, and only rejoined the main body f the army when the enemy’s cannon had opened a breach from the cord of the arapet to the foot of the glacis. He was under Kléber at Marchiennes and at the attle of Mont-Palissel, where a ball from a biscaïen broke his arm. Then he assed to the frontier of Italy, and was one of the thirty grenadiers who efended the Col de Tende with Joubert. Joubert was appointed its djutant-general, and Pontmercy sub-lieutenant. Pontmercy was by Berthier’s side n the midst of the grape-shot of that day at Lodi which caused Bonaparte to ay: “Berthier has been cannoneer, cavalier, and grenadier.” He beheld his old eneral, Joubert, fall at Novi, at the moment when, with uplifted sabre, he was houting: “Forward!” Having been embarked with his company in the exigencies of he campaign, on board a pinnace which was proceeding from Genoa to some obscure ort on the coast, he fell into a wasps’-nest of seven or eight English vessels. he Genoese commander wanted to throw his cannon into the sea, to hide the oldiers between decks, and to slip along in the dark as a merchant vessel. ontmercy had the colors hoisted to the peak, and sailed proudly past under the uns of the British frigates. Twenty leagues further on, his audacity having ncreased, he attacked with his pinnace, and captured a large English transport hich was carrying troops to Sicily, and which was so loaded down with men and orses that the vessel was sunk to the level of the sea. In 1805 he was in that alher division which took Günzberg from the Archduke Ferdinand. At Weltingen he eceived into his arms, beneath a storm of bullets, Colonel Maupetit, mortally ounded at the head of the 9th Dragoons. He distinguished himself at Austerlitz n that admirable march in echelons effected under the enemy’s fire. When the avalry of the Imperial Russian Guard crushed a battalion of the 4th of the ine, Pontmercy was one of those who took their revenge and overthrew the Guard. he Emperor gave him the cross. Pontmercy saw Wurmser at Mantua, Mélas, and lexandria, Mack at Ulm, made prisoners in succession. He formed a part of the ighth corps of the grand army which Mortier commanded, and which captured amburg. Then he was transferred to the 55th of the line, which was the old egiment of Flanders. At Eylau he was in the cemetery where, for the space of wo hours, the heroic Captain Louis Hugo, the uncle of the author of this book, ustained alone with his company of eighty-three men every effort of the hostile rmy. Pontmercy was one of the three who emerged alive from that cemetery. He as at Friedland. Then he saw Moscow. Then La Bérésina, then Lutzen, Bautzen, resden, Wachau, Leipzig, and the defiles of Gelenhausen; then Montmirail, hâteau-Thierry, Craon, the banks of the Marne, the banks of the Aisne, and the edoubtable position of Laon. At Arnay-Le-Duc, being then a captain, he put ten ossacks to the sword, and saved, not his general, but his corporal. He was well lashed up on this occasion, and twenty-seven splinters were extracted from his eft arm alone. Eight days before the capitulation of Paris he had just xchanged with a comrade and entered the cavalry. He had what was called under he old regime, _the double hand_, that is to say, an equal aptitude for andling the sabre or the musket as a soldier, or a squadron or a battalion as n officer. It is from this aptitude, perfected by a military education, which ertain special branches of the service arise, the dragoons, for example, who re both cavalry-men and infantry at one and the same time. He accompanied apoleon to the Island of Elba. At Waterloo, he was chief of a squadron of uirassiers, in Dubois’ brigade. It was he who captured the standard of the unenburg battalion. He came and cast the flag at the Emperor’s feet. He was overed with blood. While tearing down the banner he had received a sword-cut cross his face. The Emperor, greatly pleased, shouted to him: “You are a olonel, you are a baron, you are an officer of the Legion of Honor!” Pontmercy eplied: “Sire, I thank you for my widow.” An hour later, he fell in the ravine f Ohain. Now, who was this Georges Pontmercy? He was this same “brigand of the oire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.4#We have already seen something of his history. After Waterloo, Pontmercy, ho had been pulled out of the hollow road of Ohain, as it will be remembered, ad succeeded in joining the army, and had dragged himself from ambulance to mbulance as far as the cantonments of the Loire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.5#The Restoration had placed him on half-pay, then had sent him into esidence, that is to say, under surveillance, at Vernon. King Louis XVIII., egarding all that which had taken place during the Hundred Days as not having ccurred at all, did not recognize his quality as an officer of the Legion of onor, nor his grade of colonel, nor his title of baron. He, on his side, eglected no occasion of signing himself “Colonel Baron Pontmercy.” He had only n old blue coat, and he never went out without fastening to it his rosette as n officer of the Legion of Honor. The Attorney for the Crown had him warned hat the authorities would prosecute him for “illegal” wearing of this ecoration. When this notice was conveyed to him through an officious ntermediary, Pontmercy retorted with a bitter smile: “I do not know whether I o longer understand French, or whether you no longer speak it; but the fact is hat I do not understand.” Then he went out for eight successive days with his osette. They dared not interfere with him. Two or three times the Minister of ar and the general in command of the department wrote to him with the following ddress: _“A Monsieur le Commandant Pontmercy.” _ He sent back the letters with he seals unbroken. At the same moment, Napoleon at Saint Helena was treating in he same fashion the missives of Sir Hudson Lowe addressed to _General onaparte_. Pontmercy had ended, may we be pardoned the expression, by having in is mouth the same saliva as his Emperor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.6#In the same way, there were at Rome Carthaginian prisoners who refused to alute Flaminius, and who had a little of Hannibal’s spirit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.7#One day he encountered the district-attorney in one of the streets of ernon, stepped up to him, and said: “Mr. Crown Attorney, am I permitted to wear y scar?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.8#He had nothing save his meagre half-pay as chief of squadron. He had hired he smallest house which he could find at Vernon. He lived there alone, we have ust seen how. Under the Empire, between two wars, he had found time to marry ademoiselle Gillenormand. The old bourgeois, thoroughly indignant at bottom, ad given his consent with a sigh, saying: “The greatest families are forced nto it.” In 1815, Madame Pontmercy, an admirable woman in every sense, by the ay, lofty in sentiment and rare, and worthy of her husband, died, leaving a hild. This child had been the colonel’s joy in his solitude; but the randfather had imperatively claimed his grandson, declaring that if the child ere not given to him he would disinherit him. The father had yielded in the ittle one’s interest, and had transferred his love to flowers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.9#Moreover, he had renounced everything, and neither stirred up mischief nor onspired. He shared his thoughts between the innocent things which he was then oing and the great things which he had done. He passed his time in expecting a ink or in recalling Austerlitz.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.10#M. Gillenormand kept up no relations with his son-in-law. The colonel was a bandit” to him. M. Gillenormand never mentioned the colonel, except when he ccasionally made mocking allusions to “his Baronship.” It had been expressly greed that Pontmercy should never attempt to see his son nor to speak to him, nder penalty of having the latter handed over to him disowned and disinherited. or the Gillenormands, Pontmercy was a man afflicted with the plague. They ntended to bring up the child in their own way. Perhaps the colonel was wrong o accept these conditions, but he submitted to them, thinking that he was doing ight and sacrificing no one but himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.11#The inheritance of Father Gillenormand did not amount to much; but the nheritance of Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder was considerable. This aunt, ho had remained unmarried, was very rich on the maternal side, and her sister’s on was her natural heir. The boy, whose name was Marius, knew that he had a ather, but nothing more. No one opened his mouth to him about it. Nevertheless, n the society into which his grandfather took him, whispers, innuendoes, and inks, had eventually enlightened the little boy’s mind; he had finally nderstood something of the case, and as he naturally took in the ideas and pinions which were, so to speak, the air he breathed, by a sort of infiltration nd slow penetration, he gradually came to think of his father only with shame nd with a pain at his heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.12#While he was growing up in this fashion, the colonel slipped away every wo or three months, came to Paris on the sly, like a criminal breaking his ban, nd went and posted himself at Saint-Sulpice, at the hour when Aunt Gillenormand ed Marius to the mass. There, trembling lest the aunt should turn round, oncealed behind a pillar, motionless, not daring to breathe, he gazed at his hild. The scarred veteran was afraid of that old spinster.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.13#From this had arisen his connection with the curé of Vernon, M. l’Abbé abeuf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.14#That worthy priest was the brother of a warden of Saint-Sulpice, who had ften observed this man gazing at his child, and the scar on his cheek, and the arge tears in his eyes. That man, who had so manly an air, yet who was weeping ike a woman, had struck the warden. That face had clung to his mind. One day, aving gone to Vernon to see his brother, he had encountered Colonel Pontmercy n the bridge, and had recognized the man of Saint-Sulpice. The warden had entioned the circumstance to the curé, and both had paid the colonel a visit, n some pretext or other. This visit led to others. The colonel, who had been xtremely reserved at first, ended by opening his heart, and the curé and the arden finally came to know the whole history, and how Pontmercy was sacrificing is happiness to his child’s future. This caused the curé to regard him with eneration and tenderness, and the colonel, on his side, became fond of the uré. And moreover, when both are sincere and good, no men so penetrate each ther, and so amalgamate with each other, as an old priest and an old soldier. t bottom, the man is the same. The one has devoted his life to his country here elow, the other to his country on high; that is the only difference.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.2.15#Twice a year, on the first of January and on St. George’s day, Marius rote duty letters to his father, which were dictated by his aunt, and which one ould have pronounced to be copied from some formula; this was all that M. illenormand tolerated; and the father answered them with very tender letters hich the grandfather thrust into his pocket unread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.head#CHAPTER III—REQUIESCANT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.1#Madame de T.‘s salon was all that Marius Pontmercy knew of the world. It as the only opening through which he could get a glimpse of life. This opening as sombre, and more cold than warmth, more night than day, came to him through his skylight. This child, who had been all joy and light on entering this trange world, soon became melancholy, and, what is still more contrary to his ge, grave. Surrounded by all those singular and imposing personages, he gazed bout him with serious amazement. Everything conspired to increase this stonishment in him. There were in Madame de T.‘s salon some very noble ladies amed Mathan, Noé, Lévis,—which was pronounced Lévi,—Cambis, pronounced Cambyse. hese antique visages and these Biblical names mingled in the child’s mind with he Old Testament which he was learning by heart, and when they were all there, eated in a circle around a dying fire, sparely lighted by a lamp shaded with reen, with their severe profiles, their gray or white hair, their long gowns of nother age, whose lugubrious colors could not be distinguished, dropping, at are intervals, words which were both majestic and severe, little Marius stared t them with frightened eyes, in the conviction that he beheld not women, but atriarchs and magi, not real beings, but phantoms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.2#With these phantoms, priests were sometimes mingled, frequenters of this ncient salon, and some gentlemen; the Marquis de Sass****, private secretary to adame de Berry, the Vicomte de Val***, who published, under the pseudonym of Charles-Antoine_, monorhymed odes, the Prince de Beauff*******, who, though ery young, had a gray head and a pretty and witty wife, whose very low-necked oilettes of scarlet velvet with gold torsades alarmed these shadows, the arquis de C***** d’E******, the man in all France who best understood proportioned politeness,” the Comte d’Am*****, the kindly man with the amiable hin, and the Chévalier de Port-de-Guy, a pillar of the library of the Louvre, alled the King’s cabinet, M. de Port-de-Guy, bald, and rather aged than old, as wont to relate that in 1793, at the age of sixteen, he had been put in the alleys as refractory and chained with an octogenarian, the Bishop of Mirepoix, lso refractory, but as a priest, while he was so in the capacity of a soldier. his was at Toulon. Their business was to go at night and gather up on the caffold the heads and bodies of the persons who had been guillotined during the ay; they bore away on their backs these dripping corpses, and their red alley-slave blouses had a clot of blood at the back of the neck, which was dry n the morning and wet at night. These tragic tales abounded in Madame de T.‘s alon, and by dint of cursing Marat, they applauded Trestaillon. Some deputies f the undiscoverable variety played their whist there; M. Thibord du Chalard, . Lemarchant de Gomicourt, and the celebrated scoffer of the right, M. ornet-Dincourt. The bailiff de Ferrette, with his short breeches and his thin egs, sometimes traversed this salon on his way to M. de Talleyrand. He had been . le Comte d’Artois’ companion in pleasures and unlike Aristotle crouching nder Campaspe, he had made the Guimard crawl on all fours, and in that way he ad exhibited to the ages a philosopher avenged by a bailiff. As for the riests, there was the Abbé Halma, the same to whom M. Larose, his collaborator n _la Foudre_, said: “Bah! Who is there who is not fifty years old? a few reenhorns perhaps?” The Abbé Letourneur, preacher to the King, the Abbé rayssinous, who was not, as yet, either count, or bishop, or minister, or peer, nd who wore an old cassock whose buttons were missing, and the Abbé Keravenant, uré of Saint-Germain-des-Prés; also the Pope’s Nuncio, then Monsignor Macchi, rchbishop of Nisibi, later on Cardinal, remarkable for his long, pensive nose, nd another Monsignor, entitled thus: Abbate Palmieri, domestic prelate, one of he seven participant prothonotaries of the Holy See, Canon of the illustrious iberian basilica, Advocate of the saints, _Postulatore dei Santi_, which refers o matters of canonization, and signifies very nearly: Master of Requests of the ection of Paradise. Lastly, two cardinals, M. de la Luzerne, and M. de Cl****** *******. The Cardinal of Luzerne was a writer and was destined to have, a few ears later, the honor of signing in the _Conservateur_ articles side by side ith Chateaubriand; M. de Cl****** T******* was Archbishop of Toul****, and ften made trips to Paris, to his nephew, the Marquis de T*******, who was inister of Marine and War. The Cardinal of Cl****** T******* was a merry little an, who displayed his red stockings beneath his tucked-up cassock; his pecialty was a hatred of the Encyclopædia, and his desperate play at billiards, nd persons who, at that epoch, passed through the Rue M***** on summer venings, where the hotel de Cl****** T******* then stood, halted to listen to he shock of the balls and the piercing voice of the Cardinal shouting to his onclavist, Monseigneur Cotiret, Bishop _in partibus_ of Caryste: “Mark, Abbé, I ake a cannon.” The Cardinal de Cl****** T******* had been brought to Madame de .‘s by his most intimate friend, M. de Roquelaure, former Bishop of Senlis, and ne of the Forty. M. de Roquelaure was notable for his lofty figure and his ssiduity at the Academy; through the glass door of the neighboring hall of the ibrary where the French Academy then held its meetings, the curious could, on very Tuesday, contemplate the Ex-Bishop of Senlis, usually standing erect, reshly powdered, in violet hose, with his back turned to the door, apparently or the purpose of allowing a better view of his little collar. All these cclesiastics, though for the most part as much courtiers as churchmen, added to he gravity of the T. salon, whose seigniorial aspect was accentuated by five eers of France, the Marquis de Vib****, the Marquis de Tal***, the Marquis de erb*******, the Vicomte Damb***, and the Duc de Val********. This Duc de al********, although Prince de Mon***, that is to say a reigning prince abroad, ad so high an idea of France and its peerage, that he viewed everything through heir medium. It was he who said: “The Cardinals are the peers of France of ome; the lords are the peers of France of England.” Moreover, as it is ndispensable that the Revolution should be everywhere in this century, this eudal salon was, as we have said, dominated by a bourgeois. M. Gillenormand eigned there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.3#There lay the essence and quintessence of the Parisian white society. There eputations, even Royalist reputations, were held in quarantine. There is always trace of anarchy in renown. Chateaubriand, had he entered there, would have roduced the effect of Père Duchêne. Some of the scoffed-at did, nevertheless, enetrate thither on sufferance. Comte Beug*** was received there, subject to orrection.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.4#The “noble” salons of the present day no longer resemble those salons. The aubourg Saint-Germain reeks of the fagot even now. The Royalists of to-day are emagogues, let us record it to their credit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.5#At Madame de T.‘s the society was superior, taste was exquisite and aughty, under the cover of a great show of politeness. Manners there admitted f all sorts of involuntary refinements which were the old régime itself, buried ut still alive. Some of these habits, especially in the matter of language, eem eccentric. Persons but superficially acquainted with them would have taken or provincial that which was only antique. A woman was called _Madame la énérale. Madame la Colonelle_ was not entirely disused. The charming Madame de éon, in memory, no doubt, of the Duchesses de Longueville and de Chevreuse, referred this appellation to her title of Princesse. The Marquise de Créquy was lso called _Madame la Colonelle_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.6#It was this little high society which invented at the Tuileries the efinement of speaking to the King in private as _the King_, in the third erson, and never as _Your Majesty_, the designation of _Your Majesty_ having een “soiled by the usurper.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.7#Men and deeds were brought to judgment there. They jeered at the age, which eleased them from the necessity of understanding it. They abetted each other in mazement. They communicated to each other that modicum of light which they ossessed. Methuselah bestowed information on Epimenides. The deaf man made the lind man acquainted with the course of things. They declared that the time hich had elapsed since Coblentz had not existed. In the same manner that Louis VIII. was by the grace of God, in the five and twentieth year of his reign, the migrants were, by rights, in the five and twentieth year of their dolescence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.8#All was harmonious; nothing was too much alive; speech hardly amounted to a reath; the newspapers, agreeing with the salons, seemed a papyrus. There were ome young people, but they were rather dead. The liveries in the antechamber ere antiquated. These utterly obsolete personages were served by domestics of he same stamp.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.9#They all had the air of having lived a long time ago, and of obstinately esisting the sepulchre. Nearly the whole dictionary consisted of _Conserver, onservation, Conservateur; to be in good odor_,—that was the point. There are, n fact, aromatics in the opinions of these venerable groups, and their ideas melled of it. It was a mummified society. The masters were embalmed, the ervants were stuffed with straw.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.10#A worthy old marquise, an _emigrée_ and ruined, who had but a solitary aid, continued to say: “My people.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.11#What did they do in Madame de T.‘s salon? They were ultra.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.12#To be ultra; this word, although what it represents may not have isappeared, has no longer any meaning at the present day. Let us explain t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.13#To be ultra is to go beyond. It is to attack the sceptre in the name of he throne, and the mitre in the name of the altar; it is to ill-treat the thing hich one is dragging, it is to kick over the traces; it is to cavil at the agot on the score of the amount of cooking received by heretics; it is to eproach the idol with its small amount of idolatry; it is to insult through xcess of respect; it is to discover that the Pope is not sufficiently papish, hat the King is not sufficiently royal, and that the night has too much light; t is to be discontented with alabaster, with snow, with the swan and the lily n the name of whiteness; it is to be a partisan of things to the point of ecoming their enemy; it is to be so strongly for, as to be against.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.14#The ultra spirit especially characterizes the first phase of the estoration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.15#Nothing in history resembles that quarter of an hour which begins in 1814 nd terminates about 1820, with the advent of M. de Villèle, the practical man f the Right. These six years were an extraordinary moment; at one and the same ime brilliant and gloomy, smiling and sombre, illuminated as by the radiance of awn and entirely covered, at the same time, with the shadows of the great atastrophes which still filled the horizon and were slowly sinking into the ast. There existed in that light and that shadow, a complete little new and old orld, comic and sad, juvenile and senile, which was rubbing its eyes; nothing esembles an awakening like a return; a group which regarded France with ll-temper, and which France regarded with irony; good old owls of marquises by he streetful, who had returned, and of ghosts, the “former” subjects of mazement at everything, brave and noble gentlemen who smiled at being in France ut wept also, delighted to behold their country once more, in despair at not inding their monarchy; the nobility of the Crusades treating the nobility of he Empire, that is to say, the nobility of the sword, with scorn; historic aces who had lost the sense of history; the sons of the companions of harlemagne disdaining the companions of Napoleon. The swords, as we have just emarked, returned the insult; the sword of Fontenoy was laughable and nothing ut a scrap of rusty iron; the sword of Marengo was odious and was only a sabre. ormer days did not recognize Yesterday. People no longer had the feeling for hat was grand. There was some one who called Bonaparte Scapin. This Society no onger exists. Nothing of it, we repeat, exists to-day. When we select from it ome one figure at random, and attempt to make it live again in thought, it eems as strange to us as the world before the Deluge. It is because it, too, as matter of fact, has been engulfed in a deluge. It has disappeared beneath two evolutions. What billows are ideas! How quickly they cover all that it is their ission to destroy and to bury, and how promptly they create frightful ulfs!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.16#Such was the physiognomy of the salons of those distant and candid times hen M. Martainville had more wit than Voltaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.17#These salons had a literature and politics of their own. They believed in iévée. M. Agier laid down the law in them. They commentated M. Colnet, the old ookseller and publicist of the Quay Malaquais. Napoleon was to them thoroughly he Corsican Ogre. Later on the introduction into history of M. le Marquis de onaparte, Lieutenant-General of the King’s armies, was a concession to the pirit of the age.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.18#These salons did not long preserve their purity. Beginning with 1818, octrinarians began to spring up in them, a disturbing shade. Their way was to e Royalists and to excuse themselves for being so. Where the ultras were very roud, the doctrinarians were rather ashamed. They had wit; they had silence; heir political dogma was suitably impregnated with arrogance; they should have ucceeded. They indulged, and usefully too, in excesses in the matter of white eckties and tightly buttoned coats. The mistake or the misfortune of the octrinarian party was to create aged youth. They assumed the poses of wise men. hey dreamed of engrafting a temperate power on the absolute and excessive rinciple. They opposed, and sometimes with rare intelligence, conservative iberalism to the liberalism which demolishes. They were heard to say: “Thanks or Royalism! It has rendered more than one service. It has brought back radition, worship, religion, respect. It is faithful, brave, chivalric, loving, evoted. It has mingled, though with regret, the secular grandeurs of the onarchy with the new grandeurs of the nation. Its mistake is not to understand he Revolution, the Empire, glory, liberty, young ideas, young generations, the ge. But this mistake which it makes with regard to us,—have we not sometimes een guilty of it towards them? The Revolution, whose heirs we are, ought to be ntelligent on all points. To attack Royalism is a misconstruction of iberalism. What an error! And what blindness! Revolutionary France is wanting n respect towards historic France, that is to say, towards its mother, that is o say, towards itself. After the 5th of September, the nobility of the monarchy s treated as the nobility of the Empire was treated after the 5th of July. They ere unjust to the eagle, we are unjust to the fleur-de-lys. It seems that we ust always have something to proscribe! Does it serve any purpose to ungild the rown of Louis XIV., to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV.? We scoff at M. de aublanc for erasing the N’s from the bridge of Jena! What was it that he did? hat are we doing? Bouvines belongs to us as well as Marengo. The fleurs-de-lys re ours as well as the N’s. That is our patrimony. To what purpose shall we iminish it? We must not deny our country in the past any more than in the resent. Why not accept the whole of history? Why not love the whole of rance?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.19#It is thus that doctrinarians criticised and protected Royalism, which was ispleased at criticism and furious at protection.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.20#The ultras marked the first epoch of Royalism, congregation characterized he second. Skill follows ardor. Let us confine ourselves here to this ketch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.21#In the course of this narrative, the author of this book has encountered n his path this curious moment of contemporary history; he has been forced to ast a passing glance upon it, and to trace once more some of the singular eatures of this society which is unknown to-day. But he does it rapidly and ithout any bitter or derisive idea. Souvenirs both respectful and affectionate, or they touch his mother, attach him to this past. Moreover, let us remark, his same petty world had a grandeur of its own. One may smile at it, but one an neither despise nor hate it. It was the France of former days.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.22#Marius Pontmercy pursued some studies, as all children do. When he emerged rom the hands of Aunt Gillenormand, his grandfather confided him to a worthy rofessor of the most purely classic innocence. This young soul which was xpanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.23#Marius went through his years of college, then he entered the law school. e was a Royalist, fanatical and severe. He did not love his grandfather much, s the latter’s gayety and cynicism repelled him, and his feelings towards his ather were gloomy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.3.24#He was, on the whole, a cold and ardent, noble, generous, proud, eligious, enthusiastic lad; dignified to harshness, pure to shyness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.head#CHAPTER IV—END OF THE BRIGAND
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.1#The conclusion of Marius’ classical studies coincided with M. illenormand’s departure from society. The old man bade farewell to the Faubourg aint-Germain and to Madame de T.‘s salon, and established himself in the arais, in his house of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire. There he had for ervants, in addition to the porter, that chambermaid, Nicolette, who had ucceeded to Magnon, and that short-breathed and pursy Basque, who have been entioned above.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.2#In 1827, Marius had just attained his seventeenth year. One evening, on his eturn home, he saw his grandfather holding a letter in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.3#“Marius,” said M. Gillenormand, “you will set out for Vernon o-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.4#“Why?” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.5#“To see your father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.6#Marius was seized with a trembling fit. He had thought of everything except his—that he should one day be called upon to see his father. Nothing could be ore unexpected, more surprising, and, let us admit it, more disagreeable to im. It was forcing estrangement into reconciliation. It was not an affliction, ut it was an unpleasant duty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.7#Marius, in addition to his motives of political antipathy, was convinced hat his father, _the slasher_, as M. Gillenormand called him on his amiable ays, did not love him; this was evident, since he had abandoned him to others. eeling that he was not beloved, he did not love. “Nothing is more simple,” he aid to himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.8#He was so astounded that he did not question M. Gillenormand. The randfather resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.9#“It appears that he is ill. He demands your presence.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.10#And after a pause, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.11#“Set out to-morrow morning. I think there is a coach which leaves the Cour es Fontaines at six o’clock, and which arrives in the evening. Take it. He says hat here is haste.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.12#Then he crushed the letter in his hand and thrust it into his pocket. arius might have set out that very evening and have been with his father on the ollowing morning. A diligence from the Rue du Bouloi took the trip to Rouen by ight at that date, and passed through Vernon. Neither Marius nor M. illenormand thought of making inquiries about it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.13#The next day, at twilight, Marius reached Vernon. People were just eginning to light their candles. He asked the first person whom he met for “M. ontmercy’s house.” For in his own mind, he agreed with the Restoration, and ike it, did not recognize his father’s claim to the title of either colonel or aron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.14#The house was pointed out to him. He rang; a woman with a little lamp in er hand opened the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.15#“M. Pontmercy?” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.16#The woman remained motionless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.17#“Is this his house?” demanded Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.18#The woman nodded affirmatively.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.19#“Can I speak with him?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.20#The woman shook her head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.21#“But I am his son!” persisted Marius. “He is expecting me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.22#“He no longer expects you,” said the woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.23#Then he perceived that she was weeping.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.24#She pointed to the door of a room on the ground floor; he entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.25#In that room, which was lighted by a tallow candle standing on the himney-piece, there were three men, one standing erect, another kneeling, and ne lying at full length, on the floor in his shirt. The one on the floor was he colonel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.26#The other two were the doctor, and the priest, who was engaged in rayer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.27#The colonel had been attacked by brain fever three days previously. As he ad a foreboding of evil at the very beginning of his illness, he had written to . Gillenormand to demand his son. The malady had grown worse. On the very vening of Marius’ arrival at Vernon, the colonel had had an attack of delirium; e had risen from his bed, in spite of the servant’s efforts to prevent him, rying: “My son is not coming! I shall go to meet him!” Then he ran out of his oom and fell prostrate on the floor of the antechamber. He had just xpired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.28#The doctor had been summoned, and the curé. The doctor had arrived too ate. The son had also arrived too late.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.29#By the dim light of the candle, a large tear could be distinguished on the ale and prostrate colonel’s cheek, where it had trickled from his dead eye. The ye was extinguished, but the tear was not yet dry. That tear was his son’s elay.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.30#Marius gazed upon that man whom he beheld for the first time, on that enerable and manly face, on those open eyes which saw not, on those white ocks, those robust limbs, on which, here and there, brown lines, marking word-thrusts, and a sort of red stars, which indicated bullet-holes, were isible. He contemplated that gigantic sear which stamped heroism on that ountenance upon which God had imprinted goodness. He reflected that this man as his father, and that this man was dead, and a chill ran over him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.31#The sorrow which he felt was the sorrow which he would have felt in the resence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched out in eath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.32#Anguish, poignant anguish, was in that chamber. The servant-woman was amenting in a corner, the curé was praying, and his sobs were audible, the octor was wiping his eyes; the corpse itself was weeping.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.33#The doctor, the priest, and the woman gazed at Marius in the midst of heir affliction without uttering a word; he was the stranger there. Marius, who as far too little affected, felt ashamed and embarrassed at his own attitude; e held his hat in his hand; and he dropped it on the floor, in order to produce he impression that grief had deprived him of the strength to hold it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.34#At the same time, he experienced remorse, and he despised himself for ehaving in this manner. But was it his fault? He did not love his father? Why hould he!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.35#The colonel had left nothing. The sale of big furniture barely paid the xpenses of his burial.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.36#The servant found a scrap of paper, which she handed to Marius. It ontained the following, in the colonel’s handwriting:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.37#“_For my son_.—The Emperor made me a Baron on the battle-field of aterloo. Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I urchased with my blood, my son shall take it and bear it. That he will be orthy of it is a matter of course.” Below, the colonel had added: “At that same attle of Waterloo, a sergeant saved my life. The man’s name was Thénardier. I hink that he has recently been keeping a little inn, in a village in the eighborhood of Paris, at Chelles or Montfermeil. If my son meets him, he will o all the good he can to Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.38#Marius took this paper and preserved it, not out of duty to his father, ut because of that vague respect for death which is always imperious in the eart of man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.39#Nothing remained of the colonel. M. Gillenormand had his sword and uniform old to an old-clothes dealer. The neighbors devastated the garden and pillaged he rare flowers. The other plants turned to nettles and weeds, and died.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.40#Marius remained only forty-eight hours at Vernon. After the interment he eturned to Paris, and applied himself again to his law studies, with no more hought of his father than if the latter had never lived. In two days the olonel was buried, and in three forgotten.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.4.41#Marius wore crape on his hat. That was all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.head#CHAPTER V—THE UTILITY OF GOING TO MASS, IN ORDER TO BECOME A EVOLUTIONIST
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.1#Marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood. One Sunday, hen he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice, at that same chapel of the Virgin hither his aunt had led him when a small lad, he placed himself behind a illar, being more absent-minded and thoughtful than usual on that occasion, and nelt down, without paying any special heed, upon a chair of Utrecht velvet, on he back of which was inscribed this name: _Monsieur Mabeuf, warden_. Mass had ardly begun when an old man presented himself and said to Marius:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.2#“This is my place, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.3#Marius stepped aside promptly, and the old man took possession of his hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.4#The mass concluded, Marius still stood thoughtfully a few paces distant; he old man approached him again and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.5#“I beg your pardon, sir, for having disturbed you a while ago, and for gain disturbing you at this moment; you must have thought me intrusive, and I ill explain myself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.6#“There is no need of that, Sir,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.7#“Yes!” went on the old man, “I do not wish you to have a bad opinion of me. ou see, I am attached to this place. It seems to me that the mass is better rom here. Why? I will tell you. It is from this place, that I have watched a oor, brave father come regularly, every two or three months, for the last ten ears, since he had no other opportunity and no other way of seeing his child, ecause he was prevented by family arrangements. He came at the hour when he new that his son would be brought to mass. The little one never suspected that is father was there. Perhaps he did not even know that he had a father, poor nnocent! The father kept behind a pillar, so that he might not be seen. He azed at his child and he wept. He adored that little fellow, poor man! I could ee that. This spot has become sanctified in my sight, and I have contracted a abit of coming hither to listen to the mass. I prefer it to the stall to which have a right, in my capacity of warden. I knew that unhappy gentleman a ittle, too. He had a father-in-law, a wealthy aunt, relatives, I don’t know xactly what all, who threatened to disinherit the child if he, the father, saw im. He sacrificed himself in order that his son might be rich and happy some ay. He was separated from him because of political opinions. Certainly, I pprove of political opinions, but there are people who do not know where to top. Mon Dieu! a man is not a monster because he was at Waterloo; a father is ot separated from his child for such a reason as that. He was one of onaparte’s colonels. He is dead, I believe. He lived at Vernon, where I have a rother who is a curé, and his name was something like Pontmarie or Montpercy. e had a fine sword-cut, on my honor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.8#“Pontmercy,” suggested Marius, turning pale.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.9#“Precisely, Pontmercy. Did you know him?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.10#“Sir,” said Marius, “he was my father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.11#The old warden clasped his hands and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.12#“Ah! you are the child! Yes, that’s true, he must be a man by this time. ell! poor child, you may say that you had a father who loved you dearly!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.13#Marius offered his arm to the old man and conducted him to his odgings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.14#On the following day, he said to M. Gillenormand:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.15#“I have arranged a hunting-party with some friends. Will you permit me to e absent for three days?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.16#“Four!” replied his grandfather. “Go and amuse yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.5.17#And he said to his daughter in a low tone, and with a wink, “Some love ffair!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.1#Where it was that Marius went will be disclosed a little further on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.2#Marius was absent for three days, then he returned to Paris, went straight o the library of the law-school and asked for the files of the _Moniteur_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.3#He read the _Moniteur_, he read all the histories of the Republic and the mpire, the _Memorial de Sainte-Hélène_, all the memoirs, all the newspapers, he bulletins, the proclamations; he devoured everything. The first time that he ame across his father’s name in the bulletins of the grand army, he had a fever or a week. He went to see the generals under whom Georges Pontmercy had served, mong others, Comte H. Church-warden Mabeuf, whom he went to see again, told him bout the life at Vernon, the colonel’s retreat, his flowers, his solitude. arius came to a full knowledge of that rare, sweet, and sublime man, that pecies of lion-lamb who had been his father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.4#In the meanwhile, occupied as he was with this study which absorbed all his oments as well as his thoughts, he hardly saw the Gillenormands at all. He made is appearance at meals; then they searched for him, and he was not to be found. ather Gillenormand smiled. “Bah! bah! He is just of the age for the girls!” ometimes the old man added: “The deuce! I thought it was only an affair of allantry. It seems that it is an affair of passion!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.5#It was a passion, in fact. Marius was on the high road to adoring his ather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.6#At the same time, his ideas underwent an extraordinary change. The phases f this change were numerous and successive. As this is the history of many inds of our day, we think it will prove useful to follow these phases step by tep and to indicate them all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.7#That history upon which he had just cast his eyes appalled him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.8#The first effect was to dazzle him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.9#Up to that time, the Republic, the Empire, had been to him only monstrous ords. The Republic, a guillotine in the twilight; the Empire, a sword in the ight. He had just taken a look at it, and where he had expected to find only a haos of shadows, he had beheld, with a sort of unprecedented surprise, mingled ith fear and joy, stars sparkling, Mirabeau, Vergniaud, Saint-Just, obespierre, Camille, Desmoulins, Danton, and a sun arise, Napoleon. He did not now where he stood. He recoiled, blinded by the brilliant lights. Little by ittle, when his astonishment had passed off, he grew accustomed to this adiance, he contemplated these deeds without dizziness, he examined these ersonages without terror; the Revolution and the Empire presented themselves uminously, in perspective, before his mind’s eye; he beheld each of these roups of events and of men summed up in two tremendous facts: the Republic in he sovereignty of civil right restored to the masses, the Empire in the overeignty of the French idea imposed on Europe; he beheld the grand figure of he people emerge from the Revolution, and the grand figure of France spring orth from the Empire. He asserted in his conscience, that all this had been ood. What his dazzled state neglected in this, his first far too synthetic stimation, we do not think it necessary to point out here. It is the state of a ind on the march that we are recording. Progress is not accomplished in one tage. That stated, once for all, in connection with what precedes as well as ith what is to follow, we continue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.10#He then perceived that, up to that moment, he had comprehended his country o more than he had comprehended his father. He had not known either the one or he other, and a sort of voluntary night had obscured his eyes. Now he saw, and n the one hand he admired, while on the other he adored.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.11#He was filled with regret and remorse, and he reflected in despair that ll he had in his soul could now be said only to the tomb. Oh! if his father had till been in existence, if he had still had him, if God, in his compassion and is goodness, had permitted his father to be still among the living, how he ould have run, how he would have precipitated himself, how he would have cried o his father: “Father! Here I am! It is I! I have the same heart as thou! I am hy son!” How he would have embraced that white head, bathed his hair in tears, azed upon his scar, pressed his hands, adored his garment, kissed his feet! Oh! hy had his father died so early, before his time, before the justice, the love f his son had come to him? Marius had a continual sob in his heart, which said o him every moment: “Alas!” At the same time, he became more truly serious, ore truly grave, more sure of his thought and his faith. At each instant, leams of the true came to complete his reason. An inward growth seemed to be in rogress within him. He was conscious of a sort of natural enlargement, which ave him two things that were new to him—his father and his country.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.12#As everything opens when one has a key, so he explained to himself that hich he had hated, he penetrated that which he had abhorred; henceforth he lainly perceived the providential, divine and human sense of the great things hich he had been taught to detest, and of the great men whom he had been nstructed to curse. When he reflected on his former opinions, which were but hose of yesterday, and which, nevertheless, seemed to him already so very ncient, he grew indignant, yet he smiled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.13#From the rehabilitation of his father, he naturally passed to the ehabilitation of Napoleon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.14#But the latter, we will confess, was not effected without labor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.15#From his infancy, he had been imbued with the judgments of the party of 814, on Bonaparte. Now, all the prejudices of the Restoration, all its nterests, all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon. It execrated him even ore than it did Robespierre. It had very cleverly turned to sufficiently good ccount the fatigue of the nation, and the hatred of mothers. Bonaparte had ecome an almost fabulous monster, and in order to paint him to the imagination f the people, which, as we lately pointed out, resembles the imagination of hildren, the party of 1814 made him appear under all sorts of terrifying masks n succession, from that which is terrible though it remains grandiose to that hich is terrible and becomes grotesque, from Tiberius to the bugaboo. Thus, in peaking of Bonaparte, one was free to sob or to puff up with laughter, provided hat hatred lay at the bottom. Marius had never entertained—about _that man_, as e was called—any other ideas in his mind. They had combined with the tenacity hich existed in his nature. There was in him a headstrong little man who hated apoleon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.16#On reading history, on studying him, especially in the documents and aterials for history, the veil which concealed Napoleon from the eyes of Marius as gradually rent. He caught a glimpse of something immense, and he suspected hat he had been deceived up to that moment, on the score of Bonaparte as about ll the rest; each day he saw more distinctly; and he set about mounting, lowly, step by step, almost regretfully in the beginning, then with ntoxication and as though attracted by an irresistible fascination, first the ombre steps, then the vaguely illuminated steps, at last the luminous and plendid steps of enthusiasm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.17#One night, he was alone in his little chamber near the roof. His candle as burning; he was reading, with his elbows resting on his table close to the pen window. All sorts of reveries reached him from space, and mingled with his houghts. What a spectacle is the night! One hears dull sounds, without knowing hence they proceed; one beholds Jupiter, which is twelve hundred times larger han the earth, glowing like a firebrand, the azure is black, the stars shine; t is formidable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.18#He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army, those heroic strophes enned on the field of battle; there, at intervals, he beheld his father’s name, lways the name of the Emperor; the whole of that great Empire presented itself o him; he felt a flood swelling and rising within him; it seemed to him at oments that his father passed close to him like a breath, and whispered in his ar; he gradually got into a singular state; he thought that he heard drums, annon, trumpets, the measured tread of battalions, the dull and distant gallop f the cavalry; from time to time, his eyes were raised heavenward, and gazed pon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless depths of pace, then they fell upon his book once more, and there they beheld other olossal things moving confusedly. His heart contracted within him. He was in a ransport, trembling, panting. All at once, without himself knowing what was in im, and what impulse he was obeying, he sprang to his feet, stretched both arms ut of the window, gazed intently into the gloom, the silence, the infinite arkness, the eternal immensity, and exclaimed: “Long live the Emperor!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.19#From that moment forth, all was over; the Ogre of Corsica,—the surper,—the tyrant,—the monster who was the lover of his own sisters,—the actor ho took lessons of Talma,—the poisoner of Jaffa,—the tiger,—Buonaparte,—all his vanished, and gave place in his mind to a vague and brilliant radiance in hich shone, at an inaccessible height, the pale marble phantom of Cæsar. The mperor had been for his father only the well-beloved captain whom one admires, or whom one sacrifices one’s self; he was something more to Marius. He was the redestined constructor of the French group, succeeding the Roman group in the omination of the universe. He was a prodigious architect, of a destruction, the ontinuer of Charlemagne, of Louis XI., of Henry IV., of Richelieu, of Louis IV., and of the Committee of Public Safety, having his spots, no doubt, his aults, his crimes even, being a man, that is to say; but august in his faults, rilliant in his spots, powerful in his crime.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.20#He was the predestined man, who had forced all nations to say: “The great ation!” He was better than that, he was the very incarnation of France, onquering Europe by the sword which he grasped, and the world by the light hich he shed. Marius saw in Bonaparte the dazzling spectre which will always ise upon the frontier, and which will guard the future. Despot but dictator; a espot resulting from a republic and summing up a revolution. Napoleon became or him the man-people as Jesus Christ is the man-God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.21#It will be perceived, that like all new converts to a religion, his onversion intoxicated him, he hurled himself headlong into adhesion and he went oo far. His nature was so constructed; once on the downward slope, it was lmost impossible for him to put on the drag. Fanaticism for the sword took ossession of him, and complicated in his mind his enthusiasm for the idea. He id not perceive that, along with genius, and pell-mell, he was admitting force, hat is to say, that he was installing in two compartments of his idolatry, on he one hand that which is divine, on the other that which is brutal. In many espects, he had set about deceiving himself otherwise. He admitted everything. here is a way of encountering error while on one’s way to the truth. He had a iolent sort of good faith which took everything in the lump. In the new path hich he had entered on, in judging the mistakes of the old regime, as in easuring the glory of Napoleon, he neglected the attenuating circumstances.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.22#At all events, a tremendous step had been taken. Where he had formerly eheld the fall of the monarchy, he now saw the advent of France. His rientation had changed. What had been his East became the West. He had turned quarely round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.23#All these revolutions were accomplished within him, without his family btaining an inkling of the case.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.24#When, during this mysterious labor, he had entirely shed his old Bourbon nd ultra skin, when he had cast off the aristocrat, the Jacobite and the oyalist, when he had become thoroughly a revolutionist, profoundly democratic nd republican, he went to an engraver on the Quai des Orfévres and ordered a undred cards bearing this name: _Le Baron Marius Pontmercy_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.25#This was only the strictly logical consequence of the change which had aken place in him, a change in which everything gravitated round his ather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.26#Only, as he did not know any one and could not sow his cards with any orter, he put them in his pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.27#By another natural consequence, in proportion as he drew nearer to his ather, to the latter’s memory, and to the things for which the colonel had ought five and twenty years before, he receded from his grandfather. We have ong ago said, that M. Gillenormand’s temper did not please him. There already xisted between them all the dissonances of the grave young man and the rivolous old man. The gayety of Géronte shocks and exasperates the melancholy f Werther. So long as the same political opinions and the same ideas had been ommon to them both, Marius had met M. Gillenormand there as on a bridge. When he bridge fell, an abyss was formed. And then, over and above all, Marius xperienced unutterable impulses to revolt, when he reflected that it was M. illenormand who had, from stupid motives, torn him ruthlessly from the colonel, hus depriving the father of the child, and the child of the father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.28#By dint of pity for his father, Marius had nearly arrived at aversion for is grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.29#Nothing of this sort, however, was betrayed on the exterior, as we have lready said. Only he grew colder and colder; laconic at meals, and rare in the ouse. When his aunt scolded him for it, he was very gentle and alleged his tudies, his lectures, the examinations, etc., as a pretext. His grandfather ever departed from his infallible diagnosis: “In love! I know all about t.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.30#From time to time Marius absented himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.31#“Where is it that he goes off like this?” said his aunt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.32#On one of these trips, which were always very brief, he went to ontfermeil, in order to obey the injunction which his father had left him, and e sought the old sergeant to Waterloo, the inn-keeper Thénardier. Thénardier ad failed, the inn was closed, and no one knew what had become of him. Marius as away from the house for four days on this quest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.33#“He is getting decidedly wild,” said his grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.6.34#They thought they had noticed that he wore something on his breast, under is shirt, which was attached to his neck by a black ribbon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.head#CHAPTER VII—SOME PETTICOAT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.1#We have mentioned a lancer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.2#He was a great-grand-nephew of M. Gillenormand, on the paternal side, who ed a garrison life, outside the family and far from the domestic hearth. ieutenant Théodule Gillenormand fulfilled all the conditions required to make hat is called a fine officer. He had “a lady’s waist,” a victorious manner of railing his sword and of twirling his moustache in a hook. He visited Paris ery rarely, and so rarely that Marius had never seen him. The cousins knew each ther only by name. We think we have said that Théodule was the favorite of Aunt illenormand, who preferred him because she did not see him. Not seeing people ermits one to attribute to them all possible perfections.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.3#One morning, Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder returned to her apartment s much disturbed as her placidity was capable of allowing. Marius had just sked his grandfather’s permission to take a little trip, adding that he meant o set out that very evening. “Go!” had been his grandfather’s reply, and M. illenormand had added in an aside, as he raised his eyebrows to the top of his orehead: “Here he is passing the night out again.” Mademoiselle Gillenormand ad ascended to her chamber greatly puzzled, and on the staircase had dropped his exclamation: “This is too much!”—and this interrogation: “But where is it hat he goes?” She espied some adventure of the heart, more or less illicit, a oman in the shadow, a rendezvous, a mystery, and she would not have been sorry o thrust her spectacles into the affair. Tasting a mystery resembles getting he first flavor of a scandal; sainted souls do not detest this. There is some uriosity about scandal in the secret compartments of bigotry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.4#So she was the prey of a vague appetite for learning a history.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.5#In order to get rid of this curiosity which agitated her a little beyond er wont, she took refuge in her talents, and set about scalloping, with one ayer of cotton after another, one of those embroideries of the Empire and the estoration, in which there are numerous cart-wheels. The work was clumsy, the orker cross. She had been seated at this for several hours when the door pened. Mademoiselle Gillenormand raised her nose. Lieutenant Théodule stood efore her, making the regulation salute. She uttered a cry of delight. One may e old, one may be a prude, one may be pious, one may be an aunt, but it is lways agreeable to see a lancer enter one’s chamber.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.6#“You here, Théodule!” she exclaimed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.7#“On my way through town, aunt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.8#“Embrace me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.9#“Here goes!” said Théodule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.10#And he kissed her. Aunt Gillenormand went to her writing-desk and opened t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.11#“You will remain with us a week at least?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.12#“I leave this very evening, aunt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.13#“It is not possible!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.14#“Mathematically!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.15#“Remain, my little Théodule, I beseech you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.16#“My heart says ‘yes,’ but my orders say ‘no.’ The matter is simple. They re changing our garrison; we have been at Melun, we are being transferred to aillon. It is necessary to pass through Paris in order to get from the old post o the new one. I said: ‘I am going to see my aunt.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.17#“Here is something for your trouble.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.18#And she put ten louis into his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.19#“For my pleasure, you mean to say, my dear aunt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.20#Théodule kissed her again, and she experienced the joy of having some of he skin scratched from her neck by the braidings on his uniform.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.21#“Are you making the journey on horseback, with your regiment?” she asked im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.22#“No, aunt. I wanted to see you. I have special permission. My servant is aking my horse; I am travelling by diligence. And, by the way, I want to ask ou something.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.23#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.24#“Is my cousin Marius Pontmercy travelling so, too?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.25#“How do you know that?” said his aunt, suddenly pricked to the quick with lively curiosity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.26#“On my arrival, I went to the diligence to engage my seat in the oupé.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.27#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.28#“A traveller had already come to engage a seat in the imperial. I saw his ame on the card.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.29#“What name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.30#“Marius Pontmercy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.31#“The wicked fellow!” exclaimed his aunt. “Ah! your cousin is not a steady ad like yourself. To think that he is to pass the night in a diligence!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.32#“Just as I am going to do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.33#“But you—it is your duty; in his case, it is wildness.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.34#“Bosh!” said Théodule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.35#Here an event occurred to Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder,—an idea truck her. If she had been a man, she would have slapped her brow. She postrophized Théodule:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.36#“Are you aware whether your cousin knows you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.37#“No. I have seen him; but he has never deigned to notice me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.38#“So you are going to travel together?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.39#“He in the imperial, I in the coupé.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.40#“Where does this diligence run?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.41#“To Andelys.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.42#“Then that is where Marius is going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.43#“Unless, like myself, he should stop on the way. I get down at Vernon, in rder to take the branch coach for Gaillon. I know nothing of Marius’ plan of ravel.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.44#“Marius! what an ugly name! what possessed them to name him Marius? While ou, at least, are called Théodule.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.45#“I would rather be called Alfred,” said the officer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.46#“Listen, Théodule.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.47#“I am listening, aunt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.48#“Pay attention.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.49#“I am paying attention.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.50#“You understand?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.51#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.52#“Well, Marius absents himself!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.53#“Eh! eh!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.54#“He travels.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.55#“Ah! ah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.56#“He spends the night out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.57#“Oh! oh!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.58#“We should like to know what there is behind all this.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.59#Théodule replied with the composure of a man of bronze:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.60#“Some petticoat or other.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.61#And with that inward laugh which denotes certainty, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.62#“A lass.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.63#“That is evident,” exclaimed his aunt, who thought she heard M. illenormand speaking, and who felt her conviction become irresistible at that ord _fillette_, accentuated in almost the very same fashion by the granduncle nd the grandnephew. She resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.64#“Do us a favor. Follow Marius a little. He does not know you, it will be asy. Since a lass there is, try to get a sight of her. You must write us the ale. It will amuse his grandfather.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.65#Théodule had no excessive taste for this sort of spying; but he was much ouched by the ten louis, and he thought he saw a chance for a possible sequel. e accepted the commission and said: “As you please, aunt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.66#And he added in an aside, to himself: “Here I am a duenna.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.67#Mademoiselle Gillenormand embraced him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.68#“You are not the man to play such pranks, Théodule. You obey discipline, ou are the slave of orders, you are a man of scruples and duty, and you would ot quit your family to go and see a creature.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.69#The lancer made the pleased grimace of Cartouche when praised for his robity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.70#Marius, on the evening following this dialogue, mounted the diligence ithout suspecting that he was watched. As for the watcher, the first thing he id was to fall asleep. His slumber was complete and conscientious. Argus snored ll night long.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.71#At daybreak, the conductor of the diligence shouted: “Vernon! relay of ernon! Travellers for Vernon!” And Lieutenant Théodule woke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.72#“Good,” he growled, still half asleep, “this is where I get out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.73#Then, as his memory cleared by degrees, the effect of waking, he recalled is aunt, the ten louis, and the account which he had undertaken to render of he deeds and proceedings of Marius. This set him to laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.74#“Perhaps he is no longer in the coach,” he thought, as he rebuttoned the aistcoat of his undress uniform. “He may have stopped at Poissy; he may have topped at Triel; if he did not get out at Meulan, he may have got out at antes, unless he got out at Rolleboise, or if he did not go on as far as Pacy, ith the choice of turning to the left at Évreus, or to the right at aroche-Guyon. Run after him, aunty. What the devil am I to write to that good ld soul?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.75#At that moment a pair of black trousers descending from the imperial, made ts appearance at the window of the coupé.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.76#“Can that be Marius?” said the lieutenant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.77#It was Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.78#A little peasant girl, all entangled with the horses and the postilions at he end of the vehicle, was offering flowers to the travellers. “Give your adies flowers!” she cried.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.79#Marius approached her and purchased the finest flowers in her flat asket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.80#“Come now,” said Théodule, leaping down from the coupé, “this piques my uriosity. Who the deuce is he going to carry those flowers to? She must be a plendidly handsome woman for so fine a bouquet. I want to see her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.81#And no longer in pursuance of orders, but from personal curiosity, like ogs who hunt on their own account, he set out to follow Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.82#Marius paid no attention to Théodule. Elegant women descended from the iligence; he did not glance at them. He seemed to see nothing around him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.83#“He is pretty deeply in love!” thought Théodule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.84#Marius directed his steps towards the church.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.85#“Capital,” said Théodule to himself. “Rendezvous seasoned with a bit of ass are the best sort. Nothing is so exquisite as an ogle which passes over the ood God’s head.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.86#On arriving at the church, Marius did not enter it, but skirted the apse. e disappeared behind one of the angles of the apse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.87#“The rendezvous is appointed outside,” said Théodule. “Let’s have a look t the lass.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.88#And he advanced on the tips of his boots towards the corner which Marius ad turned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.89#On arriving there, he halted in amazement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.90#Marius, with his forehead clasped in his hands, was kneeling upon the rass on a grave. He had strewn his bouquet there. At the extremity of the rave, on a little swelling which marked the head, there stood a cross of black ood with this name in white letters: COLONEL BARON PONTMERCY. Marius’ sobs were udible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.7.91#The “lass” was a grave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—MARBLE AGAINST GRANITE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.1#It was hither that Marius had come on the first occasion of his absenting imself from Paris. It was hither that he had come every time that M. illenormand had said: “He is sleeping out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.2#Lieutenant Théodule was absolutely put out of countenance by this nexpected encounter with a sepulchre; he experienced a singular and isagreeable sensation which he was incapable of analyzing, and which was omposed of respect for the tomb, mingled with respect for the colonel. He etreated, leaving Marius alone in the cemetery, and there was discipline in his retreat. Death appeared to him with large epaulets, and he almost made the ilitary salute to him. Not knowing what to write to his aunt, he decided not to rite at all; and it is probable that nothing would have resulted from the iscovery made by Théodule as to the love affairs of Marius, if, by one of those ysterious arrangements which are so frequent in chance, the scene at Vernon had ot had an almost immediate counter-shock at Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.3#Marius returned from Vernon on the third day, in the middle of the morning, escended at his grandfather’s door, and, wearied by the two nights spent in the iligence, and feeling the need of repairing his loss of sleep by an hour at the wimming-school, he mounted rapidly to his chamber, took merely time enough to hrow off his travelling-coat, and the black ribbon which he wore round his eck, and went off to the bath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.4#M. Gillenormand, who had risen betimes like all old men in good health, had eard his entrance, and had made haste to climb, as quickly as his old legs ermitted, the stairs to the upper story where Marius lived, in order to embrace im, and to question him while so doing, and to find out where he had been.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.5#But the youth had taken less time to descend than the old man had to scend, and when Father Gillenormand entered the attic, Marius was no longer here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.6#The bed had not been disturbed, and on the bed lay, outspread, but not efiantly the great-coat and the black ribbon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.7#“I like this better,” said M. Gillenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.8#And a moment later, he made his entrance into the salon, where Mademoiselle illenormand was already seated, busily embroidering her cart-wheels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.9#The entrance was a triumphant one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.10#M. Gillenormand held in one hand the great-coat, and in the other the eck-ribbon, and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.11#“Victory! We are about to penetrate the mystery! We are going to learn the ost minute details; we are going to lay our finger on the debaucheries of our ly friend! Here we have the romance itself. I have the portrait!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.12#In fact, a case of black shagreen, resembling a medallion portrait, was uspended from the ribbon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.13#The old man took this case and gazed at it for some time without opening t, with that air of enjoyment, rapture, and wrath, with which a poor hungry ellow beholds an admirable dinner which is not for him, pass under his very ose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.14#“For this evidently is a portrait. I know all about such things. That is orn tenderly on the heart. How stupid they are! Some abominable fright that ill make us shudder, probably! Young men have such bad taste nowadays!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.15#“Let us see, father,” said the old spinster.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.16#The case opened by the pressure of a spring. They found in it nothing but carefully folded paper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.17#_“From the same to the same,”_ said M. Gillenormand, bursting with aughter. “I know what it is. A billet-doux.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.18#“Ah! let us read it!” said the aunt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.19#And she put on her spectacles. They unfolded the paper and read as ollows:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.20#“_For my son_.—The Emperor made me a Baron on the battlefield of Waterloo. ince the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I purchased with my lood, my son shall take it and bear it. That he will be worthy of it is a atter of course.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.21#The feelings of father and daughter cannot be described. They felt chilled s by the breath of a death’s-head. They did not exchange a word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.22#Only, M. Gillenormand said in a low voice and as though speaking to imself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.23#“It is the slasher’s handwriting.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.24#The aunt examined the paper, turned it about in all directions, then put t back in its case.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.25#At the same moment a little oblong packet, enveloped in blue paper, fell rom one of the pockets of the great-coat. Mademoiselle Gillenormand picked it p and unfolded the blue paper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.26#It contained Marius’ hundred cards. She handed one of them to M. illenormand, who read: _Le Baron Marius Pontmercy_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.27#The old man rang the bell. Nicolette came. M. Gillenormand took the ibbon, the case, and the coat, flung them all on the floor in the middle of the oom, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.28#“Carry those duds away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.29#A full hour passed in the most profound silence. The old man and the old pinster had seated themselves with their backs to each other, and were hinking, each on his own account, the same things, in all probability.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.30#At the expiration of this hour, Aunt Gillenormand said:—“A pretty state of hings!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.31#A few moments later, Marius made his appearance. He entered. Even before e had crossed the threshold, he saw his grandfather holding one of his own ards in his hand, and on catching sight of him, the latter exclaimed with his ir of bourgeois and grinning superiority which was something crushing:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.32#“Well! well! well! well! well! so you are a baron now. I present you my ompliments. What is the meaning of this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.33#Marius reddened slightly and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.34#“It means that I am the son of my father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.35#M. Gillenormand ceased to laugh, and said harshly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.36#“I am your father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.37#“My father,” retorted Marius, with downcast eyes and a severe air, “was a umble and heroic man, who served the Republic and France gloriously, who was reat in the greatest history that men have ever made, who lived in the bivouac or a quarter of a century, beneath grape-shot and bullets, in snow and mud by ay, beneath rain at night, who captured two flags, who received twenty wounds, ho died forgotten and abandoned, and who never committed but one mistake, which as to love too fondly two ingrates, his country and myself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.38#This was more than M. Gillenormand could bear to hear. At the word republic_, he rose, or, to speak more correctly, he sprang to his feet. Every ord that Marius had just uttered produced on the visage of the old Royalist the ffect of the puffs of air from a forge upon a blazing brand. From a dull hue he ad turned red, from red, purple, and from purple, flame-colored.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.39#“Marius!” he cried. “Abominable child! I do not know what your father was! do not wish to know! I know nothing about that, and I do not know him! But hat I do know is, that there never was anything but scoundrels among those men! hey were all rascals, assassins, red-caps, thieves! I say all! I say all! I now not one! I say all! Do you hear me, Marius! See here, you are no more a aron than my slipper is! They were all bandits in the service of Robespierre! ll who served B-u-o-naparté were brigands! They were all traitors who betrayed, etrayed, betrayed their legitimate king! All cowards who fled before the russians and the English at Waterloo! That is what I do know! Whether Monsieur our father comes in that category, I do not know! I am sorry for it, so much he worse, your humble servant!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.40#In his turn, it was Marius who was the firebrand and M. Gillenormand who as the bellows. Marius quivered in every limb, he did not know what would appen next, his brain was on fire. He was the priest who beholds all his sacred afers cast to the winds, the fakir who beholds a passer-by spit upon his idol. t could not be that such things had been uttered in his presence. What was he o do? His father had just been trampled under foot and stamped upon in his resence, but by whom? By his grandfather. How was he to avenge the one without utraging the other? It was impossible for him to insult his grandfather and it as equally impossible for him to leave his father unavenged. On the one hand as a sacred grave, on the other hoary locks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.41#He stood there for several moments, staggering as though intoxicated, with ll this whirlwind dashing through his head; then he raised his eyes, gazed ixedly at his grandfather, and cried in a voice of thunder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.42#“Down with the Bourbons, and that great hog of a Louis XVIII.!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.43#Louis XVIII. had been dead for four years; but it was all the same to im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.44#The old man, who had been crimson, turned whiter than his hair. He wheeled ound towards a bust of M. le Duc de Berry, which stood on the chimney-piece, nd made a profound bow, with a sort of peculiar majesty. Then he paced twice, lowly and in silence, from the fireplace to the window and from the window to he fireplace, traversing the whole length of the room, and making the polished loor creak as though he had been a stone statue walking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.45#On his second turn, he bent over his daughter, who was watching this ncounter with the stupefied air of an antiquated lamb, and said to her with a mile that was almost calm: “A baron like this gentleman, and a bourgeois like yself cannot remain under the same roof.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.46#And drawing himself up, all at once, pallid, trembling, terrible, with his row rendered more lofty by the terrible radiance of wrath, he extended his arm owards Marius and shouted to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.47#“Be off!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.48#Marius left the house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.49#On the following day, M. Gillenormand said to his daughter:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.50#“You will send sixty pistoles every six months to that blood-drinker, and ou will never mention his name to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.51#Having an immense reserve fund of wrath to get rid of, and not knowing hat to do with it, he continued to address his daughter as _you_ instead of thou_ for the next three months.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.52#Marius, on his side, had gone forth in indignation. There was one ircumstance which, it must be admitted, aggravated his exasperation. There are lways petty fatalities of the sort which complicate domestic dramas. They ugment the grievances in such cases, although, in reality, the wrongs are not ncreased by them. While carrying Marius’ “duds” precipitately to his chamber, t his grandfather’s command, Nicolette had, inadvertently, let fall, probably, n the attic staircase, which was dark, that medallion of black shagreen which ontained the paper penned by the colonel. Neither paper nor case could fterwards be found. Marius was convinced that “Monsieur Gillenormand”—from that ay forth he never alluded to him otherwise—had flung “his father’s testament” n the fire. He knew by heart the few lines which the colonel had written, and, onsequently, nothing was lost. But the paper, the writing, that sacred elic,—all that was his very heart. What had been done with it?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.53#Marius had taken his departure without saying whither he was going, and ithout knowing where, with thirty francs, his watch, and a few clothes in a and-bag. He had entered a hackney-coach, had engaged it by the hour, and had irected his course at hap-hazard towards the Latin quarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.3.8.54#What was to become of Marius?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.head#BOOK FOURTH—THE FRIENDS OF THE A B C
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.head#CHAPTER I—A GROUP WHICH BARELY MISSED BECOMING HISTORIC
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.1#At that epoch, which was, to all appearances indifferent, a certain evolutionary quiver was vaguely current. Breaths which had started forth from he depths of ’89 and ’93 were in the air. Youth was on the point, may the eader pardon us the word, of moulting. People were undergoing a transformation, lmost without being conscious of it, through the movement of the age. The eedle which moves round the compass also moves in souls. Each person was taking hat step in advance which he was bound to take. The Royalists were becoming iberals, liberals were turning democrats. It was a flood tide complicated with thousand ebb movements; the peculiarity of ebbs is to create intermixtures; ence the combination of very singular ideas; people adored both Napoleon and iberty. We are making history here. These were the mirages of that period. pinions traverse phases. Voltairian royalism, a quaint variety, had a no less ingular sequel, Bonapartist liberalism.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.2#Other groups of minds were more serious. In that direction, they sounded rinciples, they attached themselves to the right. They grew enthusiastic for he absolute, they caught glimpses of infinite realizations; the absolute, by ts very rigidity, urges spirits towards the sky and causes them to float in llimitable space. There is nothing like dogma for bringing forth dreams. And here is nothing like dreams for engendering the future. Utopia to-day, flesh nd blood to-morrow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.3#These advanced opinions had a double foundation. A beginning of mystery enaced “the established order of things,” which was suspicious and underhand. A ign which was revolutionary to the highest degree. The second thoughts of power eet the second thoughts of the populace in the mine. The incubation of nsurrections gives the retort to the premeditation of _coups d‘état_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.4#There did not, as yet, exist in France any of those vast underlying rganizations, like the German _tugendbund_ and Italian Carbonarism; but here nd there there were dark underminings, which were in process of throwing off hoots. The Cougourde was being outlined at Aix; there existed at Paris, among ther affiliations of that nature, the society of the Friends of the A B C.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.5#What were these Friends of the A B C? A society which had for its object pparently the education of children, in reality the elevation of man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.6#They declared themselves the Friends of the A B C,—the _Abaissé_,—the ebased,—that is to say, the people. They wished to elevate the people. It was a un which we should do wrong to smile at. Puns are sometimes serious factors in olitics; witness the _Castratus ad castra_, which made a general of the army of arses; witness: _Barbari et Barberini_; witness: _Tu es Petrus et super hanc etram_, etc., etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.7#The Friends of the A B C were not numerous, it was a secret society in the tate of embryo, we might almost say a coterie, if coteries ended in heroes. hey assembled in Paris in two localities, near the fish-market, in a wine-shop alled _Corinthe_, of which more will be heard later on, and near the Pantheon n a little café in the Rue Saint-Michel called the _Café Musain_, now torn own; the first of these meeting-places was close to the workingman, the second o the students.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.8#The assemblies of the Friends of the A B C were usually held in a back room f the Café Musain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.9#This hall, which was tolerably remote from the café, with which it was onnected by an extremely long corridor, had two windows and an exit with a rivate stairway on the little Rue des Grès. There they smoked and drank, and ambled and laughed. There they conversed in very loud tones about everything, nd in whispers of other things. An old map of France under the Republic was ailed to the wall,—a sign quite sufficient to excite the suspicion of a police gent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.10#The greater part of the Friends of the A B C were students, who were on ordial terms with the working classes. Here are the names of the principal nes. They belong, in a certain measure, to history: Enjolras, Combeferre, Jean rouvaire, Feuilly, Courfeyrac, Bahorel, Lesgle or Laigle, Joly, Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.11#These young men formed a sort of family, through the bond of friendship. ll, with the exception of Laigle, were from the South.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.12#This was a remarkable group. It vanished in the invisible depths which lie ehind us. At the point of this drama which we have now reached, it will not erhaps be superfluous to throw a ray of light upon these youthful heads, before he reader beholds them plunging into the shadow of a tragic adventure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.13#Enjolras, whose name we have mentioned first of all,—the reader shall see hy later on,—was an only son and wealthy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.14#Enjolras was a charming young man, who was capable of being terrible. He as angelically handsome. He was a savage Antinous. One would have said, to see he pensive thoughtfulness of his glance, that he had already, in some previous tate of existence, traversed the revolutionary apocalypse. He possessed the radition of it as though he had been a witness. He was acquainted with all the inute details of the great affair. A pontifical and warlike nature, a singular hing in a youth. He was an officiating priest and a man of war; from the mmediate point of view, a soldier of the democracy; above the contemporary ovement, the priest of the ideal. His eyes were deep, his lids a little red, is lower lip was thick and easily became disdainful, his brow was lofty. A reat deal of brow in a face is like a great deal of horizon in a view. Like ertain young men at the beginning of this century and the end of the last, who ecame illustrious at an early age, he was endowed with excessive youth, and was s rosy as a young girl, although subject to hours of pallor. Already a man, he till seemed a child. His two and twenty years appeared to be but seventeen; he as serious, it did not seem as though he were aware there was on earth a thing alled woman. He had but one passion—the right; but one thought—to overthrow the bstacle. On Mount Aventine, he would have been Gracchus; in the Convention, he ould have been Saint-Just. He hardly saw the roses, he ignored spring, he did ot hear the carolling of the birds; the bare throat of Evadne would have moved im no more than it would have moved Aristogeiton; he, like Harmodius, thought lowers good for nothing except to conceal the sword. He was severe in his njoyments. He chastely dropped his eyes before everything which was not the epublic. He was the marble lover of liberty. His speech was harshly inspired, nd had the thrill of a hymn. He was subject to unexpected outbursts of soul. oe to the love-affair which should have risked itself beside him! If any risette of the Place Cambrai or the Rue Saint-Jean-de-Beauvais, seeing that ace of a youth escaped from college, that page’s mien, those long, golden ashes, those blue eyes, that hair billowing in the wind, those rosy cheeks, hose fresh lips, those exquisite teeth, had conceived an appetite for that omplete aurora, and had tried her beauty on Enjolras, an astounding and errible glance would have promptly shown her the abyss, and would have taught er not to confound the mighty cherub of Ezekiel with the gallant Cherubino of eaumarchais.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.15#By the side of Enjolras, who represented the logic of the Revolution, ombeferre represented its philosophy. Between the logic of the Revolution and ts philosophy there exists this difference—that its logic may end in war, hereas its philosophy can end only in peace. Combeferre complemented and ectified Enjolras. He was less lofty, but broader. He desired to pour into all inds the extensive principles of general ideas: he said: “Revolution, but ivilization”; and around the mountain peak he opened out a vast view of the lue sky. The Revolution was more adapted for breathing with Combeferre than ith Enjolras. Enjolras expressed its divine right, and Combeferre its natural ight. The first attached himself to Robespierre; the second confined himself to ondorcet. Combeferre lived the life of all the rest of the world more than did njolras. If it had been granted to these two young men to attain to history, he one would have been the just, the other the wise man. Enjolras was the more irile, Combeferre the more humane. _Homo_ and _vir_, that was the exact effect f their different shades. Combeferre was as gentle as Enjolras was severe, hrough natural whiteness. He loved the word _citizen_, but he preferred the ord _man_. He would gladly have said: _Hombre_, like the Spanish. He read verything, went to the theatres, attended the courses of public lecturers, earned the polarization of light from Arago, grew enthusiastic over a lesson in hich Geoffroy Sainte-Hilaire explained the double function of the external arotid artery, and the internal, the one which makes the face, and the one hich makes the brain; he kept up with what was going on, followed science step y step, compared Saint-Simon with Fourier, deciphered hieroglyphics, broke the ebble which he found and reasoned on geology, drew from memory a silkworm moth, ointed out the faulty French in the Dictionary of the Academy, studied Puységur nd Deleuze, affirmed nothing, not even miracles; denied nothing, not even hosts; turned over the files of the _Moniteur_, reflected. He declared that the uture lies in the hand of the schoolmaster, and busied himself with educational uestions. He desired that society should labor without relaxation at the levation of the moral and intellectual level, at coining science, at putting deas into circulation, at increasing the mind in youthful persons, and he eared lest the present poverty of method, the paltriness from a literary point f view confined to two or three centuries called classic, the tyrannical ogmatism of official pedants, scholastic prejudices and routines should end by onverting our colleges into artificial oyster beds. He was learned, a purist, xact, a graduate of the Polytechnic, a close student, and at the same time, houghtful “even to chimæras,” so his friends said. He believed in all dreams, ailroads, the suppression of suffering in chirurgical operations, the fixing of mages in the dark chamber, the electric telegraph, the steering of balloons. oreover, he was not much alarmed by the citadels erected against the human mind n every direction, by superstition, despotism, and prejudice. He was one of hose who think that science will eventually turn the position. Enjolras was a hief, Combeferre was a guide. One would have liked to fight under the one and o march behind the other. It is not that Combeferre was not capable of ighting, he did not refuse a hand-to-hand combat with the obstacle, and to ttack it by main force and explosively; but it suited him better to bring the uman race into accord with its destiny gradually, by means of education, the nculcation of axioms, the promulgation of positive laws; and, between two ights, his preference was rather for illumination than for conflagration. A onflagration can create an aurora, no doubt, but why not await the dawn? A olcano illuminates, but daybreak furnishes a still better illumination. ossibly, Combeferre preferred the whiteness of the beautiful to the blaze of he sublime. A light troubled by smoke, progress purchased at the expense of iolence, only half satisfied this tender and serious spirit. The headlong recipitation of a people into the truth, a ‘93, terrified him; nevertheless, tagnation was still more repulsive to him, in it he detected putrefaction and eath; on the whole, he preferred scum to miasma, and he preferred the torrent o the cesspool, and the falls of Niagara to the lake of Montfaucon. In short, e desired neither halt nor haste. While his tumultuous friends, captivated by he absolute, adored and invoked splendid revolutionary adventures, Combeferre as inclined to let progress, good progress, take its own course; he may have een cold, but he was pure; methodical, but irreproachable; phlegmatic, but mperturbable. Combeferre would have knelt and clasped his hands to enable the uture to arrive in all its candor, and that nothing might disturb the immense nd virtuous evolution of the races. _The good must be innocent_, he repeated ncessantly. And in fact, if the grandeur of the Revolution consists in keeping he dazzling ideal fixedly in view, and of soaring thither athwart the ightnings, with fire and blood in its talons, the beauty of progress lies in eing spotless; and there exists between Washington, who represents the one, and anton, who incarnates the other, that difference which separates the swan from he angel with the wings of an eagle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.16#Jean Prouvaire was a still softer shade than Combeferre. His name was ehan, owing to that petty momentary freak which mingled with the powerful and rofound movement whence sprang the very essential study of the Middle Ages. ean Prouvaire was in love; he cultivated a pot of flowers, played on the flute, ade verses, loved the people, pitied woman, wept over the child, confounded God nd the future in the same confidence, and blamed the Revolution for having aused the fall of a royal head, that of André Chénier. His voice was ordinarily elicate, but suddenly grew manly. He was learned even to erudition, and almost n Orientalist. Above all, he was good; and, a very simple thing to those who now how nearly goodness borders on grandeur, in the matter of poetry, he referred the immense. He knew Italian, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; and these erved him only for the perusal of four poets: Dante, Juvenal, Æschylus, and saiah. In French, he preferred Corneille to Racine, and Agrippa d’Aubigné to orneille. He loved to saunter through fields of wild oats and corn-flowers, and usied himself with clouds nearly as much as with events. His mind had two ttitudes, one on the side towards man, the other on that towards God; he tudied or he contemplated. All day long, he buried himself in social questions, alary, capital, credit, marriage, religion, liberty of thought, education, enal servitude, poverty, association, property, production and sharing, the nigma of this lower world which covers the human ant-hill with darkness; and at ight, he gazed upon the planets, those enormous beings. Like Enjolras, he was ealthy and an only son. He spoke softly, bowed his head, lowered his eyes, miled with embarrassment, dressed badly, had an awkward air, blushed at a mere othing, and was very timid. Yet he was intrepid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.17#Feuilly was a workingman, a fan-maker, orphaned both of father and mother, ho earned with difficulty three francs a day, and had but one thought, to eliver the world. He had one other preoccupation, to educate himself; he called his also, delivering himself. He had taught himself to read and write; verything that he knew, he had learned by himself. Feuilly had a generous eart. The range of his embrace was immense. This orphan had adopted the eoples. As his mother had failed him, he meditated on his country. He brooded ith the profound divination of the man of the people, over what we now call the idea of the nationality_, had learned history with the express object of raging ith full knowledge of the case. In this club of young Utopians, occupied hiefly with France, he represented the outside world. He had for his specialty reece, Poland, Hungary, Roumania, Italy. He uttered these names incessantly, ppropriately and inappropriately, with the tenacity of right. The violations of urkey on Greece and Thessaly, of Russia on Warsaw, of Austria on Venice, nraged him. Above all things, the great violence of 1772 aroused him. There is o more sovereign eloquence than the true in indignation; he was eloquent with hat eloquence. He was inexhaustible on that infamous date of 1772, on the ubject of that noble and valiant race suppressed by treason, and that hree-sided crime, on that monstrous ambush, the prototype and pattern of all hose horrible suppressions of states, which, since that time, have struck many noble nation, and have annulled their certificate of birth, so to speak. All ontemporary social crimes have their origin in the partition of Poland. The artition of Poland is a theorem of which all present political outrages are the orollaries. There has not been a despot, nor a traitor for nearly a century ack, who has not signed, approved, counter-signed, and copied, _ne variatur_, he partition of Poland. When the record of modern treasons was examined, that as the first thing which made its appearance. The congress of Vienna consulted hat crime before consummating its own. 1772 sounded the onset; 1815 was the eath of the game. Such was Feuilly’s habitual text. This poor workingman had onstituted himself the tutor of Justice, and she recompensed him by rendering im great. The fact is, that there is eternity in right. Warsaw can no more be artar than Venice can be Teuton. Kings lose their pains and their honor in the ttempt to make them so. Sooner or later, the submerged part floats to the urface and reappears. Greece becomes Greece again, Italy is once more Italy. he protest of right against the deed persists forever. The theft of a nation annot be allowed by prescription. These lofty deeds of rascality have no uture. A nation cannot have its mark extracted like a pocket handkerchief.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.18#Courfeyrac had a father who was called M. de Courfeyrac. One of the false deas of the bourgeoisie under the Restoration as regards aristocracy and the obility was to believe in the particle. The particle, as every one knows, ossesses no significance. But the bourgeois of the epoch of _la Minerve_ stimated so highly that poor _de_, that they thought themselves bound to bdicate it. M. de Chauvelin had himself called M. Chauvelin; M. de Caumartin, . Caumartin; M. de Constant de Robecque, Benjamin Constant; M. de Lafayette, M. afayette. Courfeyrac had not wished to remain behind the rest, and called imself plain Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.19#We might almost, so far as Courfeyrac is concerned, stop here, and confine urselves to saying with regard to what remains: “For Courfeyrac, see holomyès.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.20#Courfeyrac had, in fact, that animation of youth which may be called the beauté du diable_ of the mind. Later on, this disappears like the playfulness f the kitten, and all this grace ends, with the bourgeois, on two legs, and ith the tomcat, on four paws.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.21#This sort of wit is transmitted from generation to generation of the uccessive levies of youth who traverse the schools, who pass it from hand to and, _quasi cursores_, and is almost always exactly the same; so that, as we ave just pointed out, any one who had listened to Courfeyrac in 1828 would have hought he heard Tholomyès in 1817. Only, Courfeyrac was an honorable fellow. eneath the apparent similarities of the exterior mind, the difference between im and Tholomyès was very great. The latent man which existed in the two was otally different in the first from what it was in the second. There was in holomyès a district attorney, and in Courfeyrac a paladin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.22#Enjolras was the chief, Combeferre was the guide, Courfeyrac was the entre. The others gave more light, he shed more warmth; the truth is, that he ossessed all the qualities of a centre, roundness and radiance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.23#Bahorel had figured in the bloody tumult of June, 1822, on the occasion of he burial of young Lallemand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.24#Bahorel was a good-natured mortal, who kept bad company, brave, a pendthrift, prodigal, and to the verge of generosity, talkative, and at times loquent, bold to the verge of effrontery; the best fellow possible; he had aring waistcoats, and scarlet opinions; a wholesale blusterer, that is to say, oving nothing so much as a quarrel, unless it were an uprising; and nothing so uch as an uprising, unless it were a revolution; always ready to smash a indow-pane, then to tear up the pavement, then to demolish a government, just o see the effect of it; a student in his eleventh year. He had nosed about the aw, but did not practise it. He had taken for his device: “Never a lawyer,” and or his armorial bearings a nightstand in which was visible a square cap. Every ime that he passed the law-school, which rarely happened, he buttoned up his rock-coat,—the paletot had not yet been invented,—and took hygienic recautions. Of the school porter he said: “What a fine old man!” and of the ean, M. Delvincourt: “What a monument!” In his lectures he espied subjects for allads, and in his professors occasions for caricature. He wasted a tolerably arge allowance, something like three thousand francs a year, in doing othing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.25#He had peasant parents whom he had contrived to imbue with respect for heir son.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.26#He said of them: “They are peasants and not bourgeois; that is the reason hey are intelligent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.27#Bahorel, a man of caprice, was scattered over numerous cafés; the others ad habits, he had none. He sauntered. To stray is human. To saunter is arisian. In reality, he had a penetrating mind and was more of a thinker than ppeared to view.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.28#He served as a connecting link between the Friends of the A B C and other till unorganized groups, which were destined to take form later on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.29#In this conclave of young heads, there was one bald member.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.30#The Marquis d’Avaray, whom Louis XVIII. made a duke for having assisted im to enter a hackney-coach on the day when he emigrated, was wont to relate, hat in 1814, on his return to France, as the King was disembarking at Calais, a an handed him a petition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.31#“What is your request?” said the King.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.32#“Sire, a post-office.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.33#“What is your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.34#“L’Aigle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.35#The King frowned, glanced at the signature of the petition and beheld the ame written thus: LESGLE. This non-Bonaparte orthography touched the King and e began to smile. “Sire,” resumed the man with the petition, “I had for ncestor a keeper of the hounds surnamed Lesgueules. This surname furnished my ame. I am called Lesgueules, by contraction Lesgle, and by corruption l’Aigle.” his caused the King to smile broadly. Later on he gave the man the posting ffice of Meaux, either intentionally or accidentally.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.36#The bald member of the group was the son of this Lesgle, or Légle, and he igned himself, Légle [de Meaux]. As an abbreviation, his companions called him ossuet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.37#Bossuet was a gay but unlucky fellow. His specialty was not to succeed in nything. As an offset, he laughed at everything. At five and twenty he was ald. His father had ended by owning a house and a field; but he, the son, had ade haste to lose that house and field in a bad speculation. He had nothing eft. He possessed knowledge and wit, but all he did miscarried. Everything ailed him and everybody deceived him; what he was building tumbled down on top f him. If he were splitting wood, he cut off a finger. If he had a mistress, he peedily discovered that he had a friend also. Some misfortune happened to him very moment, hence his joviality. He said: “I live under falling tiles.” He was ot easily astonished, because, for him, an accident was what he had foreseen, e took his bad luck serenely, and smiled at the teasing of fate, like a person ho is listening to pleasantries. He was poor, but his fund of good humor was nexhaustible. He soon reached his last sou, never his last burst of laughter. hen adversity entered his doors, he saluted this old acquaintance cordially, he apped all catastrophes on the stomach; he was familiar with fatality to the oint of calling it by its nickname: “Good day, Guignon,” he said to it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.38#These persecutions of fate had rendered him inventive. He was full of esources. He had no money, but he found means, when it seemed good to him, to ndulge in “unbridled extravagance.” One night, he went so far as to eat a hundred francs” in a supper with a wench, which inspired him to make this emorable remark in the midst of the orgy: “Pull off my boots, you five-louis ade.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.39#Bossuet was slowly directing his steps towards the profession of a lawyer; e was pursuing his law studies after the manner of Bahorel. Bossuet had not uch domicile, sometimes none at all. He lodged now with one, now with another, ost often with Joly. Joly was studying medicine. He was two years younger than ossuet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.40#Joly was the “malade imaginaire” junior. What he had won in medicine was o be more of an invalid than a doctor. At three and twenty he thought himself a aletudinarian, and passed his life in inspecting his tongue in the mirror. He ffirmed that man becomes magnetic like a needle, and in his chamber he placed is bed with its head to the south, and the foot to the north, so that, at ight, the circulation of his blood might not be interfered with by the great lectric current of the globe. During thunder storms, he felt his pulse. therwise, he was the gayest of them all. All these young, maniacal, puny, merry ncoherences lived in harmony together, and the result was an eccentric and greeable being whom his comrades, who were prodigal of winged consonants, alled Jolllly. “You may fly away on the four _L’s_,” Jean Prouvaire said to im.23
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.41#Joly had a trick of touching his nose with the tip of his cane, which is n indication of a sagacious mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.42#All these young men who differed so greatly, and who, on the whole, can nly be discussed seriously, held the same religion: Progress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.43#All were the direct sons of the French Revolution. The most giddy of them ecame solemn when they pronounced that date: ’89. Their fathers in the flesh ad been, either royalists, doctrinaires, it matters not what; this confusion nterior to themselves, who were young, did not concern them at all; the pure lood of principle ran in their veins. They attached themselves, without ntermediate shades, to incorruptible right and absolute duty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.44#Affiliated and initiated, they sketched out the ideal underground.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.45#Among all these glowing hearts and thoroughly convinced minds, there was ne sceptic. How came he there? By juxtaposition. This sceptic’s name was rantaire, and he was in the habit of signing himself with this rebus: R. rantaire was a man who took good care not to believe in anything. Moreover, he as one of the students who had learned the most during their course at Paris; e knew that the best coffee was to be had at the Café Lemblin, and the best illiards at the Café Voltaire, that good cakes and lasses were to be found at he Ermitage, on the Boulevard du Maine, spatchcocked chickens at Mother auget’s, excellent matelotes at the Barrière de la Cunette, and a certain thin hite wine at the Barrière du Compat. He knew the best place for everything; in ddition, boxing and foot-fencing and some dances; and he was a thorough ingle-stick player. He was a tremendous drinker to boot. He was inordinately omely: the prettiest boot-stitcher of that day, Irma Boissy, enraged with his omeliness, pronounced sentence on him as follows: “Grantaire is impossible”; ut Grantaire’s fatuity was not to be disconcerted. He stared tenderly and ixedly at all women, with the air of saying to them all: “If I only chose!” and f trying to make his comrades believe that he was in general demand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.46#All those words: rights of the people, rights of man, the social contract, he French Revolution, the Republic, democracy, humanity, civilization, eligion, progress, came very near to signifying nothing whatever to Grantaire. e smiled at them. Scepticism, that caries of the intelligence, had not left him single whole idea. He lived with irony. This was his axiom: “There is but one ertainty, my full glass.” He sneered at all devotion in all parties, the father s well as the brother, Robespierre junior as well as Loizerolles. “They are reatly in advance to be dead,” he exclaimed. He said of the crucifix: “There is gibbet which has been a success.” A rover, a gambler, a libertine, often runk, he displeased these young dreamers by humming incessantly: “J’aimons les illes, et j’aimons le bon vin.” Air: Vive Henri IV.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.47#However, this sceptic had one fanaticism. This fanaticism was neither a ogma, nor an idea, nor an art, nor a science; it was a man: Enjolras. Grantaire dmired, loved, and venerated Enjolras. To whom did this anarchical scoffer nite himself in this phalanx of absolute minds? To the most absolute. In what anner had Enjolras subjugated him? By his ideas? No. By his character. A henomenon which is often observable. A sceptic who adheres to a believer is as imple as the law of complementary colors. That which we lack attracts us. No ne loves the light like the blind man. The dwarf adores the drum-major. The oad always has his eyes fixed on heaven. Why? In order to watch the bird in its light. Grantaire, in whom writhed doubt, loved to watch faith soar in Enjolras. e had need of Enjolras. That chaste, healthy, firm, upright, hard, candid ature charmed him, without his being clearly aware of it, and without the idea f explaining it to himself having occurred to him. He admired his opposite by nstinct. His soft, yielding, dislocated, sickly, shapeless ideas attached hemselves to Enjolras as to a spinal column. His moral backbone leaned on that irmness. Grantaire in the presence of Enjolras became some one once more. He as, himself, moreover, composed of two elements, which were, to all appearance, ncompatible. He was ironical and cordial. His indifference loved. His mind ould get along without belief, but his heart could not get along without riendship. A profound contradiction; for an affection is a conviction. His ature was thus constituted. There are men who seem to be born to be the everse, the obverse, the wrong side. They are Pollux, Patrocles, Nisus, udamidas, Ephestion, Pechmeja. They only exist on condition that they are acked up with another man; their name is a sequel, and is only written preceded y the conjunction _and_; and their existence is not their own; it is the other ide of an existence which is not theirs. Grantaire was one of these men. He was he obverse of Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.48#One might almost say that affinities begin with the letters of the lphabet. In the series O and P are inseparable. You can, at will, pronounce O nd P or Orestes and Pylades.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.49#Grantaire, Enjolras’ true satellite, inhabited this circle of young men; e lived there, he took no pleasure anywhere but there; he followed them verywhere. His joy was to see these forms go and come through the fumes of ine. They tolerated him on account of his good humor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.1.50#Enjolras, the believer, disdained this sceptic; and, a sober man himself, corned this drunkard. He accorded him a little lofty pity. Grantaire was an naccepted Pylades. Always harshly treated by Enjolras, roughly repulsed, ejected yet ever returning to the charge, he said of Enjolras: “What fine arble!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.head#CHAPTER II—BLONDEAU’S FUNERAL ORATION BY BOSSUET
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.1#On a certain afternoon, which had, as will be seen hereafter, some oincidence with the events heretofore related, Laigle de Meaux was to be seen eaning in a sensual manner against the doorpost of the Café Musain. He had the ir of a caryatid on a vacation; he carried nothing but his reverie, however. He as staring at the Place Saint-Michel. To lean one’s back against a thing is quivalent to lying down while standing erect, which attitude is not hated by hinkers. Laigle de Meaux was pondering without melancholy, over a little isadventure which had befallen him two days previously at the law-school, and hich had modified his personal plans for the future, plans which were rather ndistinct in any case.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.2#Reverie does not prevent a cab from passing by, nor the dreamer from taking ote of that cab. Laigle de Meaux, whose eyes were straying about in a sort of iffuse lounging, perceived, athwart his somnambulism, a two-wheeled vehicle roceeding through the place, at a foot pace and apparently in indecision. For hom was this cabriolet? Why was it driving at a walk? Laigle took a survey. In t, beside the coachman, sat a young man, and in front of the young man lay a ather bulky hand-bag. The bag displayed to passers-by the following name nscribed in large black letters on a card which was sewn to the stuff: MARIUS ONTMERCY.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.3#This name caused Laigle to change his attitude. He drew himself up and urled this apostrophe at the young man in the cabriolet:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.4#“Monsieur Marius Pontmercy!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.5#The cabriolet thus addressed came to a halt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.6#The young man, who also seemed deeply buried in thought, raised his yes:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.7#“Hey?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.8#“You are M. Marius Pontmercy?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.9#“Certainly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.10#“I was looking for you,” resumed Laigle de Meaux.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.11#“How so?” demanded Marius; for it was he: in fact, he had just quitted his randfather’s, and had before him a face which he now beheld for the first time. I do not know you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.12#“Neither do I know you,” responded Laigle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.13#Marius thought he had encountered a wag, the beginning of a mystification n the open street. He was not in a very good humor at the moment. He frowned. aigle de Meaux went on imperturbably:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.14#“You were not at the school day before yesterday.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.15#“That is possible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.16#“That is certain.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.17#“You are a student?” demanded Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.18#“Yes, sir. Like yourself. Day before yesterday, I entered the school, by hance. You know, one does have such freaks sometimes. The professor was just alling the roll. You are not unaware that they are very ridiculous on such ccasions. At the third call, unanswered, your name is erased from the list. ixty francs in the gulf.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.19#Marius began to listen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.20#“It was Blondeau who was making the call. You know Blondeau, he has a very ointed and very malicious nose, and he delights to scent out the absent. He lyly began with the letter P. I was not listening, not being compromised by hat letter. The call was not going badly. No erasures; the universe was resent. Blondeau was grieved. I said to myself: ‘Blondeau, my love, you will ot get the very smallest sort of an execution to-day.’ All at once Blondeau alls, ‘Marius Pontmercy!’ No one answers. Blondeau, filled with hope, repeats ore loudly: ‘Marius Pontmercy!’ And he takes his pen. Monsieur, I have bowels f compassion. I said to myself hastily: ‘Here’s a brave fellow who is going to et scratched out. Attention. Here is a veritable mortal who is not exact. He’s ot a good student. Here is none of your heavy-sides, a student who studies, a reenhorn pedant, strong on letters, theology, science, and sapience, one of hose dull wits cut by the square; a pin by profession. He is an honorable idler ho lounges, who practises country jaunts, who cultivates the grisette, who pays ourt to the fair sex, who is at this very moment, perhaps, with my mistress. et us save him. Death to Blondeau!’ At that moment, Blondeau dipped his pen in, ll black with erasures in the ink, cast his yellow eyes round the audience oom, and repeated for the third time: ‘Marius Pontmercy!’ I replied: ‘Present!’ his is why you were not crossed off.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.21#“Monsieur!—” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.22#“And why I was,” added Laigle de Meaux.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.23#“I do not understand you,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.24#Laigle resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.25#“Nothing is more simple. I was close to the desk to reply, and close to he door for the purpose of flight. The professor gazed at me with a certain ntensity. All of a sudden, Blondeau, who must be the malicious nose alluded to y Boileau, skipped to the letter L. L is my letter. I am from Meaux, and my ame is Lesgle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.26#“L’Aigle!” interrupted Marius, “what fine name!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.27#“Monsieur, Blondeau came to this fine name, and called: ‘Laigle!’ I reply: Present!’ Then Blondeau gazes at me, with the gentleness of a tiger, and says o me: ‘If you are Pontmercy, you are not Laigle.’ A phrase which has a isobliging air for you, but which was lugubrious only for me. That said, he rossed me off.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.28#Marius exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.29#“I am mortified, sir—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.30#“First of all,” interposed Laigle, “I demand permission to embalm Blondeau n a few phrases of deeply felt eulogium. I will assume that he is dead. There ill be no great change required in his gauntness, in his pallor, in his oldness, and in his smell. And I say: ‘_Erudimini qui judicatis terram_. Here ies Blondeau, Blondeau the Nose, Blondeau Nasica, the ox of discipline, _bos isciplinæ_, the bloodhound of the password, the angel of the roll-call, who was pright, square, exact, rigid, honest, and hideous. God crossed him off as he rossed me off.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.31#Marius resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.32#“I am very sorry—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.33#“Young man,” said Laigle de Meaux, “let this serve you as a lesson. In uture, be exact.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.34#“I really beg you a thousand pardons.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.35#“Do not expose your neighbor to the danger of having his name erased gain.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.36#“I am extremely sorry—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.37#Laigle burst out laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.38#“And I am delighted. I was on the brink of becoming a lawyer. This erasure aves me. I renounce the triumphs of the bar. I shall not defend the widow, and shall not attack the orphan. No more toga, no more stage. Here is my erasure ll ready for me. It is to you that I am indebted for it, Monsieur Pontmercy. I ntend to pay a solemn call of thanks upon you. Where do you live?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.39#“In this cab,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.40#“A sign of opulence,” retorted Laigle calmly. “I congratulate you. You ave there a rent of nine thousand francs per annum.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.41#At that moment, Courfeyrac emerged from the café.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.42#Marius smiled sadly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.43#“I have paid this rent for the last two hours, and I aspire to get rid of t; but there is a sort of history attached to it, and I don’t know where to o.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.44#“Come to my place, sir,” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.45#“I have the priority,” observed Laigle, “but I have no home.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.46#“Hold your tongue, Bossuet,” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.47#“Bossuet,” said Marius, “but I thought that your name was Laigle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.48#“De Meaux,” replied Laigle; “by metaphor, Bossuet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.49#Courfeyrac entered the cab.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.50#“Coachman,” said he, “hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.2.51#And that very evening, Marius found himself installed in a chamber of the otel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques side by side with Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.head#CHAPTER III—MARIUS’ ASTONISHMENTS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.1#In a few days, Marius had become Courfeyrac’s friend. Youth is the season or prompt welding and the rapid healing of scars. Marius breathed freely in ourfeyrac’s society, a decidedly new thing for him. Courfeyrac put no questions o him. He did not even think of such a thing. At that age, faces disclose verything on the spot. Words are superfluous. There are young men of whom it an be said that their countenances chatter. One looks at them and one knows hem.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.2#One morning, however, Courfeyrac abruptly addressed this interrogation to im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.3#“By the way, have you any political opinions?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.4#“The idea!” said Marius, almost affronted by the question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.5#“What are you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.6#“A democrat-Bonapartist.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.7#“The gray hue of a reassured rat,” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.8#On the following day, Courfeyrac introduced Marius at the Café Musain. Then e whispered in his ear, with a smile: “I must give you your entry to the evolution.” And he led him to the hall of the Friends of the A B C. He resented him to the other comrades, saying this simple word which Marius did ot understand: “A pupil.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.9#Marius had fallen into a wasps’-nest of wits. However, although he was ilent and grave, he was, nonetheless, both winged and armed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.10#Marius, up to that time solitary and inclined to soliloquy, and to asides, oth by habit and by taste, was a little fluttered by this covey of young men round him. All these various initiatives solicited his attention at once, and ulled him about. The tumultuous movements of these minds at liberty and at work et his ideas in a whirl. Sometimes, in his trouble, they fled so far from him, hat he had difficulty in recovering them. He heard them talk of philosophy, of iterature, of art, of history, of religion, in unexpected fashion. He caught limpses of strange aspects; and, as he did not place them in proper erspective, he was not altogether sure that it was not chaos that he grasped. n abandoning his grandfather’s opinions for the opinions of his father, he had upposed himself fixed; he now suspected, with uneasiness, and without daring to vow it to himself, that he was not. The angle at which he saw everything began o be displaced anew. A certain oscillation set all the horizons of his brains n motion. An odd internal upsetting. He almost suffered from it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.11#It seemed as though there were no “consecrated things” for those young en. Marius heard singular propositions on every sort of subject, which mbarrassed his still timid mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.12#A theatre poster presented itself, adorned with the title of a tragedy rom the ancient repertory called classic: “Down with tragedy dear to the ourgeois!” cried Bahorel. And Marius heard Combeferre reply:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.13#“You are wrong, Bahorel. The bourgeoisie loves tragedy, and the ourgeoisie must be left at peace on that score. Bewigged tragedy has a reason or its existence, and I am not one of those who, by order of Æschylus, contest ts right to existence. There are rough outlines in nature; there are, in reation, ready-made parodies; a beak which is not a beak, wings which are not ings, gills which are not gills, paws which are not paws, a cry of pain which rouses a desire to laugh, there is the duck. Now, since poultry exists by the ide of the bird, I do not see why classic tragedy should not exist in the face f antique tragedy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.14#Or chance decreed that Marius should traverse Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau etween Enjolras and Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.15#Courfeyrac took his arm:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.16#“Pay attention. This is the Rue Plâtrière, now called Rue Jean-Jacques ousseau, on account of a singular household which lived in it sixty years ago. his consisted of Jean-Jacques and Thérèse. From time to time, little beings ere born there. Thérèse gave birth to them, Jean-Jacques represented them as oundlings.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.17#And Enjolras addressed Courfeyrac roughly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.18#“Silence in the presence of Jean-Jacques! I admire that man. He denied his wn children, that may be; but he adopted the people.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.19#Not one of these young men articulated the word: The Emperor. Jean rouvaire alone sometimes said Napoleon; all the others said “Bonaparte.” njolras pronounced it “Buonaparte.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.3.20#Marius was vaguely surprised. _Initium sapientiæ_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE BACK ROOM OF THE CAFÉ MUSAIN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.1#One of the conversations among the young men, at which Marius was present nd in which he sometimes joined, was a veritable shock to his mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.2#This took place in the back room of the Café Musain. Nearly all the Friends f the A B C had convened that evening. The argand lamp was solemnly lighted. hey talked of one thing and another, without passion and with noise. With the xception of Enjolras and Marius, who held their peace, all were haranguing ather at hap-hazard. Conversations between comrades sometimes are subject to hese peaceable tumults. It was a game and an uproar as much as a conversation. hey tossed words to each other and caught them up in turn. They were chattering n all quarters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.3#No woman was admitted to this back room, except Louison, the dish-washer of he café, who passed through it from time to time, to go to her washing in the lavatory.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.4#Grantaire, thoroughly drunk, was deafening the corner of which he had taken ossession, reasoning and contradicting at the top of his lungs, and houting:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.5#“I am thirsty. Mortals, I am dreaming: that the tun of Heidelberg has an ttack of apoplexy, and that I am one of the dozen leeches which will be applied o it. I want a drink. I desire to forget life. Life is a hideous invention of I now not whom. It lasts no time at all, and is worth nothing. One breaks one’s eck in living. Life is a theatre set in which there are but few practicable ntrances. Happiness is an antique reliquary painted on one side only. cclesiastes says: ‘All is vanity.’ I agree with that good man, who never xisted, perhaps. Zero not wishing to go stark naked, clothed himself in vanity. vanity! The patching up of everything with big words! a kitchen is a aboratory, a dancer is a professor, an acrobat is a gymnast, a boxer is a ugilist, an apothecary is a chemist, a wigmaker is an artist, a hodman is an rchitect, a jockey is a sportsman, a wood-louse is a pterigybranche. Vanity has right and a wrong side; the right side is stupid, it is the negro with his lass beads; the wrong side is foolish, it is the philosopher with his rags. I eep over the one and I laugh over the other. What are called honors and ignities, and even dignity and honor, are generally of pinchbeck. Kings make laythings of human pride. Caligula made a horse a consul; Charles II. made a night of a sirloin. Wrap yourself up now, then, between Consul Incitatus and aronet Roastbeef. As for the intrinsic value of people, it is no longer espectable in the least. Listen to the panegyric which neighbor makes of eighbor. White on white is ferocious; if the lily could speak, what a setting own it would give the dove! A bigoted woman prating of a devout woman is more enomous than the asp and the cobra. It is a shame that I am ignorant, otherwise would quote to you a mass of things; but I know nothing. For instance, I have lways been witty; when I was a pupil of Gros, instead of daubing wretched ittle pictures, I passed my time in pilfering apples; _rapin_24 is the asculine of _rapine_. So much for myself; as for the rest of you, you are worth o more than I am. I scoff at your perfections, excellencies, and qualities. very good quality tends towards a defect; economy borders on avarice, the enerous man is next door to the prodigal, the brave man rubs elbows with the raggart; he who says very pious says a trifle bigoted; there are just as many ices in virtue as there are holes in Diogenes’ cloak. Whom do you admire, the lain or the slayer, Cæsar or Brutus? Generally men are in favor of the slayer. ong live Brutus, he has slain! There lies the virtue. Virtue, granted, but adness also. There are queer spots on those great men. The Brutus who killed æsar was in love with the statue of a little boy. This statue was from the hand f the Greek sculptor Strongylion, who also carved that figure of an Amazon nown as the Beautiful Leg, Eucnemos, which Nero carried with him in his ravels. This Strongylion left but two statues which placed Nero and Brutus in ccord. Brutus was in love with the one, Nero with the other. All history is othing but wearisome repetition. One century is the plagiarist of the other. he battle of Marengo copies the battle of Pydna; the Tolbiac of Clovis and the usterlitz of Napoleon are as like each other as two drops of water. I don’t ttach much importance to victory. Nothing is so stupid as to conquer; true lory lies in convincing. But try to prove something! If you are content with uccess, what mediocrity, and with conquering, what wretchedness! Alas, vanity nd cowardice everywhere. Everything obeys success, even grammar. _Si volet sus_, says Horace. Therefore I disdain the human race. Shall we descend to the arty at all? Do you wish me to begin admiring the peoples? What people, if you lease? Shall it be Greece? The Athenians, those Parisians of days gone by, slew hocion, as we might say Coligny, and fawned upon tyrants to such an extent that nacephorus said of Pisistratus: “His urine attracts the bees.” The most rominent man in Greece for fifty years was that grammarian Philetas, who was so mall and so thin that he was obliged to load his shoes with lead in order not o be blown away by the wind. There stood on the great square in Corinth a tatue carved by Silanion and catalogued by Pliny; this statue represented pisthates. What did Episthates do? He invented a trip. That sums up Greece and lory. Let us pass on to others. Shall I admire England? Shall I admire France? rance? Why? Because of Paris? I have just told you my opinion of Athens. ngland? Why? Because of London? I hate Carthage. And then, London, the etropolis of luxury, is the headquarters of wretchedness. There are a hundred eaths a year of hunger in the parish of Charing-Cross alone. Such is Albion. I dd, as the climax, that I have seen an Englishwoman dancing in a wreath of oses and blue spectacles. A fig then for England! If I do not admire John Bull, hall I admire Brother Jonathan? I have but little taste for that slave-holding rother. Take away _Time is money_, what remains of England? Take away _Cotton s king_, what remains of America? Germany is the lymph, Italy is the bile. hall we go into ecstasies over Russia? Voltaire admired it. He also admired hina. I admit that Russia has its beauties, among others, a stout despotism; ut I pity the despots. Their health is delicate. A decapitated Alexis, a oignarded Peter, a strangled Paul, another Paul crushed flat with kicks, divers vans strangled, with their throats cut, numerous Nicholases and Basils oisoned, all this indicates that the palace of the Emperors of Russia is in a ondition of flagrant insalubrity. All civilized peoples offer this detail to he admiration of the thinker; war; now, war, civilized war, exhausts and sums p all the forms of ruffianism, from the brigandage of the Trabuceros in the orges of Mont Jaxa to the marauding of the Comanche Indians in the Doubtful ass. ‘Bah!’ you will say to me, ‘but Europe is certainly better than Asia?’ I dmit that Asia is a farce; but I do not precisely see what you find to laugh at n the Grand Lama, you peoples of the west, who have mingled with your fashions nd your elegances all the complicated filth of majesty, from the dirty chemise f Queen Isabella to the chamber-chair of the Dauphin. Gentlemen of the human ace, I tell you, not a bit of it! It is at Brussels that the most beer is onsumed, at Stockholm the most brandy, at Madrid the most chocolate, at msterdam the most gin, at London the most wine, at Constantinople the most offee, at Paris the most absinthe; there are all the useful notions. Paris arries the day, in short. In Paris, even the rag-pickers are sybarites; iogenes would have loved to be a rag-picker of the Place Maubert better than to e a philosopher at the Piræus. Learn this in addition; the wineshops of the ag-pickers are called _bibines_; the most celebrated are the _Saucepan_ and The Slaughter-House_. Hence, tea-gardens, goguettes, caboulots, bouibuis, astroquets, bastringues, manezingues, bibines of the rag-pickers, caravanseries f the caliphs, I certify to you, I am a voluptuary, I eat at Richard’s at forty ous a head, I must have Persian carpets to roll naked Cleopatra in! Where is leopatra? Ah! So it is you, Louison. Good day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.6#Thus did Grantaire, more than intoxicated, launch into speech, catching at he dish-washer in her passage, from his corner in the back room of the Café usain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.7#Bossuet, extending his hand towards him, tried to impose silence on him, nd Grantaire began again worse than ever:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.8#“Aigle de Meaux, down with your paws. You produce on me no effect with your esture of Hippocrates refusing Artaxerxes’ bric-à-brac. I excuse you from the ask of soothing me. Moreover, I am sad. What do you wish me to say to you? Man s evil, man is deformed; the butterfly is a success, man is a failure. God made mistake with that animal. A crowd offers a choice of ugliness. The first comer s a wretch, _Femme_—woman—rhymes with _infâme_,—infamous. Yes, I have the pleen, complicated with melancholy, with homesickness, plus hypochondria, and I m vexed and I rage, and I yawn, and I am bored, and I am tired to death, and I m stupid! Let God go to the devil!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.9#“Silence then, capital R!” resumed Bossuet, who was discussing a point of aw behind the scenes, and who was plunged more than waist high in a phrase of udicial slang, of which this is the conclusion:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.10#“—And as for me, although I am hardly a legist, and at the most, an mateur attorney, I maintain this: that, in accordance with the terms of the ustoms of Normandy, at Saint-Michel, and for each year, an equivalent must be aid to the profit of the lord of the manor, saving the rights of others, and by ll and several, the proprietors as well as those seized with inheritance, and hat, for all emphyteuses, leases, freeholds, contracts of domain, ortgages—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.11#“Echo, plaintive nymph,” hummed Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.12#Near Grantaire, an almost silent table, a sheet of paper, an inkstand and pen between two glasses of brandy, announced that a vaudeville was being ketched out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.13#This great affair was being discussed in a low voice, and the two heads at ork touched each other: “Let us begin by finding names. When one has the names, ne finds the subject.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.14#“That is true. Dictate. I will write.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.15#“Monsieur Dorimon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.16#“An independent gentleman?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.17#“Of course.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.18#“His daughter, Célestine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.19#“—tine. What next?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.20#“Colonel Sainval.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.21#“Sainval is stale. I should say Valsin.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.22#Beside the vaudeville aspirants, another group, which was also taking dvantage of the uproar to talk low, was discussing a duel. An old fellow of hirty was counselling a young one of eighteen, and explaining to him what sort f an adversary he had to deal with.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.23#“The deuce! Look out for yourself. He is a fine swordsman. His play is eat. He has the attack, no wasted feints, wrist, dash, lightning, a just arade, mathematical parries, _bigre!_ and he is left-handed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.24#In the angle opposite Grantaire, Joly and Bahorel were playing dominoes, nd talking of love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.25#“You are in luck, that you are,” Joly was saying. “You have a mistress who s always laughing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.26#“That is a fault of hers,” returned Bahorel. “One’s mistress does wrong to augh. That encourages one to deceive her. To see her gay removes your remorse; f you see her sad, your conscience pricks you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.27#“Ingrate! a woman who laughs is such a good thing! And you never uarrel!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.28#“That is because of the treaty which we have made. On forming our little oly Alliance we assigned ourselves each our frontier, which we never cross. hat is situated on the side of winter belongs to Vaud, on the side of the wind o Gex. Hence the peace.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.29#“Peace is happiness digesting.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.30#“And you, Jolllly, where do you stand in your entanglement with amselle—you know whom I mean?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.31#“She sulks at me with cruel patience.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.32#“Yet you are a lover to soften the heart with gauntness.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.33#“Alas!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.34#“In your place, I would let her alone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.35#“That is easy enough to say.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.36#“And to do. Is not her name Musichetta?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.37#“Yes. Ah! my poor Bahorel, she is a superb girl, very literary, with tiny eet, little hands, she dresses well, and is white and dimpled, with the eyes of fortune-teller. I am wild over her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.38#“My dear fellow, then in order to please her, you must be elegant, and roduce effects with your knees. Buy a good pair of trousers of double-milled loth at Staub’s. That will assist.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.39#“At what price?” shouted Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.40#The third corner was delivered up to a poetical discussion. Pagan ythology was giving battle to Christian mythology. The question was about lympus, whose part was taken by Jean Prouvaire, out of pure romanticism.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.41#Jean Prouvaire was timid only in repose. Once excited, he burst forth, a ort of mirth accentuated his enthusiasm, and he was at once both laughing and yric.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.42#“Let us not insult the gods,” said he. “The gods may not have taken their eparture. Jupiter does not impress me as dead. The gods are dreams, you say. ell, even in nature, such as it is to-day, after the flight of these dreams, we till find all the grand old pagan myths. Such and such a mountain with the rofile of a citadel, like the Vignemale, for example, is still to me the eaddress of Cybele; it has not been proved to me that Pan does not come at ight to breathe into the hollow trunks of the willows, stopping up the holes in urn with his fingers, and I have always believed that Io had something to do ith the cascade of Pissevache.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.43#In the last corner, they were talking politics. The Charter which had been ranted was getting roughly handled. Combeferre was upholding it weakly. ourfeyrac was energetically making a breach in it. On the table lay an nfortunate copy of the famous Touquet Charter. Courfeyrac had seized it, and as brandishing it, mingling with his arguments the rattling of this sheet of aper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.44#“In the first place, I won’t have any kings; if it were only from an conomical point of view, I don’t want any; a king is a parasite. One does not ave kings gratis. Listen to this: the dearness of kings. At the death of rançois I., the national debt of France amounted to an income of thirty housand livres; at the death of Louis XIV. it was two milliards, six hundred illions, at twenty-eight livres the mark, which was equivalent in 1760, ccording to Desmarets, to four milliards, five hundred millions, which would o-day be equivalent to twelve milliards. In the second place, and no offence to ombeferre, a charter granted is but a poor expedient of civilization. To save he transition, to soften the passage, to deaden the shock, to cause the nation o pass insensibly from the monarchy to democracy by the practice of onstitutional fictions,—what detestable reasons all those are! No! no! let us ever enlighten the people with false daylight. Principles dwindle and pale in our constitutional cellar. No illegitimacy, no compromise, no grant from the ing to the people. In all such grants there is an Article 14. By the side of he hand which gives there is the claw which snatches back. I refuse your harter point-blank. A charter is a mask; the lie lurks beneath it. A people hich accepts a charter abdicates. The law is only the law when entire. No! no harter!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.45#It was winter; a couple of fagots were crackling in the fireplace. This as tempting, and Courfeyrac could not resist. He crumpled the poor Touquet harter in his fist, and flung it in the fire. The paper flashed up. Combeferre atched the masterpiece of Louis XVIII. burn philosophically, and contented imself with saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.46#“The charter metamorphosed into flame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.4.47#And sarcasms, sallies, jests, that French thing which is called _entrain_, nd that English thing which is called humor, good and bad taste, good and bad easons, all the wild pyrotechnics of dialogue, mounting together and crossing rom all points of the room, produced a sort of merry bombardment over their eads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.head#CHAPTER V—ENLARGEMENT OF HORIZON
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.1#The shocks of youthful minds among themselves have this admirable property, hat one can never foresee the spark, nor divine the lightning flash. What will art out presently? No one knows. The burst of laughter starts from a tender eeling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.2#At the moment of jest, the serious makes its entry. Impulses depend on the irst chance word. The spirit of each is sovereign, jest suffices to open the ield to the unexpected. These are conversations with abrupt turns, in which the erspective changes suddenly. Chance is the stage-manager of such onversations.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.3#A severe thought, starting oddly from a clash of words, suddenly traversed he conflict of quips in which Grantaire, Bahorel, Prouvaire, Bossuet, ombeferre, and Courfeyrac were confusedly fencing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.4#How does a phrase crop up in a dialogue? Whence comes it that it suddenly mpresses itself on the attention of those who hear it? We have just said, that o one knows anything about it. In the midst of the uproar, Bossuet all at once erminated some apostrophe to Combeferre, with this date:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.5#“June 18th, 1815, Waterloo.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.6#At this name of Waterloo, Marius, who was leaning his elbows on a table, eside a glass of water, removed his wrist from beneath his chin, and began to aze fixedly at the audience.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.7#“Pardieu!” exclaimed Courfeyrac (“Parbleu” was falling into disuse at this eriod), “that number 18 is strange and strikes me. It is Bonaparte’s fatal umber. Place Louis in front and Brumaire behind, you have the whole destiny of he man, with this significant peculiarity, that the end treads close on the eels of the commencement.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.8#Enjolras, who had remained mute up to that point, broke the silence and ddressed this remark to Combeferre:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.9#“You mean to say, the crime and the expiation.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.10#This word _crime_ overpassed the measure of what Marius, who was already reatly agitated by the abrupt evocation of Waterloo, could accept.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.11#He rose, walked slowly to the map of France spread out on the wall, and at hose base an island was visible in a separate compartment, laid his finger on his compartment and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.12#“Corsica, a little island which has rendered France very great.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.13#This was like a breath of icy air. All ceased talking. They felt that omething was on the point of occurring.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.14#Bahorel, replying to Bossuet, was just assuming an attitude of the torso o which he was addicted. He gave it up to listen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.15#Enjolras, whose blue eye was not fixed on any one, and who seemed to be azing at space, replied, without glancing at Marius:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.16#“France needs no Corsica to be great. France is great because she is rance. _Quia nomina leo_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.17#Marius felt no desire to retreat; he turned towards Enjolras, and his oice burst forth with a vibration which came from a quiver of his very eing:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.18#“God forbid that I should diminish France! But amalgamating Napoleon with er is not diminishing her. Come! let us argue the question. I am a newcomer mong you, but I will confess that you amaze me. Where do we stand? Who are we? ho are you? Who am I? Let us come to an explanation about the Emperor. I hear ou say _Buonaparte_, accenting the _u_ like the Royalists. I warn you that my randfather does better still; he says _Buonaparté_’. I thought you were young en. Where, then, is your enthusiasm? And what are you doing with it? Whom do ou admire, if you do not admire the Emperor? And what more do you want? If you ill have none of that great man, what great men would you like? He had verything. He was complete. He had in his brain the sum of human faculties. He ade codes like Justinian, he dictated like Cæsar, his conversation was mingled ith the lightning-flash of Pascal, with the thunderclap of Tacitus, he made istory and he wrote it, his bulletins are Iliads, he combined the cipher of ewton with the metaphor of Mahomet, he left behind him in the East words as reat as the pyramids, at Tilsit he taught Emperors majesty, at the Academy of ciences he replied to Laplace, in the Council of State he held his own against erlin, he gave a soul to the geometry of the first, and to the chicanery of the ast, he was a legist with the attorneys and sidereal with the astronomers; like romwell blowing out one of two candles, he went to the Temple to bargain for a urtain tassel; he saw everything; he knew everything; which did not prevent him rom laughing good-naturedly beside the cradle of his little child; and all at nce, frightened Europe lent an ear, armies put themselves in motion, parks of rtillery rumbled, pontoons stretched over the rivers, clouds of cavalry alloped in the storm, cries, trumpets, a trembling of thrones in every irection, the frontiers of kingdoms oscillated on the map, the sound of a uperhuman sword was heard, as it was drawn from its sheath; they beheld him, im, rise erect on the horizon with a blazing brand in his hand, and a glow in is eyes, unfolding amid the thunder, his two wings, the grand army and the old uard, and he was the archangel of war!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.19#All held their peace, and Enjolras bowed his head. Silence always produces omewhat the effect of acquiescence, of the enemy being driven to the wall. arius continued with increased enthusiasm, and almost without pausing for reath:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.20#“Let us be just, my friends! What a splendid destiny for a nation to be he Empire of such an Emperor, when that nation is France and when it adds its wn genius to the genius of that man! To appear and to reign, to march and to riumph, to have for halting-places all capitals, to take his grenadiers and to ake kings of them, to decree the falls of dynasties, and to transfigure Europe t the pace of a charge; to make you feel that when you threaten you lay your and on the hilt of the sword of God; to follow in a single man, Hannibal, æsar, Charlemagne; to be the people of some one who mingles with your dawns the tartling announcement of a battle won, to have the cannon of the Invalides to ouse you in the morning, to hurl into abysses of light prodigious words which lame forever, Marengo, Arcola, Austerlitz, Jena, Wagram! To cause onstellations of victories to flash forth at each instant from the zenith of he centuries, to make the French Empire a pendant to the Roman Empire, to be he great nation and to give birth to the grand army, to make its legions fly orth over all the earth, as a mountain sends out its eagles on all sides to onquer, to dominate, to strike with lightning, to be in Europe a sort of nation ilded through glory, to sound athwart the centuries a trumpet-blast of Titans, o conquer the world twice, by conquest and by dazzling, that is sublime; and hat greater thing is there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.21#“To be free,” said Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.22#Marius lowered his head in his turn; that cold and simple word had raversed his epic effusion like a blade of steel, and he felt it vanishing ithin him. When he raised his eyes, Combeferre was no longer there. Probably atisfied with his reply to the apotheosis, he had just taken his departure, and ll, with the exception of Enjolras, had followed him. The room had been mptied. Enjolras, left alone with Marius, was gazing gravely at him. Marius, owever, having rallied his ideas to some extent, did not consider himself eaten; there lingered in him a trace of inward fermentation which was on the oint, no doubt, of translating itself into syllogisms arrayed against Enjolras, hen all of a sudden, they heard some one singing on the stairs as he went. It as Combeferre, and this is what he was singing:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.23#“Si César m’avait donné La gloire et la guerre, Et qu’il me fallait uitter L’amour de ma mère, Je dirais au grand César: Reprends ton sceptre et on char, J’aime mieux ma mère, ô gué! J’aime mieux ma mère!”25
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.24#The wild and tender accents with which Combeferre sang communicated to his couplet a sort of strange grandeur. Marius, thoughtfully, and with his eyes iked on the ceiling, repeated almost mechanically: “My mother?—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.25#At that moment, he felt Enjolras’ hand on his shoulder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.5.26#“Citizen,” said Enjolras to him, “my mother is the Republic.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.head#CHAPTER VI—RES ANGUSTA
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.1#That evening left Marius profoundly shaken, and with a melancholy shadow in is soul. He felt what the earth may possibly feel, at the moment when it is orn open with the iron, in order that grain may be deposited within it; it eels only the wound; the quiver of the germ and the joy of the fruit only rrive later.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.2#Marius was gloomy. He had but just acquired a faith; must he then reject it lready? He affirmed to himself that he would not. He declared to himself that e would not doubt, and he began to doubt in spite of himself. To stand between wo religions, from one of which you have not as yet emerged, and another into hich you have not yet entered, is intolerable; and twilight is pleasing only to at-like souls. Marius was clear-eyed, and he required the true light. The alf-lights of doubt pained him. Whatever may have been his desire to remain here he was, he could not halt there, he was irresistibly constrained to ontinue, to advance, to examine, to think, to march further. Whither would this ead him? He feared, after having taken so many steps which had brought him earer to his father, to now take a step which should estrange him from that ather. His discomfort was augmented by all the reflections which occurred to im. An escarpment rose around him. He was in accord neither with his randfather nor with his friends; daring in the eyes of the one, he was behind he times in the eyes of the others, and he recognized the fact that he was oubly isolated, on the side of age and on the side of youth. He ceased to go to he Café Musain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.3#In the troubled state of his conscience, he no longer thought of certain erious sides of existence. The realities of life do not allow themselves to be orgotten. They soon elbowed him abruptly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.4#One morning, the proprietor of the hotel entered Marius’ room and said to im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.5#“Monsieur Courfeyrac answered for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.6#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.7#“But I must have my money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.8#“Request Courfeyrac to come and talk with me,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.9#Courfeyrac having made his appearance, the host left them. Marius then told im what it had not before occurred to him to relate, that he was the same as lone in the world, and had no relatives.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.10#“What is to become of you?” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.11#“I do not know in the least,” replied Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.12#“What are you going to do?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.13#“I do not know.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.14#“Have you any money?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.15#“Fifteen francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.16#“Do you want me to lend you some?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.17#“Never.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.18#“Have you clothes?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.19#“Here is what I have.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.20#“Have you trinkets?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.21#“A watch.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.22#“Silver?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.23#“Gold; here it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.24#“I know a clothes-dealer who will take your frock-coat and a pair of rousers.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.25#“That is good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.26#“You will then have only a pair of trousers, a waistcoat, a hat and a oat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.27#“And my boots.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.28#“What! you will not go barefoot? What opulence!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.29#“That will be enough.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.30#“I know a watchmaker who will buy your watch.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.31#“That is good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.32#“No; it is not good. What will you do after that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.33#“Whatever is necessary. Anything honest, that is to say.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.34#“Do you know English?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.35#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.36#“Do you know German?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.37#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.38#“So much the worse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.39#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.40#“Because one of my friends, a publisher, is getting up a sort of an ncyclopædia, for which you might have translated English or German articles. It s badly paid work, but one can live by it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.41#“I will learn English and German.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.42#“And in the meanwhile?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.43#“In the meanwhile I will live on my clothes and my watch.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.44#The clothes-dealer was sent for. He paid twenty francs for the cast-off arments. They went to the watchmaker’s. He bought the watch for forty-five rancs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.45#“That is not bad,” said Marius to Courfeyrac, on their return to the otel, “with my fifteen francs, that makes eighty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.46#“And the hotel bill?” observed Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.47#“Hello, I had forgotten that,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.48#The landlord presented his bill, which had to be paid on the spot. It mounted to seventy francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.49#“I have ten francs left,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.50#“The deuce,” exclaimed Courfeyrac, “you will eat up five francs while you re learning English, and five while learning German. That will be swallowing a ongue very fast, or a hundred sous very slowly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.51#In the meantime Aunt Gillenormand, a rather good-hearted person at bottom n difficulties, had finally hunted up Marius’ abode.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.52#One morning, on his return from the law-school, Marius found a letter from is aunt, and the _sixty pistoles_, that is to say, six hundred francs in gold, n a sealed box.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.53#Marius sent back the thirty louis to his aunt, with a respectful letter, n which he stated that he had sufficient means of subsistence and that he hould be able thenceforth to supply all his needs. At that moment, he had three rancs left.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.54#His aunt did not inform his grandfather of this refusal for fear of xasperating him. Besides, had he not said: “Let me never hear the name of that lood-drinker again!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.4.6.55#Marius left the hotel de la Porte Saint-Jacques, as he did not wish to run n debt there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.head#BOOK FIFTH—THE EXCELLENCE OF MISFORTUNE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.head#CHAPTER I—MARIUS INDIGENT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.1#Life became hard for Marius. It was nothing to eat his clothes and his atch. He ate of that terrible, inexpressible thing that is called _de la vache nragé_; that is to say, he endured great hardships and privations. A terrible hing it is, containing days without bread, nights without sleep, evenings ithout a candle, a hearth without a fire, weeks without work, a future without ope, a coat out at the elbows, an old hat which evokes the laughter of young irls, a door which one finds locked on one at night because one’s rent is not aid, the insolence of the porter and the cook-shop man, the sneers of eighbors, humiliations, dignity trampled on, work of whatever nature accepted, isgusts, bitterness, despondency. Marius learned how all this is eaten, and how uch are often the only things which one has to devour. At that moment of his xistence when a man needs his pride, because he needs love, he felt that he was eered at because he was badly dressed, and ridiculous because he was poor. At he age when youth swells the heart with imperial pride, he dropped his eyes ore than once on his dilapidated boots, and he knew the unjust shame and the oignant blushes of wretchedness. Admirable and terrible trial from which the eeble emerge base, from which the strong emerge sublime. A crucible into which estiny casts a man, whenever it desires a scoundrel or a demi-god.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.2#For many great deeds are performed in petty combats. There are instances of ravery ignored and obstinate, which defend themselves step by step in that atal onslaught of necessities and turpitudes. Noble and mysterious triumphs hich no eye beholds, which are requited with no renown, which are saluted with o trumpet blast. Life, misfortune, isolation, abandonment, poverty, are the ields of battle which have their heroes; obscure heroes, who are, sometimes, rander than the heroes who win renown.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.3#Firm and rare natures are thus created; misery, almost always a tep-mother, is sometimes a mother; destitution gives birth to might of soul and pirit; distress is the nurse of pride; unhappiness is a good milk for the agnanimous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.4#There came a moment in Marius’ life, when he swept his own landing, when he ought his sou’s worth of Brie cheese at the fruiterer’s, when he waited until wilight had fallen to slip into the baker’s and purchase a loaf, which he arried off furtively to his attic as though he had stolen it. Sometimes there ould be seen gliding into the butcher’s shop on the corner, in the midst of the antering cooks who elbowed him, an awkward young man, carrying big books under is arm, who had a timid yet angry air, who, on entering, removed his hat from a row whereon stood drops of perspiration, made a profound bow to the butcher’s stonished wife, asked for a mutton cutlet, paid six or seven sous for it, rapped it up in a paper, put it under his arm, between two books, and went way. It was Marius. On this cutlet, which he cooked for himself, he lived for hree days.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.5#On the first day he ate the meat, on the second he ate the fat, on the hird he gnawed the bone. Aunt Gillenormand made repeated attempts, and sent him he sixty pistoles several times. Marius returned them on every occasion, saying hat he needed nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.6#He was still in mourning for his father when the revolution which we have ust described was effected within him. From that time forth, he had not put off is black garments. But his garments were quitting him. The day came when he had o longer a coat. The trousers would go next. What was to be done? Courfeyrac, o whom he had, on his side, done some good turns, gave him an old coat. For hirty sous, Marius got it turned by some porter or other, and it was a new oat. But this coat was green. Then Marius ceased to go out until after ightfall. This made his coat black. As he wished always to appear in mourning, e clothed himself with the night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.7#In spite of all this, he got admitted to practice as a lawyer. He was upposed to live in Courfeyrac’s room, which was decent, and where a certain umber of law-books backed up and completed by several dilapidated volumes of omance, passed as the library required by the regulations. He had his letters ddressed to Courfeyrac’s quarters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.1.8#When Marius became a lawyer, he informed his grandfather of the fact in a etter which was cold but full of submission and respect. M. Gillenormand rembled as he took the letter, read it, tore it in four pieces, and threw it nto the waste-basket. Two or three days later, Mademoiselle Gillenormand heard er father, who was alone in his room, talking aloud to himself. He always did his whenever he was greatly agitated. She listened, and the old man was saying: If you were not a fool, you would know that one cannot be a baron and a lawyer t the same time.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.head#CHAPTER II—MARIUS POOR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.1#It is the same with wretchedness as with everything else. It ends by ecoming bearable. It finally assumes a form, and adjusts itself. One vegetates, hat is to say, one develops in a certain meagre fashion, which is, however, ufficient for life. This is the mode in which the existence of Marius Pontmercy as arranged:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.2#He had passed the worst straits; the narrow pass was opening out a little n front of him. By dint of toil, perseverance, courage, and will, he had anaged to draw from his work about seven hundred francs a year. He had learned erman and English; thanks to Courfeyrac, who had put him in communication with is friend the publisher, Marius filled the modest post of utility man in the iterature of the publishing house. He drew up prospectuses, translated ewspapers, annotated editions, compiled biographies, etc.; net product, year in nd year out, seven hundred francs. He lived on it. How? Not so badly. We will xplain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.3#Marius occupied in the Gorbeau house, for an annual sum of thirty francs, a en minus a fireplace, called a cabinet, which contained only the most ndispensable articles of furniture. This furniture belonged to him. He gave hree francs a month to the old _principal tenant_ to come and sweep his hole, nd to bring him a little hot water every morning, a fresh egg, and a penny oll. He breakfasted on this egg and roll. His breakfast varied in cost from two o four sous, according as eggs were dear or cheap. At six o’clock in the vening he descended the Rue Saint-Jacques to dine at Rousseau’s, opposite asset’s, the stamp-dealer’s, on the corner of the Rue des Mathurins. He ate no oup. He took a six-sou plate of meat, a half-portion of vegetables for three ous, and a three-sou dessert. For three sous he got as much bread as he wished. s for wine, he drank water. When he paid at the desk where Madam Rousseau, at hat period still plump and rosy majestically presided, he gave a sou to the aiter, and Madam Rousseau gave him a smile. Then he went away. For sixteen sous e had a smile and a dinner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.4#This Restaurant Rousseau, where so few bottles and so many water carafes ere emptied, was a calming potion rather than a restaurant. It no longer xists. The proprietor had a fine nickname: he was called _Rousseau the quatic_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.5#Thus, breakfast four sous, dinner sixteen sous; his food cost him twenty ous a day; which made three hundred and sixty-five francs a year. Add the hirty francs for rent, and the thirty-six francs to the old woman, plus a few rifling expenses; for four hundred and fifty francs, Marius was fed, lodged, nd waited on. His clothing cost him a hundred francs, his linen fifty francs, is washing fifty francs; the whole did not exceed six hundred and fifty francs. e was rich. He sometimes lent ten francs to a friend. Courfeyrac had once been ble to borrow sixty francs of him. As far as fire was concerned, as Marius had o fireplace, he had “simplified matters.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.6#Marius always had two complete suits of clothes, the one old, “for every ay”; the other, brand new for special occasions. Both were black. He had but hree shirts, one on his person, the second in the commode, and the third in the asherwoman’s hands. He renewed them as they wore out. They were always ragged, hich caused him to button his coat to the chin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.7#It had required years for Marius to attain to this flourishing condition. ard years; difficult, some of them, to traverse, others to climb. Marius had ot failed for a single day. He had endured everything in the way of estitution; he had done everything except contract debts. He did himself the ustice to say that he had never owed any one a sou. A debt was, to him, the eginning of slavery. He even said to himself, that a creditor is worse than a aster; for the master possesses only your person, a creditor possesses your ignity and can administer to it a box on the ear. Rather than borrow, he went ithout food. He had passed many a day fasting. Feeling that all extremes meet, nd that, if one is not on one’s guard, lowered fortunes may lead to baseness of oul, he kept a jealous watch on his pride. Such and such a formality or action, hich, in any other situation would have appeared merely a deference to him, now eemed insipidity, and he nerved himself against it. His face wore a sort of evere flush. He was timid even to rudeness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.8#During all these trials he had felt himself encouraged and even uplifted, t times, by a secret force that he possessed within himself. The soul aids the ody, and at certain moments, raises it. It is the only bird which bears up its wn cage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.2.9#Besides his father’s name, another name was graven in Marius’ heart, the ame of Thénardier. Marius, with his grave and enthusiastic nature, surrounded ith a sort of aureole the man to whom, in his thoughts, he owed his father’s ife,—that intrepid sergeant who had saved the colonel amid the bullets and the annon-balls of Waterloo. He never separated the memory of this man from the emory of his father, and he associated them in his veneration. It was a sort of orship in two steps, with the grand altar for the colonel and the lesser one or Thénardier. What redoubled the tenderness of his gratitude towards hénardier, was the idea of the distress into which he knew that Thénardier had allen, and which had engulfed the latter. Marius had learned at Montfermeil of he ruin and bankruptcy of the unfortunate inn-keeper. Since that time, he had ade unheard-of efforts to find traces of him and to reach him in that dark byss of misery in which Thénardier had disappeared. Marius had beaten the whole ountry; he had gone to Chelles, to Bondy, to Gourney, to Nogent, to Lagny. He ad persisted for three years, expending in these explorations the little money hich he had laid by. No one had been able to give him any news of Thénardier: e was supposed to have gone abroad. His creditors had also sought him, with ess love than Marius, but with as much assiduity, and had not been able to lay heir hands on him. Marius blamed himself, and was almost angry with himself for is lack of success in his researches. It was the only debt left him by the olonel, and Marius made it a matter of honor to pay it. “What,” he thought, when my father lay dying on the field of battle, did Thénardier contrive to ind him amid the smoke and the grape-shot, and bear him off on his shoulders, nd yet he owed him nothing, and I, who owe so much to Thénardier, cannot join im in this shadow where he is lying in the pangs of death, and in my turn bring im back from death to life! Oh! I will find him!” To find Thénardier, in fact, arius would have given one of his arms, to rescue him from his misery, he would ave sacrificed all his blood. To see Thénardier, to render Thénardier some ervice, to say to him: “You do not know me; well, I do know you! Here I am. ispose of me!” This was Marius’ sweetest and most magnificent dream.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.head#CHAPTER III—MARIUS GROWN UP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.1#At this epoch, Marius was twenty years of age. It was three years since he ad left his grandfather. Both parties had remained on the same terms, without ttempting to approach each other, and without seeking to see each other. esides, what was the use of seeing each other? Marius was the brass vase, while ather Gillenormand was the iron pot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.2#We admit that Marius was mistaken as to his grandfather’s heart. He had magined that M. Gillenormand had never loved him, and that that crusty, harsh, nd smiling old fellow who cursed, shouted, and stormed and brandished his cane, herished for him, at the most, only that affection, which is at once slight and evere, of the dotards of comedy. Marius was in error. There are fathers who do ot love their children; there exists no grandfather who does not adore his randson. At bottom, as we have said, M. Gillenormand idolized Marius. He dolized him after his own fashion, with an accompaniment of snappishness and oxes on the ear; but, this child once gone, he felt a black void in his heart; e would allow no one to mention the child to him, and all the while secretly egretted that he was so well obeyed. At first, he hoped that this Buonapartist, his Jacobin, this terrorist, this Septembrist, would return. But the weeks assed by, years passed; to M. Gillenormand’s great despair, the “blood-drinker” id not make his appearance. “I could not do otherwise than turn him out,” said he grandfather to himself, and he asked himself: “If the thing were to do over gain, would I do it?” His pride instantly answered “yes,” but his aged head, hich he shook in silence, replied sadly “no.” He had his hours of depression. e missed Marius. Old men need affection as they need the sun. It is warmth. trong as his nature was, the absence of Marius had wrought some change in him. othing in the world could have induced him to take a step towards “that rogue”; ut he suffered. He never inquired about him, but he thought of him incessantly. e lived in the Marais in a more and more retired manner; he was still merry and iolent as of old, but his merriment had a convulsive harshness, and his iolences always terminated in a sort of gentle and gloomy dejection. He ometimes said: “Oh! if he only would return, what a good box on the ear I would ive him!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.3#As for his aunt, she thought too little to love much; Marius was no longer or her much more than a vague black form; and she eventually came to occupy erself with him much less than with the cat or the paroquet which she probably ad. What augmented Father Gillenormand’s secret suffering was, that he locked t all up within his breast, and did not allow its existence to be divined. His orrow was like those recently invented furnaces which consume their own smoke. t sometimes happened that officious busybodies spoke to him of Marius, and sked him: “What is your grandson doing?” “What has become of him?” The old ourgeois replied with a sigh, that he was a sad case, and giving a fillip to is cuff, if he wished to appear gay: “Monsieur le Baron de Pontmercy is ractising pettifogging in some corner or other.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.4#While the old man regretted, Marius applauded himself. As is the case with ll good-hearted people, misfortune had eradicated his bitterness. He only hought of M. Gillenormand in an amiable light, but he had set his mind on not eceiving anything more from the man who _had been unkind to his father_. This as the mitigated translation of his first indignation. Moreover, he was happy t having suffered, and at suffering still. It was for his father’s sake. The ardness of his life satisfied and pleased him. He said to himself with a sort f joy that— _it was certainly the least he could do_; that it was an xpiation;—that, had it not been for that, he would have been punished in some ther way and later on for his impious indifference towards his father, and such father! that it would not have been just that his father should have all the uffering, and he none of it; and that, in any case, what were his toils and his estitution compared with the colonel’s heroic life? that, in short, the only ay for him to approach his father and resemble him, was to be brave in the face f indigence, as the other had been valiant before the enemy; and that that was, o doubt, what the colonel had meant to imply by the words: “He will be worthy f it.” Words which Marius continued to wear, not on his breast, since the olonel’s writing had disappeared, but in his heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.5#And then, on the day when his grandfather had turned him out of doors, he ad been only a child, now he was a man. He felt it. Misery, we repeat, had been ood for him. Poverty in youth, when it succeeds, has this magnificent property bout it, that it turns the whole will towards effort, and the whole soul owards aspiration. Poverty instantly lays material life bare and renders it ideous; hence inexpressible bounds towards the ideal life. The wealthy young an has a hundred coarse and brilliant distractions, horse races, hunting, dogs, obacco, gaming, good repasts, and all the rest of it; occupations for the baser ide of the soul, at the expense of the loftier and more delicate sides. The oor young man wins his bread with difficulty; he eats; when he has eaten, he as nothing more but meditation. He goes to the spectacles which God furnishes ratis; he gazes at the sky, space, the stars, flowers, children, the humanity mong which he is suffering, the creation amid which he beams. He gazes so much n humanity that he perceives its soul, he gazes upon creation to such an extent hat he beholds God. He dreams, he feels himself great; he dreams on, and feels imself tender. From the egotism of the man who suffers he passes to the ompassion of the man who meditates. An admirable sentiment breaks forth in him, orgetfulness of self and pity for all. As he thinks of the innumerable njoyments which nature offers, gives, and lavishes to souls which stand open, nd refuses to souls that are closed, he comes to pity, he the millionnaire of he mind, the millionnaire of money. All hatred departs from his heart, in roportion as light penetrates his spirit. And is he unhappy? No. The misery of young man is never miserable. The first young lad who comes to hand, however oor he may be, with his strength, his health, his rapid walk, his brilliant yes, his warmly circulating blood, his black hair, his red lips, his white eeth, his pure breath, will always arouse the envy of an aged emperor. And hen, every morning, he sets himself afresh to the task of earning his bread; nd while his hands earn his bread, his dorsal column gains pride, his brain athers ideas. His task finished, he returns to ineffable ecstasies, to ontemplation, to joys; he beholds his feet set in afflictions, in obstacles, on he pavement, in the nettles, sometimes in the mire; his head in the light. He s firm, serene, gentle, peaceful, attentive, serious, content with little, indly; and he thanks God for having bestowed on him those two forms of riches hich many a rich man lacks: work, which makes him free; and thought, which akes him dignified.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.6#This is what had happened with Marius. To tell the truth, he inclined a ittle too much to the side of contemplation. From the day when he had succeeded n earning his living with some approach to certainty, he had stopped, thinking t good to be poor, and retrenching time from his work to give to thought; that s to say, he sometimes passed entire days in meditation, absorbed, engulfed, ike a visionary, in the mute voluptuousness of ecstasy and inward radiance. He ad thus propounded the problem of his life: to toil as little as possible at aterial labor, in order to toil as much as possible at the labor which is mpalpable; in other words, to bestow a few hours on real life, and to cast the est to the infinite. As he believed that he lacked nothing, he did not perceive hat contemplation, thus understood, ends by becoming one of the forms of dleness; that he was contenting himself with conquering the first necessities f life, and that he was resting from his labors too soon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.7#It was evident that, for this energetic and enthusiastic nature, this could nly be a transitory state, and that, at the first shock against the inevitable omplications of destiny, Marius would awaken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.8#In the meantime, although he was a lawyer, and whatever Father Gillenormand hought about the matter, he was not practising, he was not even pettifogging. editation had turned him aside from pleading. To haunt attorneys, to follow the ourt, to hunt up cases—what a bore! Why should he do it? He saw no reason for hanging the manner of gaining his livelihood! The obscure and ill-paid ublishing establishment had come to mean for him a sure source of work which id not involve too much labor, as we have explained, and which sufficed for his ants.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.9#One of the publishers for whom he worked, M. Magimel, I think, offered to ake him into his own house, to lodge him well, to furnish him with regular ccupation, and to give him fifteen hundred francs a year. To be well lodged! ifteen hundred francs! No doubt. But renounce his liberty! Be on fixed wages! A ort of hired man of letters! According to Marius’ opinion, if he accepted, his osition would become both better and worse at the same time, he acquired omfort, and lost his dignity; it was a fine and complete unhappiness converted nto a repulsive and ridiculous state of torture: something like the case of a lind man who should recover the sight of one eye. He refused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.10#Marius dwelt in solitude. Owing to his taste for remaining outside of verything, and through having been too much alarmed, he had not entered ecidedly into the group presided over by Enjolras. They had remained good riends; they were ready to assist each other on occasion in every possible way; ut nothing more. Marius had two friends: one young, Courfeyrac; and one old, M. abeuf. He inclined more to the old man. In the first place, he owed to him the evolution which had taken place within him; to him he was indebted for having nown and loved his father. “He operated on me for a cataract,” he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.11#The churchwarden had certainly played a decisive part.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.12#It was not, however, that M. Mabeuf had been anything but the calm and mpassive agent of Providence in this connection. He had enlightened Marius by hance and without being aware of the fact, as does a candle which some one rings; he had been the candle and not the some one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.13#As for Marius’ inward political revolution, M. Mabeuf was totally ncapable of comprehending it, of willing or of directing it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.3.14#As we shall see M. Mabeuf again, later on, a few words will not be uperfluous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.head#CHAPTER IV—M. MABEUF
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.1#On the day when M. Mabeuf said to Marius: “Certainly I approve of political pinions,” he expressed the real state of his mind. All political opinions were atters of indifference to him, and he approved them all, without distinction, rovided they left him in peace, as the Greeks called the Furies “the beautiful, he good, the charming,” the Eumenides. M. Mabeuf’s political opinion consisted n a passionate love for plants, and, above all, for books. Like all the rest of he world, he possessed the termination in _ist_, without which no one could xist at that time, but he was neither a Royalist, a Bonapartist, a Chartist, an rleanist, nor an Anarchist; he was a _bouquinist_, a collector of old books. He id not understand how men could busy themselves with hating each other because f silly stuff like the charter, democracy, legitimacy, monarchy, the republic, tc., when there were in the world all sorts of mosses, grasses, and shrubs hich they might be looking at, and heaps of folios, and even of 32mos, which hey might turn over. He took good care not to become useless; having books did ot prevent his reading, being a botanist did not prevent his being a gardener. hen he made Pontmercy’s acquaintance, this sympathy had existed between the olonel and himself—that what the colonel did for flowers, he did for fruits. M. abeuf had succeeded in producing seedling pears as savory as the pears of St. ermain; it is from one of his combinations, apparently, that the October irabelle, now celebrated and no less perfumed than the summer Mirabelle, owes ts origin. He went to mass rather from gentleness than from piety, and because, s he loved the faces of men, but hated their noise, he found them assembled and ilent only in church. Feeling that he must be something in the State, he had hosen the career of warden. However, he had never succeeded in loving any woman s much as a tulip bulb, nor any man as much as an Elzevir. He had long passed ixty, when, one day, some one asked him: “Have you never been married?” “I have orgotten,” said he. When it sometimes happened to him—and to whom does it not appen?—to say: “Oh! if I were only rich!” it was not when ogling a pretty girl, s was the case with Father Gillenormand, but when contemplating an old book. He ived alone with an old housekeeper. He was somewhat gouty, and when he was sleep, his aged fingers, stiffened with rheumatism, lay crooked up in the folds f his sheets. He had composed and published a _Flora of the Environs of auteretz_, with colored plates, a work which enjoyed a tolerable measure of steem and which sold well. People rang his bell, in the Rue Mésières, two or hree times a day, to ask for it. He drew as much as two thousand francs a year rom it; this constituted nearly the whole of his fortune. Although poor, he had ad the talent to form for himself, by dint of patience, privations, and time, a recious collection of rare copies of every sort. He never went out without a ook under his arm, and he often returned with two. The sole decoration of the our rooms on the ground floor, which composed his lodgings, consisted of framed erbariums, and engravings of the old masters. The sight of a sword or a gun hilled his blood. He had never approached a cannon in his life, even at the nvalides. He had a passable stomach, a brother who was a curé, perfectly white air, no teeth, either in his mouth or his mind, a trembling in every limb, a icard accent, an infantile laugh, the air of an old sheep, and he was easily rightened. Add to this, that he had no other friendship, no other acquaintance mong the living, than an old bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques, named oyal. His dream was to naturalize indigo in France.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.2#His servant was also a sort of innocent. The poor good old woman was a pinster. Sultan, her cat, which might have mewed Allegri’s miserere in the ixtine Chapel, had filled her heart and sufficed for the quantity of passion hich existed in her. None of her dreams had ever proceeded as far as man. She ad never been able to get further than her cat. Like him, she had a moustache. er glory consisted in her caps, which were always white. She passed her time, n Sundays, after mass, in counting over the linen in her chest, and in preading out on her bed the dresses in the piece which she bought and never had ade up. She knew how to read. M. Mabeuf had nicknamed her Mother Plutarque.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.3#M. Mabeuf had taken a fancy to Marius, because Marius, being young and entle, warmed his age without startling his timidity. Youth combined with entleness produces on old people the effect of the sun without wind. When arius was saturated with military glory, with gunpowder, with marches and ountermarches, and with all those prodigious battles in which his father had iven and received such tremendous blows of the sword, he went to see M. Mabeuf, nd M. Mabeuf talked to him of his hero from the point of view of flowers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.4#His brother the curé died about 1830, and almost immediately, as when the ight is drawing on, the whole horizon grew dark for M. Mabeuf. A notary’s ailure deprived him of the sum of ten thousand francs, which was all that he ossessed in his brother’s right and his own. The Revolution of July brought a risis to publishing. In a period of embarrassment, the first thing which does ot sell is a _Flora. The Flora of the Environs of Cauteretz_ stopped short. eeks passed by without a single purchaser. Sometimes M. Mabeuf started at the ound of the bell. “Monsieur,” said Mother Plutarque sadly, “it is the ater-carrier.” In short, one day, M. Mabeuf quitted the Rue Mésières, abdicated he functions of warden, gave up Saint-Sulpice, sold not a part of his books, ut of his prints,—that to which he was the least attached,—and installed imself in a little house on the Rue Montparnasse, where, however, he remained ut one quarter for two reasons: in the first place, the ground floor and the arden cost three hundred francs, and he dared not spend more than two hundred rancs on his rent; in the second, being near Faton’s shooting-gallery, he could ear the pistol-shots; which was intolerable to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.5#He carried off his _Flora_, his copper-plates, his herbariums, his ortfolios, and his books, and established himself near the Salpêtrière, in a ort of thatched cottage of the village of Austerlitz, where, for fifty crowns a ear, he got three rooms and a garden enclosed by a hedge, and containing a ell. He took advantage of this removal to sell off nearly all his furniture. On he day of his entrance into his new quarters, he was very gay, and drove the ails on which his engravings and herbariums were to hang, with his own hands, ug in his garden the rest of the day, and at night, perceiving that Mother lutarque had a melancholy air, and was very thoughtful, he tapped her on the houlder and said to her with a smile: “We have the indigo!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.6#Only two visitors, the bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques and Marius, ere admitted to view the thatched cottage at Austerlitz, a brawling name which as, to tell the truth, extremely disagreeable to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.7#However, as we have just pointed out, brains which are absorbed in some bit f wisdom, or folly, or, as it often happens, in both at once, are but slowly ccessible to the things of actual life. Their own destiny is a far-off thing to hem. There results from such concentration a passivity, which, if it were the utcome of reasoning, would resemble philosophy. One declines, descends, rickles away, even crumbles away, and yet is hardly conscious of it one’s self. t always ends, it is true, in an awakening, but the awakening is tardy. In the eantime, it seems as though we held ourselves neutral in the game which is oing on between our happiness and our unhappiness. We are the stake, and we ook on at the game with indifference.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.8#It is thus that, athwart the cloud which formed about him, when all his opes were extinguished one after the other, M. Mabeuf remained rather uerilely, but profoundly serene. His habits of mind had the regular swing of a endulum. Once mounted on an illusion, he went for a very long time, even after he illusion had disappeared. A clock does not stop short at the precise moment hen the key is lost.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.9#M. Mabeuf had his innocent pleasures. These pleasures were inexpensive and nexpected; the merest chance furnished them. One day, Mother Plutarque was eading a romance in one corner of the room. She was reading aloud, finding that he understood better thus. To read aloud is to assure one’s self of what one is eading. There are people who read very loud, and who have the appearance of iving themselves their word of honor as to what they are perusing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.10#It was with this sort of energy that Mother Plutarque was reading the omance which she had in hand. M. Mabeuf heard her without listening to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.11#In the course of her reading, Mother Plutarque came to this phrase. It was question of an officer of dragoons and a beauty:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.12#“—The beauty pouted, and the dragoon—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.13#Here she interrupted herself to wipe her glasses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.14#“Bouddha and the Dragon,” struck in M. Mabeuf in a low voice. “Yes, it is rue that there was a dragon, which, from the depths of its cave, spouted flame hrough his maw and set the heavens on fire. Many stars had already been onsumed by this monster, which, besides, had the claws of a tiger. Bouddha went nto its den and succeeded in converting the dragon. That is a good book that ou are reading, Mother Plutarque. There is no more beautiful legend in xistence.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.4.15#And M. Mabeuf fell into a delicious reverie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.head#CHAPTER V—POVERTY A GOOD NEIGHBOR FOR MISERY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.1#Marius liked this candid old man who saw himself gradually falling into the lutches of indigence, and who came to feel astonishment, little by little, ithout, however, being made melancholy by it. Marius met Courfeyrac and sought ut M. Mabeuf. Very rarely, however; twice a month at most.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.2#Marius’ pleasure consisted in taking long walks alone on the outer oulevards, or in the Champs-de-Mars, or in the least frequented alleys of the uxembourg. He often spent half a day in gazing at a market garden, the beds of ettuce, the chickens on the dung-heap, the horse turning the water-wheel. The assers-by stared at him in surprise, and some of them thought his attire uspicious and his mien sinister. He was only a poor young man dreaming in an bjectless way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.3#It was during one of his strolls that he had hit upon the Gorbeau house, nd, tempted by its isolation and its cheapness, had taken up his abode there. e was known there only under the name of M. Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.4#Some of his father’s old generals or old comrades had invited him to go and ee them, when they learned about him. Marius had not refused their invitations. hey afforded opportunities of talking about his father. Thus he went from time o time, to Comte Pajol, to General Bellavesne, to General Fririon, to the nvalides. There was music and dancing there. On such evenings, Marius put on is new coat. But he never went to these evening parties or balls except on days hen it was freezing cold, because he could not afford a carriage, and he did ot wish to arrive with boots otherwise than like mirrors.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.5#He said sometimes, but without bitterness: “Men are so made that in a rawing-room you may be soiled everywhere except on your shoes. In order to nsure a good reception there, only one irreproachable thing is asked of you; our conscience? No, your boots.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.6#All passions except those of the heart are dissipated by reverie. Marius’ olitical fevers vanished thus. The Revolution of 1830 assisted in the process, y satisfying and calming him. He remained the same, setting aside his fits of rath. He still held the same opinions. Only, they had been tempered. To speak ccurately, he had no longer any opinions, he had sympathies. To what party did e belong? To the party of humanity. Out of humanity he chose France; out of the ation he chose the people; out of the people he chose the woman. It was to that oint above all, that his pity was directed. Now he preferred an idea to a deed, poet to a hero, and he admired a book like Job more than an event like arengo. And then, when, after a day spent in meditation, he returned in the vening through the boulevards, and caught a glimpse through the branches of the rees of the fathomless space beyond, the nameless gleams, the abyss, the hadow, the mystery, all that which is only human seemed very pretty indeed to im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.7#He thought that he had, and he really had, in fact, arrived at the truth of ife and of human philosophy, and he had ended by gazing at nothing but heaven, he only thing which Truth can perceive from the bottom of her well.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.8#This did not prevent him from multiplying his plans, his combinations, his caffoldings, his projects for the future. In this state of reverie, an eye hich could have cast a glance into Marius’ interior would have been dazzled ith the purity of that soul. In fact, had it been given to our eyes of the lesh to gaze into the consciences of others, we should be able to judge a man uch more surely according to what he dreams, than according to what he thinks. here is will in thought, there is none in dreams. Reverie, which is utterly pontaneous, takes and keeps, even in the gigantic and the ideal, the form of ur spirit. Nothing proceeds more directly and more sincerely from the very epth of our soul, than our unpremeditated and boundless aspirations towards the plendors of destiny. In these aspirations, much more than in deliberate, ational co-ordinated ideas, is the real character of a man to be found. Our himæras are the things which the most resemble us. Each one of us dreams of the nknown and the impossible in accordance with his nature.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.9#Towards the middle of this year 1831, the old woman who waited on Marius old him that his neighbors, the wretched Jondrette family, had been turned out f doors. Marius, who passed nearly the whole of his days out of the house, ardly knew that he had any neighbors.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.10#“Why are they turned out?” he asked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.11#“Because they do not pay their rent; they owe for two quarters.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.12#“How much is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.13#“Twenty francs,” said the old woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.14#Marius had thirty francs saved up in a drawer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.5.15#“Here,” he said to the old woman, “take these twenty-five francs. Pay for he poor people and give them five francs, and do not tell them that it was .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE SUBSTITUTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.1#It chanced that the regiment to which Lieutenant Théodule belonged came to erform garrison duty in Paris. This inspired Aunt Gillenormand with a second dea. She had, on the first occasion, hit upon the plan of having Marius spied pon by Théodule; now she plotted to have Théodule take Marius’ place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.2#At all events and in case the grandfather should feel the vague need of a oung face in the house,—these rays of dawn are sometimes sweet to ruin,—it was xpedient to find another Marius. “Take it as a simple erratum,” she thought, such as one sees in books. For Marius, read Théodule.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.3#A grandnephew is almost the same as a grandson; in default of a lawyer one akes a lancer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.4#One morning, when M. Gillenormand was about to read something in the Quotidienne_, his daughter entered and said to him in her sweetest voice; for he question concerned her favorite:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.5#“Father, Théodule is coming to present his respects to you this orning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.6#“Who’s Théodule?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.7#“Your grandnephew.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.8#“Ah!” said the grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.9#Then he went back to his reading, thought no more of his grandnephew, who as merely some Théodule or other, and soon flew into a rage, which almost lways happened when he read. The “sheet” which he held, although Royalist, of ourse, announced for the following day, without any softening phrases, one of hese little events which were of daily occurrence at that date in Paris: “That he students of the schools of law and medicine were to assemble on the Place du anthéon, at midday,—to deliberate.” The discussion concerned one of the uestions of the moment, the artillery of the National Guard, and a conflict etween the Minister of War and “the citizen’s militia,” on the subject of the annon parked in the courtyard of the Louvre. The students were to “deliberate” ver this. It did not take much more than this to swell M. Gillenormand’s age.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.10#He thought of Marius, who was a student, and who would probably go with he rest, to “deliberate, at midday, on the Place du Panthéon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.11#As he was indulging in this painful dream, Lieutenant Théodule entered lad in plain clothes as a bourgeois, which was clever of him, and was iscreetly introduced by Mademoiselle Gillenormand. The lancer had reasoned as ollows: “The old druid has not sunk all his money in a life pension. It is well o disguise one’s self as a civilian from time to time.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.12#Mademoiselle Gillenormand said aloud to her father:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.13#“Théodule, your grandnephew.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.14#And in a low voice to the lieutenant:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.15#“Approve of everything.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.16#And she withdrew.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.17#The lieutenant, who was but little accustomed to such venerable ncounters, stammered with some timidity: “Good day, uncle,”—and made a salute omposed of the involuntary and mechanical outline of the military salute inished off as a bourgeois salute.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.18#“Ah! so it’s you; that is well, sit down,” said the old gentleman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.19#That said, he totally forgot the lancer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.20#Théodule seated himself, and M. Gillenormand rose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.21#M. Gillenormand began to pace back and forth, his hands in his pockets, alking aloud, and twitching, with his irritated old fingers, at the two watches hich he wore in his two fobs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.22#“That pack of brats! they convene on the Place du Panthéon! by my life! rchins who were with their nurses but yesterday! If one were to squeeze their oses, milk would burst out. And they deliberate to-morrow, at midday. What are e coming to? What are we coming to? It is clear that we are making for the byss. That is what the _descamisados_ have brought us to! To deliberate on the itizen artillery! To go and jabber in the open air over the jibes of the ational Guard! And with whom are they to meet there? Just see whither acobinism leads. I will bet anything you like, a million against a counter, hat there will be no one there but returned convicts and released alley-slaves. The Republicans and the galley-slaves,—they form but one nose and ne handkerchief. Carnot used to say: ‘Where would you have me go, traitor?’ ouché replied: ‘Wherever you please, imbecile!’ That’s what the Republicans are ike.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.23#“That is true,” said Théodule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.24#M. Gillenormand half turned his head, saw Théodule, and went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.25#“When one reflects that that scoundrel was so vile as to turn carbonaro! hy did you leave my house? To go and become a Republican! Pssst! In the first lace, the people want none of your republic, they have common sense, they know ell that there always have been kings, and that there always will be; they know ell that the people are only the people, after all, they make sport of it, of our republic—do you understand, idiot? Is it not a horrible caprice? To fall in ove with Père Duchesne, to make sheep’s-eyes at the guillotine, to sing omances, and play on the guitar under the balcony of ’93—it’s enough to make ne spit on all these young fellows, such fools are they! They are all alike. ot one escapes. It suffices for them to breathe the air which blows through the treet to lose their senses. The nineteenth century is poison. The first scamp hat happens along lets his beard grow like a goat’s, thinks himself a real coundrel, and abandons his old relatives. He’s a Republican, he’s a romantic. hat does that mean, romantic? Do me the favor to tell me what it is. All ossible follies. A year ago, they ran to _Hernani_. Now, I just ask you, Hernani!_ antitheses! abominations which are not even written in French! And hen, they have cannons in the courtyard of the Louvre. Such are the rascalities f this age!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.26#“You are right, uncle,” said Théodule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.27#M. Gillenormand resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.28#“Cannons in the courtyard of the Museum! For what purpose? Do you want to ire grape-shot at the Apollo Belvedere? What have those cartridges to do with he Venus de Medici? Oh! the young men of the present day are all blackguards! hat a pretty creature is their Benjamin Constant! And those who are not rascals re simpletons! They do all they can to make themselves ugly, they are badly ressed, they are afraid of women, in the presence of petticoats they have a endicant air which sets the girls into fits of laughter; on my word of honor, ne would say the poor creatures were ashamed of love. They are deformed, and hey complete themselves by being stupid; they repeat the puns of Tiercelin and otier, they have sack coats, stablemen’s waistcoats, shirts of coarse linen, rousers of coarse cloth, boots of coarse leather, and their rigmarole resembles heir plumage. One might make use of their jargon to put new soles on their old hoes. And all this awkward batch of brats has political opinions, if you lease. Political opinions should be strictly forbidden. They fabricate systems, hey recast society, they demolish the monarchy, they fling all laws to the arth, they put the attic in the cellar’s place and my porter in the place of he King, they turn Europe topsy-turvy, they reconstruct the world, and all heir love affairs consist in staring slily at the ankles of the laundresses as hese women climb into their carts. Ah! Marius! Ah! you blackguard! to go and ociferate on the public place! to discuss, to debate, to take measures! They all that measures, just God! Disorder humbles itself and becomes silly. I have een chaos, I now see a mess. Students deliberating on the National Guard,—such thing could not be seen among the Ogibewas nor the Cadodaches! Savages who go aked, with their noddles dressed like a shuttlecock, with a club in their paws, re less of brutes than those bachelors of arts! The four-penny monkeys! And hey set up for judges! Those creatures deliberate and ratiocinate! The end of he world is come! This is plainly the end of this miserable terraqueous globe! final hiccough was required, and France has emitted it. Deliberate, my ascals! Such things will happen so long as they go and read the newspapers nder the arcades of the Odéon. That costs them a sou, and their good sense, and heir intelligence, and their heart and their soul, and their wits. They emerge hence, and decamp from their families. All newspapers are pests; all, even the Drapeau Blanc!_ At bottom, Martainville was a Jacobin. Ah! just Heaven! you may oast of having driven your grandfather to despair, that you may!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.29#“That is evident,” said Théodule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.30#And profiting by the fact that M. Gillenormand was taking breath, the ancer added in a magisterial manner:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.31#“There should be no other newspaper than the _Moniteur_, and no other book han the _Annuaire Militaire_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.32#M. Gillenormand continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.33#“It is like their Sieyès! A regicide ending in a senator; for that is the ay they always end. They give themselves a scar with the address of _thou_ as itizens, in order to get themselves called, eventually, _Monsieur le Comte_. onsieur le Comte as big as my arm, assassins of September. The philosopher ieyès! I will do myself the justice to say, that I have never had any better pinion of the philosophies of all those philosophers, than of the spectacles of he grimacer of Tivoli! One day I saw the Senators cross the Quai Malplaquet in antles of violet velvet sown with bees, with hats à la Henri IV. They were ideous. One would have pronounced them monkeys from the tiger’s court. itizens, I declare to you, that your progress is madness, that your humanity is dream, that your revolution is a crime, that your republic is a monster, that our young and virgin France comes from the brothel, and I maintain it against ll, whoever you may be, whether journalists, economists, legists, or even were ou better judges of liberty, of equality, and fraternity than the knife of the uillotine! And that I announce to you, my fine fellows!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.34#“Parbleu!” cried the lieutenant, “that is wonderfully true.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.35#M. Gillenormand paused in a gesture which he had begun, wheeled round, tared Lancer Théodule intently in the eyes, and said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.5.6.36#“You are a fool.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.head#BOOK SIXTH—THE CONJUNCTION OF TWO STARS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE SOBRIQUET: MODE OF FORMATION OF FAMILY NAMES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.1#Marius was, at this epoch, a handsome young man, of medium stature, with hick and intensely black hair, a lofty and intelligent brow, well-opened and assionate nostrils, an air of calmness and sincerity, and with something ndescribably proud, thoughtful, and innocent over his whole countenance. His rofile, all of whose lines were rounded, without thereby losing their firmness, ad a certain Germanic sweetness, which has made its way into the French hysiognomy by way of Alsace and Lorraine, and that complete absence of angles hich rendered the Sicambres so easily recognizable among the Romans, and which istinguishes the leonine from the aquiline race. He was at that period of life hen the mind of men who think is composed, in nearly equal parts, of depth and ngenuousness. A grave situation being given, he had all that is required to be tupid: one more turn of the key, and he might be sublime. His manners were eserved, cold, polished, not very genial. As his mouth was charming, his lips he reddest, and his teeth the whitest in the world, his smile corrected the everity of his face, as a whole. At certain moments, that pure brow and that oluptuous smile presented a singular contrast. His eyes were small, but his lance was large.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.2#At the period of his most abject misery, he had observed that young girls urned round when he passed by, and he fled or hid, with death in his soul. He hought that they were staring at him because of his old clothes, and that they ere laughing at them; the fact is, that they stared at him because of his race, and that they dreamed of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.3#This mute misunderstanding between him and the pretty passers-by had made im shy. He chose none of them for the excellent reason that he fled from all of hem. He lived thus indefinitely,—stupidly, as Courfeyrac said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.4#Courfeyrac also said to him: “Do not aspire to be venerable” [they called ach other _thou_; it is the tendency of youthful friendships to slip into this ode of address]. “Let me give you a piece of advice, my dear fellow. Don’t read o many books, and look a little more at the lasses. The jades have some good oints about them, O Marius! By dint of fleeing and blushing, you will become rutalized.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.5#On other occasions, Courfeyrac encountered him and said:—“Good morning, onsieur l’Abbé!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.6#When Courfeyrac had addressed to him some remark of this nature, Marius voided women, both young and old, more than ever for a week to come, and he voided Courfeyrac to boot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.7#Nevertheless, there existed in all the immensity of creation, two women hom Marius did not flee, and to whom he paid no attention whatever. In truth, e would have been very much amazed if he had been informed that they were omen. One was the bearded old woman who swept out his chamber, and caused ourfeyrac to say: “Seeing that his servant woman wears his beard, Marius does ot wear his own beard.” The other was a sort of little girl whom he saw very ften, and whom he never looked at.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.8#For more than a year, Marius had noticed in one of the walks of the uxembourg, the one which skirts the parapet of the Pépinière, a man and a very oung girl, who were almost always seated side by side on the same bench, at the ost solitary end of the alley, on the Rue de l’Ouest side. Every time that that hance which meddles with the strolls of persons whose gaze is turned inwards, ed Marius to that walk,—and it was nearly every day,—he found this couple here. The man appeared to be about sixty years of age; he seemed sad and erious; his whole person presented the robust and weary aspect peculiar to ilitary men who have retired from the service. If he had worn a decoration, arius would have said: “He is an ex-officer.” He had a kindly but napproachable air, and he never let his glance linger on the eyes of any one. e wore blue trousers, a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmed hat, which always ppeared to be new, a black cravat, a quaker shirt, that is to say, it was azzlingly white, but of coarse linen. A grisette who passed near him one day, aid: “Here’s a very tidy widower.” His hair was very white.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.9#The first time that the young girl who accompanied him came and seated erself on the bench which they seemed to have adopted, she was a sort of child hirteen or fourteen years of age, so thin as to be almost homely, awkward, nsignificant, and with a possible promise of handsome eyes. Only, they were lways raised with a sort of displeasing assurance. Her dress was both aged and hildish, like the dress of the scholars in a convent; it consisted of a badly ut gown of black merino. They had the air of being father and daughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.10#Marius scanned this old man, who was not yet aged, and this little girl, ho was not yet a person, for a few days, and thereafter paid no attention to hem. They, on their side, did not appear even to see him. They conversed ogether with a peaceful and indifferent air. The girl chattered incessantly and errily. The old man talked but little, and, at times, he fixed on her eyes verflowing with an ineffable paternity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.11#Marius had acquired the mechanical habit of strolling in that walk. He nvariably found them there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.12#This is the way things went:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.13#Marius liked to arrive by the end of the alley which was furthest from heir bench; he walked the whole length of the alley, passed in front of them, hen returned to the extremity whence he had come, and began again. This he did ive or six times in the course of his promenade, and the promenade was taken ive or six times a week, without its having occurred to him or to these people o exchange a greeting. That personage, and that young girl, although they ppeared,—and perhaps because they appeared,—to shun all glances, had, aturally, caused some attention on the part of the five or six students who trolled along the Pépinière from time to time; the studious after their ectures, the others after their game of billiards. Courfeyrac, who was among he last, had observed them several times, but, finding the girl homely, he had peedily and carefully kept out of the way. He had fled, discharging at them a obriquet, like a Parthian dart. Impressed solely with the child’s gown and the ld man’s hair, he had dubbed the daughter Mademoiselle Lanoire, and the father, onsieur Leblanc, so that as no one knew them under any other title, this ickname became a law in the default of any other name. The students said: “Ah! onsieur Leblanc is on his bench.” And Marius, like the rest, had found it onvenient to call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.14#We shall follow their example, and we shall say M. Leblanc, in order to acilitate this tale.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.1.15#So Marius saw them nearly every day, at the same hour, during the first ear. He found the man to his taste, but the girl insipid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.head#CHAPTER II—LUX FACTA EST
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.1#During the second year, precisely at the point in this history which the eader has now reached, it chanced that this habit of the Luxembourg was nterrupted, without Marius himself being quite aware why, and nearly six months lapsed, during which he did not set foot in the alley. One day, at last, he eturned thither once more; it was a serene summer morning, and Marius was in oyous mood, as one is when the weather is fine. It seemed to him that he had in is heart all the songs of the birds that he was listening to, and all the bits f blue sky of which he caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.2#He went straight to “his alley,” and when he reached the end of it he erceived, still on the same bench, that well-known couple. Only, when he pproached, it certainly was the same man; but it seemed to him that it was no onger the same girl. The person whom he now beheld was a tall and beautiful reature, possessed of all the most charming lines of a woman at the precise oment when they are still combined with all the most ingenuous graces of the hild; a pure and fugitive moment, which can be expressed only by these two ords,—“fifteen years.” She had wonderful brown hair, shaded with threads of old, a brow that seemed made of marble, cheeks that seemed made of rose-leaf, a ale flush, an agitated whiteness, an exquisite mouth, whence smiles darted like unbeams, and words like music, a head such as Raphael would have given to Mary, et upon a neck that Jean Goujon would have attributed to a Venus. And, in order hat nothing might be lacking to this bewitching face, her nose was not andsome—it was pretty; neither straight nor curved, neither Italian nor Greek; t was the Parisian nose, that is to say, spiritual, delicate, irregular, ure,—which drives painters to despair, and charms poets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.3#When Marius passed near her, he could not see her eyes, which were onstantly lowered. He saw only her long chestnut lashes, permeated with shadow nd modesty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.4#This did not prevent the beautiful child from smiling as she listened to hat the white-haired old man was saying to her, and nothing could be more ascinating than that fresh smile, combined with those drooping eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.5#For a moment, Marius thought that she was another daughter of the same man, sister of the former, no doubt. But when the invariable habit of his stroll rought him, for the second time, near the bench, and he had examined her ttentively, he recognized her as the same. In six months the little girl had ecome a young maiden; that was all. Nothing is more frequent than this henomenon. There is a moment when girls blossom out in the twinkling of an eye, nd become roses all at once. One left them children but yesterday; today, one inds them disquieting to the feelings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.6#This child had not only grown, she had become idealized. As three days in pril suffice to cover certain trees with flowers, six months had sufficed to lothe her with beauty. Her April had arrived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.7#One sometimes sees people, who, poor and mean, seem to wake up, pass uddenly from indigence to luxury, indulge in expenditures of all sorts, and ecome dazzling, prodigal, magnificent, all of a sudden. That is the result of aving pocketed an income; a note fell due yesterday. The young girl had eceived her quarterly income.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.8#And then, she was no longer the school-girl with her felt hat, her merino own, her scholar’s shoes, and red hands; taste had come to her with beauty; she as a well-dressed person, clad with a sort of rich and simple elegance, and ithout affectation. She wore a dress of black damask, a cape of the same aterial, and a bonnet of white crape. Her white gloves displayed the delicacy f the hand which toyed with the carved, Chinese ivory handle of a parasol, and er silken shoe outlined the smallness of her foot. When one passed near her, er whole toilette exhaled a youthful and penetrating perfume.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.9#As for the man, he was the same as usual.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.10#The second time that Marius approached her, the young girl raised her yelids; her eyes were of a deep, celestial blue, but in that veiled azure, here was, as yet, nothing but the glance of a child. She looked at Marius ndifferently, as she would have stared at the brat running beneath the ycamores, or the marble vase which cast a shadow on the bench, and Marius, on is side, continued his promenade, and thought about something else.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.11#He passed near the bench where the young girl sat, five or six times, but ithout even turning his eyes in her direction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.2.12#On the following days, he returned, as was his wont, to the Luxembourg; as sual, he found there “the father and daughter;” but he paid no further ttention to them. He thought no more about the girl now that she was beautiful han he had when she was homely. He passed very near the bench where she sat, ecause such was his habit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.head#CHAPTER III—EFFECT OF THE SPRING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.1#One day, the air was warm, the Luxembourg was inundated with light and hade, the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it that morning, the parrows were giving vent to little twitters in the depths of the hestnut-trees. Marius had thrown open his whole soul to nature, he was not hinking of anything, he simply lived and breathed, he passed near the bench, he young girl raised her eyes to him, the two glances met.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.2#What was there in the young girl’s glance on this occasion? Marius could ot have told. There was nothing and there was everything. It was a strange lash.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.3#She dropped her eyes, and he pursued his way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.4#What he had just seen was no longer the ingenuous and simple eye of a hild; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened, then abruptly closed gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.5#There comes a day when the young girl glances in this manner. Woe to him ho chances to be there!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.6#That first gaze of a soul which does not, as yet, know itself, is like the awn in the sky. It is the awakening of something radiant and strange. Nothing an give any idea of the dangerous charm of that unexpected gleam, which flashes uddenly and vaguely forth from adorable shadows, and which is composed of all he innocence of the present, and of all the passion of the future. It is a sort f undecided tenderness which reveals itself by chance, and which waits. It is a nare which the innocent maiden sets unknown to herself, and in which she aptures hearts without either wishing or knowing it. It is a virgin looking ike a woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.7#It is rare that a profound reverie does not spring from that glance, where t falls. All purities and all candors meet in that celestial and fatal gleam hich, more than all the best-planned tender glances of coquettes, possesses the agic power of causing the sudden blossoming, in the depths of the soul, of that ombre flower, impregnated with perfume and with poison, which is called ove.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.3.8#That evening, on his return to his garret, Marius cast his eyes over his arments, and perceived, for the first time, that he had been so slovenly, ndecorous, and inconceivably stupid as to go for his walk in the Luxembourg ith his “every-day clothes,” that is to say, with a hat battered near the band, oarse carter’s boots, black trousers which showed white at the knees, and a lack coat which was pale at the elbows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.head#CHAPTER IV—BEGINNING OF A GREAT MALADY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.1#On the following day, at the accustomed hour, Marius drew from his wardrobe is new coat, his new trousers, his new hat, and his new boots; he clothed imself in this complete panoply, put on his gloves, a tremendous luxury, and et off for the Luxembourg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.2#On the way thither, he encountered Courfeyrac, and pretended not to see im. Courfeyrac, on his return home, said to his friends:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.3#“I have just met Marius’ new hat and new coat, with Marius inside them. He as going to pass an examination, no doubt. He looked utterly stupid.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.4#On arriving at the Luxembourg, Marius made the tour of the fountain basin, nd stared at the swans; then he remained for a long time in contemplation efore a statue whose head was perfectly black with mould, and one of whose hips as missing. Near the basin there was a bourgeois forty years of age, with a rominent stomach, who was holding by the hand a little urchin of five, and aying to him: “Shun excess, my son, keep at an equal distance from despotism nd from anarchy.” Marius listened to this bourgeois. Then he made the circuit f the basin once more. At last he directed his course towards “his alley,” lowly, and as if with regret. One would have said that he was both forced to go here and withheld from doing so. He did not perceive it himself, and thought hat he was doing as he always did.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.5#On turning into the walk, he saw M. Leblanc and the young girl at the other nd, “on their bench.” He buttoned his coat up to the very top, pulled it down n his body so that there might be no wrinkles, examined, with a certain omplaisance, the lustrous gleams of his trousers, and marched on the bench. his march savored of an attack, and certainly of a desire for conquest. So I ay that he marched on the bench, as I should say: “Hannibal marched on ome.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.6#However, all his movements were purely mechanical, and he had interrupted one of the habitual preoccupations of his mind and labors. At that moment, he as thinking that the _Manuel du Baccalauréat_ was a stupid book, and that it ust have been drawn up by rare idiots, to allow of three tragedies of Racine nd only one comedy of Molière being analyzed therein as masterpieces of the uman mind. There was a piercing whistling going on in his ears. As he pproached the bench, he held fast to the folds in his coat, and fixed his eyes n the young girl. It seemed to him that she filled the entire extremity of the lley with a vague blue light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.7#In proportion as he drew near, his pace slackened more and more. On rriving at some little distance from the bench, and long before he had reached he end of the walk, he halted, and could not explain to himself why he retraced is steps. He did not even say to himself that he would not go as far as the nd. It was only with difficulty that the young girl could have perceived him in he distance and noted his fine appearance in his new clothes. Nevertheless, he eld himself very erect, in case any one should be looking at him from ehind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.8#He attained the opposite end, then came back, and this time he approached a ittle nearer to the bench. He even got to within three intervals of trees, but here he felt an indescribable impossibility of proceeding further, and he esitated. He thought he saw the young girl’s face bending towards him. But he xerted a manly and violent effort, subdued his hesitation, and walked straight head. A few seconds later, he rushed in front of the bench, erect and firm, eddening to the very ears, without daring to cast a glance either to the right r to the left, with his hand thrust into his coat like a statesman. At the oment when he passed,—under the cannon of the place,—he felt his heart beat ildly. As on the preceding day, she wore her damask gown and her crape bonnet. e heard an ineffable voice, which must have been “her voice.” She was talking ranquilly. She was very pretty. He felt it, although he made no attempt to see er. “She could not, however,” he thought, “help feeling esteem and onsideration for me, if she only knew that I am the veritable author of the issertation on Marcos Obrégon de la Ronde, which M. François de Neufchâteau ut, as though it were his own, at the head of his edition of _Gil Blas_.” He ent beyond the bench as far as the extremity of the walk, which was very near, hen turned on his heel and passed once more in front of the lovely girl. This ime, he was very pale. Moreover, all his emotions were disagreeable. As he went urther from the bench and the young girl, and while his back was turned to her, e fancied that she was gazing after him, and that made him stumble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.9#He did not attempt to approach the bench again; he halted near the middle f the walk, and there, a thing which he never did, he sat down, and reflecting n the most profoundly indistinct depths of his spirit, that after all, it was ard that persons whose white bonnet and black gown he admired should be bsolutely insensible to his splendid trousers and his new coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.10#At the expiration of a quarter of an hour, he rose, as though he were on he point of again beginning his march towards that bench which was surrounded y an aureole. But he remained standing there, motionless. For the first time in ifteen months, he said to himself that that gentleman who sat there every day ith his daughter, had, on his side, noticed him, and probably considered his ssiduity singular.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.11#For the first time, also, he was conscious of some irreverence in esignating that stranger, even in his secret thoughts, by the sobriquet of M. eblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.12#He stood thus for several minutes, with drooping head, tracing figures in he sand, with the cane which he held in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.13#Then he turned abruptly in the direction opposite to the bench, to M. eblanc and his daughter, and went home.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.14#That day he forgot to dine. At eight o’clock in the evening he perceived his fact, and as it was too late to go down to the Rue Saint-Jacques, he said: Never mind!” and ate a bit of bread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.4.15#He did not go to bed until he had brushed his coat and folded it up with reat care.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.head#CHAPTER V—DIVERS CLAPS OF THUNDER FALL ON MA’AM BOUGON
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.1#On the following day, Ma’am Bougon, as Courfeyrac styled the old ortress-principal-tenant, housekeeper of the Gorbeau hovel, Ma’am Bougon, whose ame was, in reality, Madame Burgon, as we have found out, but this iconoclast, ourfeyrac, respected nothing,—Ma’am Bougon observed, with stupefaction, that M. arius was going out again in his new coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.2#He went to the Luxembourg again, but he did not proceed further than his ench midway of the alley. He seated himself there, as on the preceding day, urveying from a distance, and clearly making out, the white bonnet, the black ress, and above all, that blue light. He did not stir from it, and only went ome when the gates of the Luxembourg closed. He did not see M. Leblanc and his aughter retire. He concluded that they had quitted the garden by the gate on he Rue de l’Ouest. Later on, several weeks afterwards, when he came to think it ver, he could never recall where he had dined that evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.3#On the following day, which was the third, Ma’am Bougon was thunderstruck. arius went out in his new coat. “Three days in succession!” she exclaimed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.4#She tried to follow him, but Marius walked briskly, and with immense trides; it was a hippopotamus undertaking the pursuit of a chamois. She lost ight of him in two minutes, and returned breathless, three-quarters choked with sthma, and furious. “If there is any sense,” she growled, “in putting on one’s est clothes every day, and making people run like this!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.5#Marius betook himself to the Luxembourg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.6#The young girl was there with M. Leblanc. Marius approached as near as he ould, pretending to be busy reading a book, but he halted afar off, then eturned and seated himself on his bench, where he spent four hours in watching he house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk, and who produced on him the mpression that they were making sport of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.7#A fortnight passed thus. Marius went to the Luxembourg no longer for the ake of strolling there, but to seat himself always in the same spot, and that ithout knowing why. Once arrived there, he did not stir. He put on his new coat very morning, for the purpose of not showing himself, and he began all over gain on the morrow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.5.8#She was decidedly a marvellous beauty. The only remark approaching a riticism, that could be made, was, that the contradiction between her gaze, hich was melancholy, and her smile, which was merry, gave a rather wild effect o her face, which sometimes caused this sweet countenance to become strange ithout ceasing to be charming.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.head#CHAPTER VI—TAKEN PRISONER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.1#On one of the last days of the second week, Marius was seated on his bench, s usual, holding in his hand an open book, of which he had not turned a page or the last two hours. All at once he started. An event was taking place at the ther extremity of the walk. Leblanc and his daughter had just left their seat, nd the daughter had taken her father’s arm, and both were advancing slowly, owards the middle of the alley where Marius was. Marius closed his book, then pened it again, then forced himself to read; he trembled; the aureole was oming straight towards him. “Ah! good Heavens!” thought he, “I shall not have ime to strike an attitude.” Still the white-haired man and the girl advanced. t seemed to him that this lasted for a century, and that it was but a second. What are they coming in this direction for?” he asked himself. “What! She will ass here? Her feet will tread this sand, this walk, two paces from me?” He was tterly upset, he would have liked to be very handsome, he would have liked to wn the cross. He heard the soft and measured sound of their approaching ootsteps. He imagined that M. Leblanc was darting angry glances at him. “Is hat gentleman going to address me?” he thought to himself. He dropped his head; hen he raised it again, they were very near him. The young girl passed, and as he passed, she glanced at him. She gazed steadily at him, with a pensive weetness which thrilled Marius from head to foot. It seemed to him that she was eproaching him for having allowed so long a time to elapse without coming as ar as her, and that she was saying to him: “I am coming myself.” Marius was azzled by those eyes fraught with rays and abysses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.2#He felt his brain on fire. She had come to him, what joy! And then, how she ad looked at him! She appeared to him more beautiful than he had ever seen her et. Beautiful with a beauty which was wholly feminine and angelic, with a omplete beauty which would have made Petrarch sing and Dante kneel. It seemed o him that he was floating free in the azure heavens. At the same time, he was orribly vexed because there was dust on his boots.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.3#He thought he felt sure that she had looked at his boots too.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.4#He followed her with his eyes until she disappeared. Then he started up and alked about the Luxembourg garden like a madman. It is possible that, at times, e laughed to himself and talked aloud. He was so dreamy when he came near the hildren’s nurses, that each one of them thought him in love with her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.5#He quitted the Luxembourg, hoping to find her again in the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.6#He encountered Courfeyrac under the arcades of the Odéon, and said to him: Come and dine with me.” They went off to Rousseau’s and spent six francs. arius ate like an ogre. He gave the waiter six sous. At dessert, he said to ourfeyrac. “Have you read the paper? What a fine discourse Audry de Puyraveau elivered!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.7#He was desperately in love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.8#After dinner, he said to Courfeyrac: “I will treat you to the play.” They ent to the Porte-Sainte-Martin to see Frédérick in _l’Auberge des Adrets_. arius was enormously amused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.9#At the same time, he had a redoubled attack of shyness. On emerging from he theatre, he refused to look at the garter of a modiste who was stepping cross a gutter, and Courfeyrac, who said: “I should like to put that woman in y collection,” almost horrified him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.10#Courfeyrac invited him to breakfast at the Café Voltaire on the following orning. Marius went thither, and ate even more than on the preceding evening. e was very thoughtful and very merry. One would have said that he was taking dvantage of every occasion to laugh uproariously. He tenderly embraced some man r other from the provinces, who was presented to him. A circle of students ormed round the table, and they spoke of the nonsense paid for by the State hich was uttered from the rostrum in the Sorbonne, then the conversation fell pon the faults and omissions in Guicherat’s dictionaries and grammars. Marius nterrupted the discussion to exclaim: “But it is very agreeable, all the same o have the cross!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.11#“That’s queer!” whispered Courfeyrac to Jean Prouvaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.12#“No,” responded Prouvaire, “that’s serious.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.13#It was serious; in fact, Marius had reached that first violent and harming hour with which grand passions begin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.14#A glance had wrought all this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.15#When the mine is charged, when the conflagration is ready, nothing is more imple. A glance is a spark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.16#It was all over with him. Marius loved a woman. His fate was entering the nknown.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.6.17#The glance of women resembles certain combinations of wheels, which are ranquil in appearance yet formidable. You pass close to them every day, eaceably and with impunity, and without a suspicion of anything. A moment rrives when you forget that the thing is there. You go and come, dream, speak, augh. All at once you feel yourself clutched; all is over. The wheels hold you ast, the glance has ensnared you. It has caught you, no matter where or how, by ome portion of your thought which was fluttering loose, by some distraction hich had attacked you. You are lost. The whole of you passes into it. A chain f mysterious forces takes possession of you. You struggle in vain; no more uman succor is possible. You go on falling from gearing to gearing, from agony o agony, from torture to torture, you, your mind, your fortune, your future, our soul; and, according to whether you are in the power of a wicked creature, r of a noble heart, you will not escape from this terrifying machine otherwise han disfigured with shame, or transfigured by passion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.head#CHAPTER VII—ADVENTURES OF THE LETTER U DELIVERED OVER TO ONJECTURES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.1#Isolation, detachment, from everything, pride, independence, the taste of ature, the absence of daily and material activity, the life within himself, the ecret conflicts of chastity, a benevolent ecstasy towards all creation, had repared Marius for this possession which is called passion. His worship of his ather had gradually become a religion, and, like all religions, it had etreated to the depths of his soul. Something was required in the foreground. ove came.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.2#A full month elapsed, during which Marius went every day to the Luxembourg. hen the hour arrived, nothing could hold him back.—“He is on duty,” said ourfeyrac. Marius lived in a state of delight. It is certain that the young irl did look at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.3#He had finally grown bold, and approached the bench. Still, he did not pass n front of it any more, in obedience to the instinct of timidity and to the nstinct of prudence common to lovers. He considered it better not to attract the attention of the father.” He combined his stations behind the trees and the edestals of the statues with a profound diplomacy, so that he might be seen as uch as possible by the young girl and as little as possible by the old entleman. Sometimes, he remained motionless by the half-hour together in the hade of a Leonidas or a Spartacus, holding in his hand a book, above which his yes, gently raised, sought the beautiful girl, and she, on her side, turned her harming profile towards him with a vague smile. While conversing in the most atural and tranquil manner in the world with the white-haired man, she bent pon Marius all the reveries of a virginal and passionate eye. Ancient and ime-honored manœuvre which Eve understood from the very first day of the world, nd which every woman understands from the very first day of her life! her mouth eplied to one, and her glance replied to another.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.4#It must be supposed, that M. Leblanc finally noticed something, for often, hen Marius arrived, he rose and began to walk about. He had abandoned their ccustomed place and had adopted the bench by the Gladiator, near the other end f the walk, as though with the object of seeing whether Marius would pursue hem thither. Marius did not understand, and committed this error. “The father” egan to grow inexact, and no longer brought “his daughter” every day. ometimes, he came alone. Then Marius did not stay. Another blunder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.5#Marius paid no heed to these symptoms. From the phase of timidity, he had assed, by a natural and fatal progress, to the phase of blindness. His love ncreased. He dreamed of it every night. And then, an unexpected bliss had appened to him, oil on the fire, a redoubling of the shadows over his eyes. One vening, at dusk, he had found, on the bench which “M. Leblanc and his daughter” ad just quitted, a handkerchief, a very simple handkerchief, without mbroidery, but white, and fine, and which seemed to him to exhale ineffable erfume. He seized it with rapture. This handkerchief was marked with the etters U. F. Marius knew nothing about this beautiful child,—neither her family ame, her Christian name nor her abode; these two letters were the first thing f her that he had gained possession of, adorable initials, upon which he mmediately began to construct his scaffolding. U was evidently the Christian ame. “Ursule!” he thought, “what a delicious name!” He kissed the handkerchief, rank it in, placed it on his heart, on his flesh, during the day, and at night, aid it beneath his lips that he might fall asleep on it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.6#“I feel that her whole soul lies within it!” he exclaimed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.7#This handkerchief belonged to the old gentleman, who had simply let it fall rom his pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.8#In the days which followed the finding of this treasure, he only displayed imself at the Luxembourg in the act of kissing the handkerchief and laying it n his heart. The beautiful child understood nothing of all this, and signified t to him by imperceptible signs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.7.9#“O modesty!” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE VETERANS THEMSELVES CAN BE HAPPY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.1#Since we have pronounced the word modesty, and since we conceal nothing, we ught to say that once, nevertheless, in spite of his ecstasies, “his Ursule” aused him very serious grief. It was on one of the days when she persuaded M. eblanc to leave the bench and stroll along the walk. A brisk May breeze was lowing, which swayed the crests of the plaintain-trees. The father and aughter, arm in arm, had just passed Marius’ bench. Marius had risen to his eet behind them, and was following them with his eyes, as was fitting in the esperate situation of his soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.2#All at once, a gust of wind, more merry than the rest, and probably charged ith performing the affairs of Springtime, swept down from the nursery, flung tself on the alley, enveloped the young girl in a delicious shiver, worthy of irgil’s nymphs, and the fawns of Theocritus, and lifted her dress, the robe ore sacred than that of Isis, almost to the height of her garter. A leg of xquisite shape appeared. Marius saw it. He was exasperated and furious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.3#The young girl had hastily thrust down her dress, with a divinely troubled otion, but he was nonetheless angry for all that. He was alone in the alley, it s true. But there might have been some one there. And what if there had been ome one there! Can any one comprehend such a thing? What she had just done is orrible!—Alas, the poor child had done nothing; there had been but one culprit, he wind; but Marius, in whom quivered the Bartholo who exists in Cherubin, was etermined to be vexed, and was jealous of his own shadow. It is thus, in fact, hat the harsh and capricious jealousy of the flesh awakens in the human heart, nd takes possession of it, even without any right. Moreover, setting aside even hat jealousy, the sight of that charming leg had contained nothing agreeable or him; the white stocking of the first woman he chanced to meet would have fforded him more pleasure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.4#When “his Ursule,” after having reached the end of the walk, retraced her teps with M. Leblanc, and passed in front of the bench on which Marius had eated himself once more, Marius darted a sullen and ferocious glance at her. he young girl gave way to that slight straightening up with a backward ovement, accompanied by a raising of the eyelids, which signifies: “Well, what s the matter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.5#This was “their first quarrel.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.6#Marius had hardly made this scene at her with his eyes, when some one rossed the walk. It was a veteran, very much bent, extremely wrinkled, and ale, in a uniform of the Louis XV. pattern, bearing on his breast the little val plaque of red cloth, with the crossed swords, the soldier’s cross of aint-Louis, and adorned, in addition, with a coat-sleeve, which had no arm ithin it, with a silver chin and a wooden leg. Marius thought he perceived that his man had an extremely well satisfied air. It even struck him that the aged ynic, as he hobbled along past him, addressed to him a very fraternal and very erry wink, as though some chance had created an understanding between them, and s though they had shared some piece of good luck together. What did that relic f Mars mean by being so contented? What had passed between that wooden leg and he other? Marius reached a paroxysm of jealousy.—“Perhaps he was there!” he aid to himself; “perhaps he saw!”—And he felt a desire to exterminate the eteran.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.7#With the aid of time, all points grow dull. Marius’ wrath against “Ursule,” ust and legitimate as it was, passed off. He finally pardoned her; but this ost him a great effort; he sulked for three days.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.8.8#Nevertheless, in spite of all this, and because of all this, his passion ugmented and grew to madness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.head#CHAPTER IX—ECLIPSE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.1#The reader has just seen how Marius discovered, or thought that he iscovered, that _She_ was named Ursule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.2#Appetite grows with loving. To know that her name was Ursule was a great eal; it was very little. In three or four weeks, Marius had devoured this liss. He wanted another. He wanted to know where she lived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.3#He had committed his first blunder, by falling into the ambush of the bench y the Gladiator. He had committed a second, by not remaining at the Luxembourg hen M. Leblanc came thither alone. He now committed a third, and an immense ne. He followed “Ursule.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.4#She lived in the Rue de l’Ouest, in the most unfrequented spot, in a new, hree-story house, of modest appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.5#From that moment forth, Marius added to his happiness of seeing her at the uxembourg the happiness of following her home.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.6#His hunger was increasing. He knew her first name, at least, a charming ame, a genuine woman’s name; he knew where she lived; he wanted to know who she as.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.7#One evening, after he had followed them to their dwelling, and had seen hem disappear through the carriage gate, he entered in their train and said oldly to the porter:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.8#“Is that the gentleman who lives on the first floor, who has just come n?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.9#“No,” replied the porter. “He is the gentleman on the third floor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.10#Another step gained. This success emboldened Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.11#“On the front?” he asked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.12#“Parbleu!” said the porter, “the house is only built on the street.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.13#“And what is that gentleman’s business?” began Marius again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.14#“He is a gentleman of property, sir. A very kind man who does good to the nfortunate, though not rich himself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.15#“What is his name?” resumed Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.16#The porter raised his head and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.17#“Are you a police spy, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.18#Marius went off quite abashed, but delighted. He was getting on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.19#“Good,” thought he, “I know that her name is Ursule, that she is the aughter of a gentleman who lives on his income, and that she lives there, on he third floor, in the Rue de l’Ouest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.20#On the following day, M. Leblanc and his daughter made only a very brief tay in the Luxembourg; they went away while it was still broad daylight. Marius ollowed them to the Rue de l’Ouest, as he had taken up the habit of doing. On rriving at the carriage entrance M. Leblanc made his daughter pass in first, hen paused, before crossing the threshold, and stared intently at Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.21#On the next day they did not come to the Luxembourg. Marius waited for hem all day in vain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.22#At nightfall, he went to the Rue de l’Ouest, and saw a light in the indows of the third story.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.23#He walked about beneath the windows until the light was extinguished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.24#The next day, no one at the Luxembourg. Marius waited all day, then went nd did sentinel duty under their windows. This carried him on to ten o’clock in he evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.25#His dinner took care of itself. Fever nourishes the sick man, and love the over.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.26#He spent a week in this manner. M. Leblanc no longer appeared at the uxembourg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.27#Marius indulged in melancholy conjectures; he dared not watch the orte-cochère during the day; he contented himself with going at night to gaze pon the red light of the windows. At times he saw shadows flit across them, and is heart began to beat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.28#On the eighth day, when he arrived under the windows, there was no light n them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.29#“Hello!” he said, “the lamp is not lighted yet. But it is dark. Can they ave gone out?” He waited until ten o’clock. Until midnight. Until one in the orning. Not a light appeared in the windows of the third story, and no one ntered the house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.30#He went away in a very gloomy frame of mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.31#On the morrow,—for he only existed from morrow to morrow, there was, so to peak, no to-day for him,—on the morrow, he found no one at the Luxembourg; he ad expected this. At dusk, he went to the house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.32#No light in the windows; the shades were drawn; the third floor was otally dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.33#Marius rapped at the porte-cochère, entered, and said to the porter:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.34#“The gentleman on the third floor?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.35#“Has moved away,” replied the porter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.36#Marius reeled and said feebly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.37#“How long ago?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.38#“Yesterday.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.39#“Where is he living now?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.40#“I don’t know anything about it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.41#“So he has not left his new address?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.42#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.43#And the porter, raising his eyes, recognized Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.6.9.44#“Come! So it’s you!” said he; “but you are decidedly a spy then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.head#BOOK SEVENTH—PATRON MINETTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.head#CHAPTER I—MINES AND MINERS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.1#Human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance, _a third ower floor_. The social soil is everywhere undermined, sometimes for good, ometimes for evil. These works are superposed one upon the other. There are uperior mines and inferior mines. There is a top and a bottom in this obscure ub-soil, which sometimes gives way beneath civilization, and which our ndifference and heedlessness trample under foot. The Encyclopedia, in the last entury, was a mine that was almost open to the sky. The shades, those sombre atchers of primitive Christianity, only awaited an opportunity to bring about n explosion under the Cæsars and to inundate the human race with light. For in he sacred shadows there lies latent light. Volcanoes are full of a shadow that s capable of flashing forth. Every form begins by being night. The catacombs, n which the first mass was said, were not alone the cellar of Rome, they were he vaults of the world.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.2#Beneath the social construction, that complicated marvel of a structure, here are excavations of all sorts. There is the religious mine, the hilosophical mine, the economic mine, the revolutionary mine. Such and such a ick-axe with the idea, such a pick with ciphers. Such another with wrath. eople hail and answer each other from one catacomb to another. Utopias travel bout underground, in the pipes. There they branch out in every direction. They ometimes meet, and fraternize there. Jean-Jacques lends his pick to Diogenes, ho lends him his lantern. Sometimes they enter into combat there. Calvin seizes ocinius by the hair. But nothing arrests nor interrupts the tension of all hese energies toward the goal, and the vast, simultaneous activity, which goes nd comes, mounts, descends, and mounts again in these obscurities, and which mmense unknown swarming slowly transforms the top and the bottom and the inside nd the outside. Society hardly even suspects this digging which leaves its urface intact and changes its bowels. There are as many different subterranean tages as there are varying works, as there are extractions. What emerges from hese deep excavations? The future.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.3#The deeper one goes, the more mysterious are the toilers. The work is good, p to a degree which the social philosophies are able to recognize; beyond that egree it is doubtful and mixed; lower down, it becomes terrible. At a certain epth, the excavations are no longer penetrable by the spirit of civilization, he limit breathable by man has been passed; a beginning of monsters is ossible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.4#The descending scale is a strange one; and each one of the rungs of this adder corresponds to a stage where philosophy can find foothold, and where one ncounters one of these workmen, sometimes divine, sometimes misshapen. Below ohn Huss, there is Luther; below Luther, there is Descartes; below Descartes, here is Voltaire; below Voltaire, there is Condorcet; below Condorcet, there is obespierre; below Robespierre, there is Marat; below Marat there is Babeuf. And o it goes on. Lower down, confusedly, at the limit which separates the ndistinct from the invisible, one perceives other gloomy men, who perhaps do ot exist as yet. The men of yesterday are spectres; those of to-morrow are orms. The eye of the spirit distinguishes them but obscurely. The embryonic ork of the future is one of the visions of philosophy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.5#A world in limbo, in the state of fœtus, what an unheard-of spectre!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.6#Saint-Simon, Owen, Fourier, are there also, in lateral galleries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.7#Surely, although a divine and invisible chain unknown to themselves, binds ogether all these subterranean pioneers who, almost always, think themselves solated, and who are not so, their works vary greatly, and the light of some ontrasts with the blaze of others. The first are paradisiacal, the last are ragic. Nevertheless, whatever may be the contrast, all these toilers, from the ighest to the most nocturnal, from the wisest to the most foolish, possess one ikeness, and this is it: disinterestedness. Marat forgets himself like Jesus. hey throw themselves on one side, they omit themselves, they think not of hemselves. They have a glance, and that glance seeks the absolute. The first as the whole heavens in his eyes; the last, enigmatical though he may be, has till, beneath his eyelids, the pale beam of the infinite. Venerate the man, hoever he may be, who has this sign—the starry eye.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.8#The shadowy eye is the other sign.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.9#With it, evil commences. Reflect and tremble in the presence of any one who as no glance at all. The social order has its black miners.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.10#There is a point where depth is tantamount to burial, and where light ecomes extinct.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.11#Below all these mines which we have just mentioned, below all these alleries, below this whole immense, subterranean, venous system of progress and topia, much further on in the earth, much lower than Marat, lower than Babeuf, ower, much lower, and without any connection with the upper levels, there lies he last mine. A formidable spot. This is what we have designated as the _le roisième dessous_. It is the grave of shadows. It is the cellar of the blind. Inferi_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.1.12#This communicates with the abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE LOWEST DEPTHS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.1#There disinterestedness vanishes. The demon is vaguely outlined; each one s for himself. The _I_ in the eyes howls, seeks, fumbles, and gnaws. The social golino is in this gulf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.2#The wild spectres who roam in this grave, almost beasts, almost phantoms, re not occupied with universal progress; they are ignorant both of the idea and f the word; they take no thought for anything but the satisfaction of their ndividual desires. They are almost unconscious, and there exists within them a ort of terrible obliteration. They have two mothers, both step-mothers, gnorance and misery. They have a guide, necessity; and for all forms of atisfaction, appetite. They are brutally voracious, that is to say, ferocious, ot after the fashion of the tyrant, but after the fashion of the tiger. From uffering these spectres pass to crime; fatal affiliation, dizzy creation, logic f darkness. That which crawls in the social third lower level is no longer omplaint stifled by the absolute; it is the protest of matter. Man there ecomes a dragon. To be hungry, to be thirsty—that is the point of departure; to e Satan—that is the point reached. From that vault Lacenaire emerges.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.3#We have just seen, in Book Fourth, one of the compartments of the upper ine, of the great political, revolutionary, and philosophical excavation. here, as we have just said, all is pure, noble, dignified, honest. There, ssuredly, one might be misled; but error is worthy of veneration there, so horoughly does it imply heroism. The work there effected, taken as a whole has name: Progress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.4#The moment has now come when we must take a look at other depths, hideous epths. There exists beneath society, we insist upon this point, and there will xist, until that day when ignorance shall be dissipated, the great cavern of vil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.5#This cavern is below all, and is the foe of all. It is hatred, without xception. This cavern knows no philosophers; its dagger has never cut a pen. ts blackness has no connection with the sublime blackness of the inkstand. ever have the fingers of night which contract beneath this stifling ceiling, urned the leaves of a book nor unfolded a newspaper. Babeuf is a speculator to artouche; Marat is an aristocrat to Schinderhannes. This cavern has for its bject the destruction of everything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.6#Of everything. Including the upper superior mines, which it execrates. It ot only undermines, in its hideous swarming, the actual social order; it ndermines philosophy, it undermines human thought, it undermines civilization, t undermines revolution, it undermines progress. Its name is simply theft, rostitution, murder, assassination. It is darkness, and it desires chaos. Its ault is formed of ignorance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.7#All the others, those above it, have but one object—to suppress it. It is o this point that philosophy and progress tend, with all their organs imultaneously, by their amelioration of the real, as well as by their ontemplation of the absolute. Destroy the cavern Ignorance and you destroy the air Crime.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.8#Let us condense, in a few words, a part of what we have just written. The nly social peril is darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.2.9#Humanity is identity. All men are made of the same clay. There is no ifference, here below, at least, in predestination. The same shadow in front, he same flesh in the present, the same ashes afterwards. But ignorance, mingled ith the human paste, blackens it. This incurable blackness takes possession of he interior of a man and is there converted into evil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.head#CHAPTER III—BABET, GUEULEMER, CLAQUESOUS, AND MONTPARNASSE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.1#A quartette of ruffians, Claquesous, Gueulemer, Babet, and Montparnasse overned the third lower floor of Paris, from 1830 to 1835.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.2#Gueulemer was a Hercules of no defined position. For his lair he had the ewer of the Arche-Marion. He was six feet high, his pectoral muscles were of arble, his biceps of brass, his breath was that of a cavern, his torso that of colossus, his head that of a bird. One thought one beheld the Farnese Hercules lad in duck trousers and a cotton velvet waistcoat. Gueulemer, built after this culptural fashion, might have subdued monsters; he had found it more xpeditious to be one. A low brow, large temples, less than forty years of age, ut with crow’s-feet, harsh, short hair, cheeks like a brush, a beard like that f a wild boar; the reader can see the man before him. His muscles called for ork, his stupidity would have none of it. He was a great, idle force. He was an ssassin through coolness. He was thought to be a creole. He had, probably, omewhat to do with Marshal Brune, having been a porter at Avignon in 1815. fter this stage, he had turned ruffian.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.3#The diaphaneity of Babet contrasted with the grossness of Gueulemer. Babet as thin and learned. He was transparent but impenetrable. Daylight was visible hrough his bones, but nothing through his eyes. He declared that he was a hemist. He had been a jack of all trades. He had played in vaudeville at aint-Mihiel. He was a man of purpose, a fine talker, who underlined his smiles nd accentuated his gestures. His occupation consisted in selling, in the open ir, plaster busts and portraits of “the head of the State.” In addition to his, he extracted teeth. He had exhibited phenomena at fairs, and he had owned booth with a trumpet and this poster: “Babet, Dental Artist, Member of the cademies, makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids, extracts teeth, ndertakes stumps abandoned by his brother practitioners. Price: one tooth, one ranc, fifty centimes; two teeth, two francs; three teeth, two francs, fifty. ake advantage of this opportunity.” This _Take advantage of this opportunity_ eant: Have as many teeth extracted as possible. He had been married and had had hildren. He did not know what had become of his wife and children. He had lost hem as one loses his handkerchief. Babet read the papers, a striking exception n the world to which he belonged. One day, at the period when he had his family ith him in his booth on wheels, he had read in the _Messager_, that a woman had ust given birth to a child, who was doing well, and had a calf’s muzzle, and he xclaimed: “There’s a fortune! my wife has not the wit to present me with a hild like that!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.4#Later on he had abandoned everything, in order to “undertake Paris.” This as his expression.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.5#Who was Claquesous? He was night. He waited until the sky was daubed with lack, before he showed himself. At nightfall he emerged from the hole whither e returned before daylight. Where was this hole? No one knew. He only addressed is accomplices in the most absolute darkness, and with his back turned to them. as his name Claquesous? Certainly not. If a candle was brought, he put on a ask. He was a ventriloquist. Babet said: “Claquesous is a nocturne for two oices.” Claquesous was vague, terrible, and a roamer. No one was sure whether e had a name, Claquesous being a sobriquet; none was sure that he had a voice, s his stomach spoke more frequently than his voice; no one was sure that he had face, as he was never seen without his mask. He disappeared as though he had anished into thin air; when he appeared, it was as though he sprang from the arth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.6#A lugubrious being was Montparnasse. Montparnasse was a child; less than wenty years of age, with a handsome face, lips like cherries, charming black air, the brilliant light of springtime in his eyes; he had all vices and spired to all crimes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.3.7#The digestion of evil aroused in him an appetite for worse. It was the treet boy turned pickpocket, and a pickpocket turned garroter. He was genteel, ffeminate, graceful, robust, sluggish, ferocious. The rim of his hat was curled p on the left side, in order to make room for a tuft of hair, after the style f 1829. He lived by robbery with violence. His coat was of the best cut, but hreadbare. Montparnasse was a fashion-plate in misery and given to the ommission of murders. The cause of all this youth’s crimes was the desire to be ell-dressed. The first grisette who had said to him: “You are handsome!” had ast the stain of darkness into his heart, and had made a Cain of this Abel. inding that he was handsome, he desired to be elegant: now, the height of legance is idleness; idleness in a poor man means crime. Few prowlers were so readed as Montparnasse. At eighteen, he had already numerous corpses in his ast. More than one passer-by lay with outstretched arms in the presence of this retch, with his face in a pool of blood. Curled, pomaded, with laced waist, the ips of a woman, the bust of a Prussian officer, the murmur of admiration from he boulevard wenches surrounding him, his cravat knowingly tied, a bludgeon in is pocket, a flower in his buttonhole; such was this dandy of the epulchre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.head#CHAPTER IV—COMPOSITION OF THE TROUPE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.1#These four ruffians formed a sort of Proteus, winding like a serpent among he police, and striving to escape Vidocq’s indiscreet glances “under divers orms, tree, flame, fountain,” lending each other their names and their traps, iding in their own shadows, boxes with secret compartments and refuges for each ther, stripping off their personalities, as one removes his false nose at a asked ball, sometimes simplifying matters to the point of consisting of but one ndividual, sometimes multiplying themselves to such a point that Coco-Latour imself took them for a whole throng.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.2#These four men were not four men; they were a sort of mysterious robber ith four heads, operating on a grand scale on Paris; they were that monstrous olyp of evil, which inhabits the crypt of society.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.3#Thanks to their ramifications, and to the network underlying their elations, Babet, Gueulemer, Claquesous, and Montparnasse were charged with the eneral enterprise of the ambushes of the department of the Seine. The inventors f ideas of that nature, men with nocturnal imaginations, applied to them to ave their ideas executed. They furnished the canvas to the four rascals, and he latter undertook the preparation of the scenery. They labored at the stage etting. They were always in a condition to lend a force proportioned and uitable to all crimes which demanded a lift of the shoulder, and which were ufficiently lucrative. When a crime was in quest of arms, they under-let their ccomplices. They kept a troupe of actors of the shadows at the disposition of ll underground tragedies.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.4#They were in the habit of assembling at nightfall, the hour when they woke p, on the plains which adjoin the Salpêtrière. There they held their onferences. They had twelve black hours before them; they regulated their mployment accordingly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.5#_Patron-Minette_,—such was the name which was bestowed in the subterranean irculation on the association of these four men. In the fantastic, ancient, opular parlance, which is vanishing day by day, _Patron-Minette_ signifies the orning, the same as _entre chien et loup_—between dog and wolf—signifies the vening. This appellation, _Patron-Minette_, was probably derived from the hour t which their work ended, the dawn being the vanishing moment for phantoms and or the separation of ruffians. These four men were known under this title. When he President of the Assizes visited Lacenaire in his prison, and questioned him oncerning a misdeed which Lacenaire denied, “Who did it?” demanded the resident. Lacenaire made this response, enigmatical so far as the magistrate as concerned, but clear to the police: “Perhaps it was Patron-Minette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.6#A piece can sometimes be divined on the enunciation of the personages; in he same manner a band can almost be judged from the list of ruffians composing t. Here are the appellations to which the principal members of Patron-Minette nswered,—for the names have survived in special memoirs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.7#Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.8#Brujon. [There was a Brujon dynasty; we cannot refrain from interpolating his word.]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.9#Boulatruelle, the road-mender already introduced.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.10#Laveuve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.11#Finistère.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.12#Homère-Hogu, a negro.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.13#Mardisoir. (Tuesday evening.)
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.14#Dépêche. (Make haste.)
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.15#Fauntleroy, alias Bouquetière (the Flower Girl).
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.16#Glorieux, a discharged convict.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.17#Barrecarrosse (Stop-carriage), called Monsieur Dupont.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.18#L’Esplanade-du-Sud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.19#Poussagrive.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.20#Carmagnolet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.21#Kruideniers, called Bizarro.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.22#Mangedentelle. (Lace-eater.)
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.23#Les-pieds-en-l’Air. (Feet in the air.)
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.24#Demi-Liard, called Deux-Milliards.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.25#Etc., etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.26#We pass over some, and not the worst of them. These names have faces ttached. They do not express merely beings, but species. Each one of these ames corresponds to a variety of those misshapen fungi from the under side of ivilization.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.27#Those beings, who were not very lavish with their countenances, were not mong the men whom one sees passing along the streets. Fatigued by the wild ights which they passed, they went off by day to sleep, sometimes in the ime-kilns, sometimes in the abandoned quarries of Montmatre or Montrouge, ometimes in the sewers. They ran to earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.28#What became of these men? They still exist. They have always existed. orace speaks of them: _Ambubaiarum collegia, pharmacopolæ, mendici, mimæ_; and o long as society remains what it is, they will remain what they are. Beneath he obscure roof of their cavern, they are continually born again from the ocial ooze. They return, spectres, but always identical; only, they no longer ear the same names and they are no longer in the same skins. The individuals xtirpated, the tribe subsists.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.29#They always have the same faculties. From the vagrant to the tramp, the ace is maintained in its purity. They divine purses in pockets, they scent out atches in fobs. Gold and silver possess an odor for them. There exist ingenuous ourgeois, of whom it might be said, that they have a “stealable” air. These men atiently pursue these bourgeois. They experience the quivers of a spider at the assage of a stranger or of a man from the country.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.30#These men are terrible, when one encounters them, or catches a glimpse of hem, towards midnight, on a deserted boulevard. They do not seem to be men but orms composed of living mists; one would say that they habitually constitute ne mass with the shadows, that they are in no wise distinct from them, that hey possess no other soul than the darkness, and that it is only momentarily nd for the purpose of living for a few minutes a monstrous life, that they have eparated from the night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.7.4.31#What is necessary to cause these spectres to vanish? Light. Light in loods. Not a single bat can resist the dawn. Light up society from below.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.head#BOOK EIGHTH—THE WICKED POOR MAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.1.head#CHAPTER I—MARIUS, WHILE SEEKING A GIRL IN A BONNET, ENCOUNTERS A MAN N A CAP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.1.1#Summer passed, then the autumn; winter came. Neither M. Leblanc nor the oung girl had again set foot in the Luxembourg garden. Thenceforth, Marius had ut one thought,—to gaze once more on that sweet and adorable face. He sought onstantly, he sought everywhere; he found nothing. He was no longer Marius, the nthusiastic dreamer, the firm, resolute, ardent man, the bold defier of fate, he brain which erected future on future, the young spirit encumbered with lans, with projects, with pride, with ideas and wishes; he was a lost dog. He ell into a black melancholy. All was over. Work disgusted him, walking tired im. Vast nature, formerly so filled with forms, lights, voices, counsels, erspectives, horizons, teachings, now lay empty before him. It seemed to him hat everything had disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.1.2#He thought incessantly, for he could not do otherwise; but he no longer ook pleasure in his thoughts. To everything that they proposed to him in a hisper, he replied in his darkness: “What is the use?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.1.3#He heaped a hundred reproaches on himself. “Why did I follow her? I was so appy at the mere sight of her! She looked at me; was not that immense? She had he air of loving me. Was not that everything? I wished to have, what? There was othing after that. I have been absurd. It is my own fault,” etc., etc. ourfeyrac, to whom he confided nothing,—it was his nature,—but who made some ittle guess at everything,—that was his nature,—had begun by congratulating him n being in love, though he was amazed at it; then, seeing Marius fall into this elancholy state, he ended by saying to him: “I see that you have been simply an nimal. Here, come to the Chaumière.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.1.4#Once, having confidence in a fine September sun, Marius had allowed himself o be taken to the ball at Sceaux by Courfeyrac, Bossuet, and Grantaire, hoping, hat a dream! that he might, perhaps, find her there. Of course he did not see he one he sought.—“But this is the place, all the same, where all lost women re found,” grumbled Grantaire in an aside. Marius left his friends at the ball nd returned home on foot, alone, through the night, weary, feverish, with sad nd troubled eyes, stunned by the noise and dust of the merry wagons filled with inging creatures on their way home from the feast, which passed close to him, s he, in his discouragement, breathed in the acrid scent of the walnut-trees, long the road, in order to refresh his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.1.5#He took to living more and more alone, utterly overwhelmed, wholly given up o his inward anguish, going and coming in his pain like the wolf in the trap, eeking the absent one everywhere, stupefied by love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.1.6#On another occasion, he had an encounter which produced on him a singular ffect. He met, in the narrow streets in the vicinity of the Boulevard des nvalides, a man dressed like a workingman and wearing a cap with a long visor, hich allowed a glimpse of locks of very white hair. Marius was struck with the eauty of this white hair, and scrutinized the man, who was walking slowly and s though absorbed in painful meditation. Strange to say, he thought that he ecognized M. Leblanc. The hair was the same, also the profile, so far as the ap permitted a view of it, the mien identical, only more depressed. But why hese workingman’s clothes? What was the meaning of this? What signified that isguise? Marius was greatly astonished. When he recovered himself, his first mpulse was to follow the man; who knows whether he did not hold at last the lue which he was seeking? In any case, he must see the man near at hand, and lear up the mystery. But the idea occurred to him too late, the man was no onger there. He had turned into some little side street, and Marius could not ind him. This encounter occupied his mind for three days and then was effaced. After all,” he said to himself, “it was probably only a resemblance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.head#CHAPTER II—TREASURE TROVE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.1#Marius had not left the Gorbeau house. He paid no attention to any one here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.2#At that epoch, to tell the truth, there were no other inhabitants in the ouse, except himself and those Jondrettes whose rent he had once paid, without, oreover, ever having spoken to either father, mother, or daughters. The other odgers had moved away or had died, or had been turned out in default of ayment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.3#One day during that winter, the sun had shown itself a little in the fternoon, but it was the 2d of February, that ancient Candlemas day whose reacherous sun, the precursor of a six weeks’ cold spell, inspired Mathieu aensberg with these two lines, which have with justice remained classic:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.4#Qu’il luise ou qu’il luiserne, L’ours rentre dans en sa caverne.26
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.5#Marius had just emerged from his: night was falling. It was the hour for is dinner; for he had been obliged to take to dining again, alas! oh, nfirmities of ideal passions!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.6#He had just crossed his threshold, where Ma’am Bougon was sweeping at the oment, as she uttered this memorable monologue:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.7#“What is there that is cheap now? Everything is dear. There is nothing in he world that is cheap except trouble; you can get that for nothing, the rouble of the world!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.8#Marius slowly ascended the boulevard towards the barrier, in order to reach he Rue Saint-Jacques. He was walking along with drooping head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.9#All at once, he felt some one elbow him in the dusk; he wheeled round, and aw two young girls clad in rags, the one tall and slim, the other a little horter, who were passing rapidly, all out of breath, in terror, and with the ppearance of fleeing; they had been coming to meet him, had not seen him, and ad jostled him as they passed. Through the twilight, Marius could distinguish heir livid faces, their wild heads, their dishevelled hair, their hideous onnets, their ragged petticoats, and their bare feet. They were talking as they an. The taller said in a very low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.10#“The bobbies have come. They came near nabbing me at the half-circle.” The ther answered: “I saw them. I bolted, bolted, bolted!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.11#Through this repulsive slang, Marius understood that gendarmes or the olice had come near apprehending these two children, and that the latter had scaped.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.12#They plunged among the trees of the boulevard behind him, and there reated, for a few minutes, in the gloom, a sort of vague white spot, then isappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.13#Marius had halted for a moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.14#He was about to pursue his way, when his eye lighted on a little grayish ackage lying on the ground at his feet. He stooped and picked it up. It was a ort of envelope which appeared to contain papers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.15#“Good,” he said to himself, “those unhappy girls dropped it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.16#He retraced his steps, he called, he did not find them; he reflected that hey must already be far away, put the package in his pocket, and went off to ine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.17#On the way, he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard, a child’s coffin, overed with a black cloth resting on three chairs, and illuminated by a candle. he two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.18#“Poor mothers!” he thought. “There is one thing sadder than to see one’s hildren die; it is to see them leading an evil life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.19#Then those shadows which had varied his melancholy vanished from his houghts, and he fell back once more into his habitual preoccupations. He fell o thinking once more of his six months of love and happiness in the open air nd the broad daylight, beneath the beautiful trees of Luxembourg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.2.20#“How gloomy my life has become!” he said to himself. “Young girls are lways appearing to me, only formerly they were angels and now they are houls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.head#CHAPTER III—QUADRIFRONS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.1#That evening, as he was undressing preparatory to going to bed, his hand ame in contact, in the pocket of his coat, with the packet which he had picked p on the boulevard. He had forgotten it. He thought that it would be well to pen it, and that this package might possibly contain the address of the young irls, if it really belonged to them, and, in any case, the information ecessary to a restitution to the person who had lost it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.2#He opened the envelope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.3#It was not sealed and contained four letters, also unsealed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.4#They bore addresses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.5#All four exhaled a horrible odor of tobacco.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.6#The first was addressed: _“To Madame, Madame la Marquise de Grucheray, the lace opposite the Chamber of Deputies, No.—”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.7#Marius said to himself, that he should probably find in it the information hich he sought, and that, moreover, the letter being open, it was probable that t could be read without impropriety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.8#It was conceived as follows:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.9#Madame la Marquise: The virtue of clemency and piety is that which most losely unites sosiety. Turn your Christian spirit and cast a look of compassion n this unfortunate Spanish victim of loyalty and attachment to the sacred cause f legitimacy, who has given with his blood, consecrated his fortune, vverything, to defend that cause, and to-day finds himself in the greatest issery. He doubts not that your honorable person will grant succor to preserve n existence exteremely painful for a military man of education and honor full f wounds, counts in advance on the humanity which animates you and on the nterest which Madame la Marquise bears to a nation so unfortunate. Their prayer ill not be in vain, and their gratitude will preserve theirs charming ouvenir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.10#My respectful sentiments, with which I have the honor to be Madame, Don lvarès, Spanish Captain of Cavalry, a royalist who has take refuge in France, ho finds himself on travells for his country, and the resources are lacking him o continue his travells.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.11#No address was joined to the signature. Marius hoped to find the address n the second letter, whose superscription read: _À Madame, Madame la Comtesse e Montvernet, Rue Cassette, No. 9_. This is what Marius read in it:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.12#Madame la Comtesse: It is an unhappy mother of a family of six children he last of which is only eight months old. I sick since my last confinement, bandoned by my husband five months ago, haveing no resources in the world the ost frightful indigance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.13#In the hope of Madame la Comtesse, she has the honor to be, Madame, with rofound respect, Mistress Balizard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.14#Marius turned to the third letter, which was a petition like the receding; he read:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.15#Monsieur Pabourgeot, Elector, wholesale stocking merchant, Rue Saint-Denis n the corner of the Rue aux Fers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.16#I permit myself to address you this letter to beg you to grant me the retious favor of your simpaties and to interest yourself in a man of letters ho has just sent a drama to the Théâtre-Français. The subject is historical, nd the action takes place in Auvergne in the time of the Empire; the style, I hink, is natural, laconic, and may have some merit. There are couplets to be ung in four places. The comic, the serious, the unexpected, are mingled in a ariety of characters, and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread through all the ntrigue which proceeds misteriously, and ends, after striking altarations, in he midst of many beautiful strokes of brilliant scenes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.17#My principal object is to satisfi the desire which progressively animates he man of our century, that is to say, the fashion, that capritious and bizarre eathervane which changes at almost every new wind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.18#In spite of these qualities I have reason to fear that jealousy, the gotism of priviliged authors, may obtaine my exclusion from the theatre, for I m not ignorant of the mortifications with which newcomers are treated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.19#Monsiuer Pabourgeot, your just reputation as an enlightened protector of en of litters emboldens me to send you my daughter who will explain our ndigant situation to you, lacking bread and fire in this wynter season. When I ay to you that I beg you to accept the dedication of my drama which I desire to ake to you and of all those that I shall make, is to prove to you how great is y ambition to have the honor of sheltering myself under your protection, and of dorning my writings with your name. If you deign to honor me with the most odest offering, I shall immediately occupy myself in making a piesse of verse o pay you my tribute of gratitude. Which I shall endeavor to render this piesse s perfect as possible, will be sent to you before it is inserted at the eginning of the drama and delivered on the stage. To Monsieur and Madame abourgeot, My most respectful complements, Genflot, man of letters. P. S. Even f it is only forty sous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.20#Excuse me for sending my daughter and not presenting myself, but sad otives connected with the toilet do not permit me, alas! to go out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.21#Finally, Marius opened the fourth letter. The address ran: _To the enevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-haut-Pas_. It contained he following lines:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.22#Benevolent Man: If you deign to accompany my daughter, you will behold a isserable calamity, and I will show you my certificates.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.23#At the aspect of these writings your generous soul will be moved with a entiment of obvious benevolence, for true philosophers always feel lively motions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.24#Admit, compassionate man, that it is necessary to suffer the most cruel eed, and that it is very painful, for the sake of obtaining a little relief, to et oneself attested by the authorities as though one were not free to suffer nd to die of inanition while waiting to have our misery relieved. Destinies are ery fatal for several and too prodigal or too protecting for others.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.25#I await your presence or your offering, if you deign to make one, and I eseech you to accept the respectful sentiments with which I have the honor to e, truly magnanimous man, your very humble and very obedient servant, P. abantou, dramatic artist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.26#After perusing these four letters, Marius did not find himself much urther advanced than before.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.27#In the first place, not one of the signers gave his address.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.28#Then, they seemed to come from four different individuals, Don Alvarès, istress Balizard, the poet Genflot, and dramatic artist Fabantou; but the ingular thing about these letters was, that all four were written by the same and.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.29#What conclusion was to be drawn from this, except that they all come from he same person?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.30#Moreover, and this rendered the conjecture all the more probable, the oarse and yellow paper was the same in all four, the odor of tobacco was the ame, and, although an attempt had been made to vary the style, the same rthographical faults were reproduced with the greatest tranquillity, and the an of letters Genflot was no more exempt from them than the Spanish aptain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.31#It was waste of trouble to try to solve this petty mystery. Had it not een a chance find, it would have borne the air of a mystification. Marius was oo melancholy to take even a chance pleasantry well, and to lend himself to a ame which the pavement of the street seemed desirous of playing with him. It eemed to him that he was playing the part of the blind man in blind man’s buff etween the four letters, and that they were making sport of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.32#Nothing, however, indicated that these letters belonged to the two young irls whom Marius had met on the boulevard. After all, they were evidently apers of no value. Marius replaced them in their envelope, flung the whole into corner and went to bed. About seven o’clock in the morning, he had just risen nd breakfasted, and was trying to settle down to work, when there came a soft nock at his door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.33#As he owned nothing, he never locked his door, unless occasionally, though ery rarely, when he was engaged in some pressing work. Even when absent he left is key in the lock. “You will be robbed,” said Ma’am Bougon. “Of what?” said arius. The truth is, however, that he had, one day, been robbed of an old pair f boots, to the great triumph of Ma’am Bougon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.34#There came a second knock, as gentle as the first.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.35#“Come in,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.36#The door opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.37#“What do you want, Ma’am Bougon?” asked Marius, without raising his eyes rom the books and manuscripts on his table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.38#A voice which did not belong to Ma’am Bougon replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.39#“Excuse me, sir—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.40#It was a dull, broken, hoarse, strangled voice, the voice of an old man, oughened with brandy and liquor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.3.41#Marius turned round hastily, and beheld a young girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.head#CHAPTER IV—A ROSE IN MISERY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.1#A very young girl was standing in the half-open door. The dormer window of he garret, through which the light fell, was precisely opposite the door, and lluminated the figure with a wan light. She was a frail, emaciated, slender reature; there was nothing but a chemise and a petticoat upon that chilled and hivering nakedness. Her girdle was a string, her head ribbon a string, her ointed shoulders emerged from her chemise, a blond and lymphatic pallor, arth-colored collar-bones, red hands, a half-open and degraded mouth, missing eeth, dull, bold, base eyes; she had the form of a young girl who has missed er youth, and the look of a corrupt old woman; fifty years mingled with ifteen; one of those beings which are both feeble and horrible, and which cause hose to shudder whom they do not cause to weep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.2#Marius had risen, and was staring in a sort of stupor at this being, who as almost like the forms of the shadows which traverse dreams.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.3#The most heart-breaking thing of all was, that this young girl had not come nto the world to be homely. In her early childhood she must even have been retty. The grace of her age was still struggling against the hideous, premature ecrepitude of debauchery and poverty. The remains of beauty were dying away in hat face of sixteen, like the pale sunlight which is extinguished under hideous louds at dawn on a winter’s day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.4#That face was not wholly unknown to Marius. He thought he remembered having een it somewhere.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.5#“What do you wish, Mademoiselle?” he asked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.6#The young girl replied in her voice of a drunken convict:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.7#“Here is a letter for you, Monsieur Marius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.8#She called Marius by his name; he could not doubt that he was the person hom she wanted; but who was this girl? How did she know his name?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.9#Without waiting for him to tell her to advance, she entered. She entered esolutely, staring, with a sort of assurance that made the heart bleed, at the hole room and the unmade bed. Her feet were bare. Large holes in her petticoat ermitted glimpses of her long legs and her thin knees. She was shivering.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.10#She held a letter in her hand, which she presented to Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.11#Marius, as he opened the letter, noticed that the enormous wafer which ealed it was still moist. The message could not have come from a distance. He ead:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.12#My amiable neighbor, young man: I have learned of your goodness to me, hat you paid my rent six months ago. I bless you, young man. My eldest daughter ill tell you that we have been without a morsel of bread for two days, four ersons and my spouse ill. If I am not deseaved in my opinion, I think I may ope that your generous heart will melt at this statement and the desire will ubjugate you to be propitious to me by daigning to lavish on me a slight avor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.13#I am with the distinguished consideration which is due to the benefactors f humanity,—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.14#Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.15#P.S. My eldest daughter will await your orders, dear Monsieur Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.16#This letter, coming in the very midst of the mysterious adventure which ad occupied Marius’ thoughts ever since the preceding evening, was like a andle in a cellar. All was suddenly illuminated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.17#This letter came from the same place as the other four. There was the same riting, the same style, the same orthography, the same paper, the same odor of obacco.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.18#There were five missives, five histories, five signatures, and a single igner. The Spanish Captain Don Alvarès, the unhappy Mistress Balizard, the ramatic poet Genflot, the old comedian Fabantou, were all four named Jondrette, f, indeed, Jondrette himself were named Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.19#Marius had lived in the house for a tolerably long time, and he had had, s we have said, but very rare occasion to see, to even catch a glimpse of, his xtremely mean neighbors. His mind was elsewhere, and where the mind is, there he eyes are also. He had been obliged more than once to pass the Jondrettes in he corridor or on the stairs; but they were mere forms to him; he had paid so ittle heed to them, that, on the preceding evening, he had jostled the ondrette girls on the boulevard, without recognizing them, for it had evidently een they, and it was with great difficulty that the one who had just entered is room had awakened in him, in spite of disgust and pity, a vague recollection f having met her elsewhere.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.20#Now he saw everything clearly. He understood that his neighbor Jondrette, n his distress, exercised the industry of speculating on the charity of enevolent persons, that he procured addresses, and that he wrote under feigned ames to people whom he judged to be wealthy and compassionate, letters which is daughters delivered at their risk and peril, for this father had come to uch a pass, that he risked his daughters; he was playing a game with fate, and e used them as the stake. Marius understood that probably, judging from their light on the evening before, from their breathless condition, from their terror nd from the words of slang which he had overheard, these unfortunate creatures ere plying some inexplicably sad profession, and that the result of the whole as, in the midst of human society, as it is now constituted, two miserable eings who were neither girls nor women, a species of impure and innocent onsters produced by misery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.21#Sad creatures, without name, or sex, or age, to whom neither good nor evil ere any longer possible, and who, on emerging from childhood, have already othing in this world, neither liberty, nor virtue, nor responsibility. Souls hich blossomed out yesterday, and are faded to-day, like those flowers let fall n the streets, which are soiled with every sort of mire, while waiting for some heel to crush them. Nevertheless, while Marius bent a pained and astonished aze on her, the young girl was wandering back and forth in the garret with the udacity of a spectre. She kicked about, without troubling herself as to her akedness. Occasionally her chemise, which was untied and torn, fell almost to er waist. She moved the chairs about, she disarranged the toilet articles which tood on the commode, she handled Marius’ clothes, she rummaged about to see hat there was in the corners.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.22#“Hullo!” said she, “you have a mirror!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.23#And she hummed scraps of vaudevilles, as though she had been alone, rolicsome refrains which her hoarse and guttural voice rendered lugubrious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.24#An indescribable constraint, weariness, and humiliation were perceptible eneath this hardihood. Effrontery is a disgrace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.25#Nothing could be more melancholy than to see her sport about the room, nd, so to speak, flit with the movements of a bird which is frightened by the aylight, or which has broken its wing. One felt that under other conditions of ducation and destiny, the gay and over-free mien of this young girl might have urned out sweet and charming. Never, even among animals, does the creature born o be a dove change into an osprey. That is only to be seen among men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.26#Marius reflected, and allowed her to have her way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.27#She approached the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.28#“Ah!” said she, “books!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.29#A flash pierced her glassy eye. She resumed, and her accent expressed the appiness which she felt in boasting of something, to which no human creature is nsensible:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.30#“I know how to read, I do!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.31#She eagerly seized a book which lay open on the table, and read with olerable fluency:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.32#“—General Bauduin received orders to take the château of Hougomont which tands in the middle of the plain of Waterloo, with five battalions of his rigade.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.33#She paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.34#“Ah! Waterloo! I know about that. It was a battle long ago. My father was here. My father has served in the armies. We are fine Bonapartists in our ouse, that we are! Waterloo was against the English.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.35#She laid down the book, caught up a pen, and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.36#“And I know how to write, too!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.37#She dipped her pen in the ink, and turning to Marius:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.38#“Do you want to see? Look here, I’m going to write a word to show ou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.39#And before he had time to answer, she wrote on a sheet of white paper, hich lay in the middle of the table: “The bobbies are here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.40#Then throwing down the pen:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.41#“There are no faults of orthography. You can look. We have received an ducation, my sister and I. We have not always been as we are now. We were not ade—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.42#Here she paused, fixed her dull eyes on Marius, and burst out laughing, aying, with an intonation which contained every form of anguish, stifled by very form of cynicism:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.43#“Bah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.44#And she began to hum these words to a gay air:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.45#“J’ai faim, mon père.” I am hungry, father. Pas de fricot. I have no food. ’ai froid, ma mère. I am cold, mother. Pas de tricot. I have no clothes. relotte, Lolotte! Lolotte! Shiver, Sanglote, Sob, Jacquot!” Jacquot!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.46#She had hardly finished this couplet, when she exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.47#“Do you ever go to the play, Monsieur Marius? I do. I have a little rother who is a friend of the artists, and who gives me tickets sometimes. But don’t like the benches in the galleries. One is cramped and uncomfortable here. There are rough people there sometimes; and people who smell bad.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.48#Then she scrutinized Marius, assumed a singular air and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.49#“Do you know, Mr. Marius, that you are a very handsome fellow?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.50#And at the same moment the same idea occurred to them both, and made her mile and him blush. She stepped up to him, and laid her hand on his shoulder: You pay no heed to me, but I know you, Mr. Marius. I meet you here on the taircase, and then I often see you going to a person named Father Mabeuf who ives in the direction of Austerlitz, sometimes when I have been strolling in hat quarter. It is very becoming to you to have your hair tumbled thus.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.51#She tried to render her voice soft, but only succeeded in making it very eep. A portion of her words was lost in the transit from her larynx to her ips, as though on a piano where some notes are missing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.52#Marius had retreated gently.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.53#“Mademoiselle,” said he, with his cool gravity, “I have here a package hich belongs to you, I think. Permit me to return it to you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.54#And he held out the envelope containing the four letters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.55#She clapped her hands and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.56#“We have been looking everywhere for that!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.57#Then she eagerly seized the package and opened the envelope, saying as she id so:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.58#“Dieu de Dieu! how my sister and I have hunted! And it was you who found t! On the boulevard, was it not? It must have been on the boulevard? You see, e let it fall when we were running. It was that brat of a sister of mine who as so stupid. When we got home, we could not find it anywhere. As we did not ish to be beaten, as that is useless, as that is entirely useless, as that is bsolutely useless, we said that we had carried the letters to the proper ersons, and that they had said to us: ‘Nix.’ So here they are, those poor etters! And how did you find out that they belonged to me? Ah! yes, the riting. So it was you that we jostled as we passed last night. We couldn’t see. said to my sister: ‘Is it a gentleman?’ My sister said to me: ‘I think it is a entleman.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.59#In the meanwhile she had unfolded the petition addressed to “the enevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.60#“Here!” said she, “this is for that old fellow who goes to mass. By the ay, this is his hour. I’ll go and carry it to him. Perhaps he will give us omething to breakfast on.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.61#Then she began to laugh again, and added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.62#“Do you know what it will mean if we get a breakfast today? It will mean hat we shall have had our breakfast of the day before yesterday, our breakfast f yesterday, our dinner of to-day, and all that at once, and this morning. ome! Parbleu! if you are not satisfied, dogs, burst!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.63#This reminded Marius of the wretched girl’s errand to himself. He fumbled n his waistcoat pocket, and found nothing there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.64#The young girl went on, and seemed to have no consciousness of Marius’ resence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.65#“I often go off in the evening. Sometimes I don’t come home again. Last inter, before we came here, we lived under the arches of the bridges. We uddled together to keep from freezing. My little sister cried. How melancholy he water is! When I thought of drowning myself, I said to myself: ‘No, it’s too old.’ I go out alone, whenever I choose, I sometimes sleep in the ditches. Do ou know, at night, when I walk along the boulevard, I see the trees like forks, see houses, all black and as big as Notre Dame, I fancy that the white walls re the river, I say to myself: ‘Why, there’s water there!’ The stars are like he lamps in illuminations, one would say that they smoked and that the wind lew them out, I am bewildered, as though horses were breathing in my ears; lthough it is night, I hear hand-organs and spinning-machines, and I don’t know hat all. I think people are flinging stones at me, I flee without knowing hither, everything whirls and whirls. You feel very queer when you have had no ood.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.66#And then she stared at him with a bewildered air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.67#By dint of searching and ransacking his pockets, Marius had finally ollected five francs sixteen sous. This was all he owned in the world for the oment. “At all events,” he thought, “there is my dinner for to-day, and o-morrow we will see.” He kept the sixteen sous, and handed the five francs to he young girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.68#She seized the coin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.69#“Good!” said she, “the sun is shining!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.70#And, as though the sun had possessed the property of melting the valanches of slang in her brain, she went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.71#“Five francs! the shiner! a monarch! in this hole! Ain’t this fine! You’re jolly thief! I’m your humble servant! Bravo for the good fellows! Two days’ ine! and meat! and stew! we’ll have a royal feast! and a good fill!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.72#She pulled her chemise up on her shoulders, made a low bow to Marius, then familiar sign with her hand, and went towards the door, saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.73#“Good morning, sir. It’s all right. I’ll go and find my old man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.74#As she passed, she caught sight of a dry crust of bread on the commode, hich was moulding there amid the dust; she flung herself upon it and bit into t, muttering:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.75#“That’s good! it’s hard! it breaks my teeth!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.4.76#Then she departed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.head#CHAPTER V—A PROVIDENTIAL PEEP-HOLE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.1#Marius had lived for five years in poverty, in destitution, even in istress, but he now perceived that he had not known real misery. True misery he ad but just had a view of. It was its spectre which had just passed before his yes. In fact, he who has only beheld the misery of man has seen nothing; the isery of woman is what he must see; he who has seen only the misery of woman as seen nothing; he must see the misery of the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.2#When a man has reached his last extremity, he has reached his last esources at the same time. Woe to the defenceless beings who surround him! ork, wages, bread, fire, courage, good will, all fail him simultaneously. The ight of day seems extinguished without, the moral light within; in these hadows man encounters the feebleness of the woman and the child, and bends them iolently to ignominy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.3#Then all horrors become possible. Despair is surrounded with fragile artitions which all open on either vice or crime.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.4#Health, youth, honor, all the shy delicacies of the young body, the heart, irginity, modesty, that epidermis of the soul, are manipulated in sinister wise y that fumbling which seeks resources, which encounters opprobrium, and which ccommodates itself to it. Fathers, mothers, children, brothers, sisters, men, omen, daughters, adhere and become incorporated, almost like a mineral ormation, in that dusky promiscuousness of sexes, relationships, ages, nfamies, and innocences. They crouch, back to back, in a sort of hut of fate. hey exchange woe-begone glances. Oh, the unfortunate wretches! How pale they re! How cold they are! It seems as though they dwelt in a planet much further rom the sun than ours.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.5#This young girl was to Marius a sort of messenger from the realm of sad hadows. She revealed to him a hideous side of the night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.6#Marius almost reproached himself for the preoccupations of reverie and assion which had prevented his bestowing a glance on his neighbors up to that ay. The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement, which any one ould have yielded to; but he, Marius, should have done better than that. What! nly a wall separated him from those abandoned beings who lived gropingly in the ark outside the pale of the rest of the world, he was elbow to elbow with them, e was, in some sort, the last link of the human race which they touched, he eard them live, or rather, rattle in the death agony beside him, and he paid no eed to them! Every day, every instant, he heard them walking on the other side f the wall, he heard them go, and come, and speak, and he did not even lend an ar! And groans lay in those words, and he did not even listen to them, his houghts were elsewhere, given up to dreams, to impossible radiances, to loves n the air, to follies; and all the while, human creatures, his brothers in esus Christ, his brothers in the people, were agonizing in vain beside him! He ven formed a part of their misfortune, and he aggravated it. For if they had ad another neighbor who was less chimerical and more attentive, any ordinary nd charitable man, evidently their indigence would have been noticed, their ignals of distress would have been perceived, and they would have been taken old of and rescued! They appeared very corrupt and very depraved, no doubt, ery vile, very odious even; but those who fall without becoming degraded are are; besides, there is a point where the unfortunate and the infamous unite and re confounded in a single word, a fatal word, _the miserable_; whose fault is his? And then should not the charity be all the more profound, in proportion as he fall is great?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.7#While reading himself this moral lesson, for there were occasions on which arius, like all truly honest hearts, was his own pedagogue and scolded himself ore than he deserved, he stared at the wall which separated him from the ondrettes, as though he were able to make his gaze, full of pity, penetrate hat partition and warm these wretched people. The wall was a thin layer of laster upheld by lathes and beams, and, as the reader had just learned, it llowed the sound of voices and words to be clearly distinguished. Only a man as reamy as Marius could have failed to perceive this long before. There was no aper pasted on the wall, either on the side of the Jondrettes or on that of arius; the coarse construction was visible in its nakedness. Marius examined he partition, almost unconsciously; sometimes reverie examines, observes, and crutinizes as thought would. All at once he sprang up; he had just perceived, ear the top, close to the ceiling, a triangular hole, which resulted from the pace between three lathes. The plaster which should have filled this cavity was issing, and by mounting on the commode, a view could be had through this perture into the Jondrettes’ attic. Commiseration has, and should have, its uriosity. This aperture formed a sort of peep-hole. It is permissible to gaze t misfortune like a traitor in order to succor it.27
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.8#“Let us get some little idea of what these people are like,” thought arius, “and in what condition they are.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.5.9#He climbed upon the commode, put his eye to the crevice, and looked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE WILD MAN IN HIS LAIR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.1#Cities, like forests, have their caverns in which all the most wicked and ormidable creatures which they contain conceal themselves. Only, in cities, hat which thus conceals itself is ferocious, unclean, and petty, that is to ay, ugly; in forests, that which conceals itself is ferocious, savage, and rand, that is to say, beautiful. Taking one lair with another, the beast’s is referable to the man’s. Caverns are better than hovels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.2#What Marius now beheld was a hovel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.3#Marius was poor, and his chamber was poverty-stricken, but as his poverty as noble, his garret was neat. The den upon which his eye now rested was bject, dirty, fetid, pestiferous, mean, sordid. The only furniture consisted of straw chair, an infirm table, some old bits of crockery, and in two of the orners, two indescribable pallets; all the light was furnished by a dormer indow of four panes, draped with spiders’ webs. Through this aperture there enetrated just enough light to make the face of a man appear like the face of a hantom. The walls had a leprous aspect, and were covered with seams and scars, ike a visage disfigured by some horrible malady; a repulsive moisture exuded rom them. Obscene sketches roughly sketched with charcoal could be istinguished upon them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.4#The chamber which Marius occupied had a dilapidated brick pavement; this ne was neither tiled nor planked; its inhabitants stepped directly on the ntique plaster of the hovel, which had grown black under the long-continued ressure of feet. Upon this uneven floor, where the dirt seemed to be fairly ncrusted, and which possessed but one virginity, that of the broom, were apriciously grouped constellations of old shoes, socks, and repulsive rags; owever, this room had a fireplace, so it was let for forty francs a year. There as every sort of thing in that fireplace, a brazier, a pot, broken boards, rags uspended from nails, a bird-cage, ashes, and even a little fire. Two brands ere smouldering there in a melancholy way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.5#One thing which added still more to the horrors of this garret was, that it as large. It had projections and angles and black holes, the lower sides of oofs, bays, and promontories. Hence horrible, unfathomable nooks where it eemed as though spiders as big as one’s fist, wood-lice as large as one’s foot, nd perhaps even—who knows?—some monstrous human beings, must be hiding.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.6#One of the pallets was near the door, the other near the window. One end of ach touched the fireplace and faced Marius. In a corner near the aperture hrough which Marius was gazing, a colored engraving in a black frame was uspended to a nail on the wall, and at its bottom, in large letters, was the nscription: THE DREAM. This represented a sleeping woman, and a child, also sleep, the child on the woman’s lap, an eagle in a cloud, with a crown in his eak, and the woman thrusting the crown away from the child’s head, without waking the latter; in the background, Napoleon in a glory, leaning on a very lue column with a yellow capital ornamented with this inscription:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.7#MARINGO AUSTERLITS IENA WAGRAMME ELOT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.8#Beneath this frame, a sort of wooden panel, which was no longer than it was road, stood on the ground and rested in a sloping attitude against the wall. It ad the appearance of a picture with its face turned to the wall, of a frame robably showing a daub on the other side, of some pier-glass detached from a all and lying forgotten there while waiting to be rehung.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.9#Near the table, upon which Marius descried a pen, ink, and paper, sat a man bout sixty years of age, small, thin, livid, haggard, with a cunning, cruel, nd uneasy air; a hideous scoundrel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.10#If Lavater had studied this visage, he would have found the vulture ingled with the attorney there, the bird of prey and the pettifogger rendering ach other mutually hideous and complementing each other; the pettifogger making he bird of prey ignoble, the bird of prey making the pettifogger horrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.11#This man had a long gray beard. He was clad in a woman’s chemise, which llowed his hairy breast and his bare arms, bristling with gray hair, to be een. Beneath this chemise, muddy trousers and boots through which his toes rojected were visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.12#He had a pipe in his mouth and was smoking. There was no bread in the ovel, but there was still tobacco.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.13#He was writing probably some more letters like those which Marius had ead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.14#On the corner of the table lay an ancient, dilapidated, reddish volume, nd the size, which was the antique 12mo of reading-rooms, betrayed a romance. n the cover sprawled the following title, printed in large capitals: GOD; THE ING; HONOR AND THE LADIES; BY DUCRAY DUMINIL, 1814.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.15#As the man wrote, he talked aloud, and Marius heard his words:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.16#“The idea that there is no equality, even when you are dead! Just look at ère-Lachaise! The great, those who are rich, are up above, in the acacia alley, hich is paved. They can reach it in a carriage. The little people, the poor, he unhappy, well, what of them? they are put down below, where the mud is up to our knees, in the damp places. They are put there so that they will decay the ooner! You cannot go to see them without sinking into the earth.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.17#He paused, smote the table with his fist, and added, as he ground his eeth:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.18#“Oh! I could eat the whole world!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.19#A big woman, who might be forty years of age, or a hundred, was crouching ear the fireplace on her bare heels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.20#She, too, was clad only in a chemise and a knitted petticoat patched with its of old cloth. A coarse linen apron concealed the half of her petticoat. lthough this woman was doubled up and bent together, it could be seen that she as of very lofty stature. She was a sort of giant, beside her husband. She had ideous hair, of a reddish blond which was turning gray, and which she thrust ack from time to time, with her enormous shining hands, with their flat ails.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.21#Beside her, on the floor, wide open, lay a book of the same form as the ther, and probably a volume of the same romance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.22#On one of the pallets, Marius caught a glimpse of a sort of tall pale oung girl, who sat there half naked and with pendant feet, and who did not seem o be listening or seeing or living.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.23#No doubt the younger sister of the one who had come to his room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.24#She seemed to be eleven or twelve years of age. On closer scrutiny it was vident that she really was fourteen. She was the child who had said, on the oulevard the evening before: “I bolted, bolted, bolted!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.25#She was of that puny sort which remains backward for a long time, then uddenly starts up rapidly. It is indigence which produces these melancholy uman plants. These creatures have neither childhood nor youth. At fifteen years f age they appear to be twelve, at sixteen they seem twenty. To-day a little irl, to-morrow a woman. One might say that they stride through life, in order o get through with it the more speedily.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.26#At this moment, this being had the air of a child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.27#Moreover, no trace of work was revealed in that dwelling; no handicraft, o spinning-wheel, not a tool. In one corner lay some ironmongery of dubious spect. It was the dull listlessness which follows despair and precedes the eath agony.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.28#Marius gazed for a while at this gloomy interior, more terrifying than the nterior of a tomb, for the human soul could be felt fluttering there, and life as palpitating there. The garret, the cellar, the lowly ditch where certain ndigent wretches crawl at the very bottom of the social edifice, is not exactly he sepulchre, but only its antechamber; but, as the wealthy display their reatest magnificence at the entrance of their palaces, it seems that death, hich stands directly side by side with them, places its greatest miseries in hat vestibule.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.29#The man held his peace, the woman spoke no word, the young girl did not ven seem to breathe. The scratching of the pen on the paper was audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.30#The man grumbled, without pausing in his writing. “Canaille! canaille! verybody is canaille!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.31#This variation to Solomon’s exclamation elicited a sigh from the oman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.32#“Calm yourself, my little friend,” she said. “Don’t hurt yourself, my ear. You are too good to write to all those people, husband.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.33#Bodies press close to each other in misery, as in cold, but hearts draw part. This woman must have loved this man, to all appearance, judging from the mount of love within her; but probably, in the daily and reciprocal reproaches f the horrible distress which weighed on the whole group, this had become xtinct. There no longer existed in her anything more than the ashes of ffection for her husband. Nevertheless, caressing appellations had survived, as s often the case. She called him: _My dear, my little friend, my good man_, tc., with her mouth while her heart was silent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.6.34#The man resumed his writing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.head#CHAPTER VII—STRATEGY AND TACTICS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.1#Marius, with a load upon his breast, was on the point of descending from he species of observatory which he had improvised, when a sound attracted his ttention and caused him to remain at his post.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.2#The door of the attic had just burst open abruptly. The eldest girl made er appearance on the threshold. On her feet, she had large, coarse, men’s hoes, bespattered with mud, which had splashed even to her red ankles, and she as wrapped in an old mantle which hung in tatters. Marius had not seen it on er an hour previously, but she had probably deposited it at his door, in order hat she might inspire the more pity, and had picked it up again on emerging. he entered, pushed the door to behind her, paused to take breath, for she was ompletely breathless, then exclaimed with an expression of triumph and oy:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.3#“He is coming!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.4#The father turned his eyes towards her, the woman turned her head, the ittle sister did not stir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.5#“Who?” demanded her father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.6#“The gentleman!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.7#“The philanthropist?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.8#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.9#“From the church of Saint-Jacques?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.10#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.11#“That old fellow?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.12#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.13#“And he is coming?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.14#“He is following me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.15#“You are sure?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.16#“I am sure.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.17#“There, truly, he is coming?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.18#“He is coming in a fiacre.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.19#“In a fiacre. He is Rothschild.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.20#The father rose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.21#“How are you sure? If he is coming in a fiacre, how is it that you arrive efore him? You gave him our address at least? Did you tell him that it was the ast door at the end of the corridor, on the right? If he only does not make a istake! So you found him at the church? Did he read my letter? What did he say o you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.22#“Ta, ta, ta,” said the girl, “how you do gallop on, my good man! See here: entered the church, he was in his usual place, I made him a reverence, and I anded him the letter; he read it and said to me: ‘Where do you live, my child?’ said: ‘Monsieur, I will show you.’ He said to me: ‘No, give me your address, y daughter has some purchases to make, I will take a carriage and reach your ouse at the same time that you do.’ I gave him the address. When I mentioned he house, he seemed surprised and hesitated for an instant, then he said: Never mind, I will come.’ When the mass was finished, I watched him leave the hurch with his daughter, and I saw them enter a carriage. I certainly did tell im the last door in the corridor, on the right.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.23#“And what makes you think that he will come?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.24#“I have just seen the fiacre turn into the Rue Petit-Banquier. That is hat made me run so.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.25#“How do you know that it was the same fiacre?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.26#“Because I took notice of the number, so there!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.27#“What was the number?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.28#“440.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.29#“Good, you are a clever girl.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.30#The girl stared boldly at her father, and showing the shoes which she had n her feet:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.31#“A clever girl, possibly; but I tell you I won’t put these shoes on again, nd that I won’t, for the sake of my health, in the first place, and for the ake of cleanliness, in the next. I don’t know anything more irritating than hoes that squelch, and go _ghi, ghi, ghi,_ the whole time. I prefer to go arefoot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.32#“You are right,” said her father, in a sweet tone which contrasted with he young girl’s rudeness, “but then, you will not be allowed to enter churches, or poor people must have shoes to do that. One cannot go barefoot to the good od,” he added bitterly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.33#Then, returning to the subject which absorbed him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.34#“So you are sure that he will come?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.35#“He is following on my heels,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.36#The man started up. A sort of illumination appeared on his ountenance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.37#“Wife!” he exclaimed, “you hear. Here is the philanthropist. Extinguish he fire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.38#The stupefied mother did not stir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.39#The father, with the agility of an acrobat, seized a broken-nosed jug hich stood on the chimney, and flung the water on the brands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.40#Then, addressing his eldest daughter:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.41#“Here you! Pull the straw off that chair!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.42#His daughter did not understand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.43#He seized the chair, and with one kick he rendered it seatless. His leg assed through it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.44#As he withdrew his leg, he asked his daughter:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.45#“Is it cold?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.46#“Very cold. It is snowing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.47#The father turned towards the younger girl who sat on the bed near the indow, and shouted to her in a thundering voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.48#“Quick! get off that bed, you lazy thing! will you never do anything? reak a pane of glass!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.49#The little girl jumped off the bed with a shiver.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.50#“Break a pane!” he repeated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.51#The child stood still in bewilderment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.52#“Do you hear me?” repeated her father, “I tell you to break a pane!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.53#The child, with a sort of terrified obedience, rose on tiptoe, and struck pane with her fist. The glass broke and fell with a loud clatter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.54#“Good,” said the father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.55#He was grave and abrupt. His glance swept rapidly over all the crannies of he garret. One would have said that he was a general making the final reparation at the moment when the battle is on the point of beginning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.56#The mother, who had not said a word so far, now rose and demanded in a ull, slow, languid voice, whence her words seemed to emerge in a congealed tate:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.57#“What do you mean to do, my dear?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.58#“Get into bed,” replied the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.59#His intonation admitted of no deliberation. The mother obeyed, and threw erself heavily on one of the pallets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.60#In the meantime, a sob became audible in one corner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.61#“What’s that?” cried the father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.62#The younger daughter exhibited her bleeding fist, without quitting the orner in which she was cowering. She had wounded herself while breaking the indow; she went off, near her mother’s pallet and wept silently.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.63#It was now the mother’s turn to start up and exclaim:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.64#“Just see there! What follies you commit! She has cut herself breaking hat pane for you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.65#“So much the better!” said the man. “I foresaw that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.66#“What? So much the better?” retorted his wife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.67#“Peace!” replied the father, “I suppress the liberty of the press.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.68#Then tearing the woman’s chemise which he was wearing, he made a strip of loth with which he hastily swathed the little girl’s bleeding wrist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.69#That done, his eye fell with a satisfied expression on his torn hemise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.70#“And the chemise too,” said he, “this has a good appearance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.71#An icy breeze whistled through the window and entered the room. The outer ist penetrated thither and diffused itself like a whitish sheet of wadding aguely spread by invisible fingers. Through the broken pane the snow could be een falling. The snow promised by the Candlemas sun of the preceding day had ctually come.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.72#The father cast a glance about him as though to make sure that he had orgotten nothing. He seized an old shovel and spread ashes over the wet brands n such a manner as to entirely conceal them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.73#Then drawing himself up and leaning against the chimney-piece:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.7.74#“Now,” said he, “we can receive the philanthropist.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE RAY OF LIGHT IN THE HOVEL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.1#The big girl approached and laid her hand in her father’s.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.2#“Feel how cold I am,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.3#“Bah!” replied the father, “I am much colder than that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.4#The mother exclaimed impetuously:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.5#“You always have something better than any one else, so you do! even bad hings.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.6#“Down with you!” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.7#The mother, being eyed after a certain fashion, held her tongue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.8#Silence reigned for a moment in the hovel. The elder girl was removing the ud from the bottom of her mantle, with a careless air; her younger sister ontinued to sob; the mother had taken the latter’s head between her hands, and as covering it with kisses, whispering to her the while:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.9#“My treasure, I entreat you, it is nothing of consequence, don’t cry, you ill anger your father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.10#“No!” exclaimed the father, “quite the contrary! sob! sob! that’s ight.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.11#Then turning to the elder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.12#“There now! He is not coming! What if he were not to come! I shall have xtinguished my fire, wrecked my chair, torn my shirt, and broken my pane all or nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.13#“And wounded the child!” murmured the mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.14#“Do you know,” went on the father, “that it’s beastly cold in this devil’s arret! What if that man should not come! Oh! See there, you! He makes us wait! e says to himself: ‘Well! they will wait for me! That’s what they’re there or.’ Oh! how I hate them, and with what joy, jubilation, enthusiasm, and atisfaction I could strangle all those rich folks! all those rich folks! These en who pretend to be charitable, who put on airs, who go to mass, who make resents to the priesthood, _preachy, preachy_, in their skullcaps, and who hink themselves above us, and who come for the purpose of humiliating us, and o bring us ‘clothes,’ as they say! old duds that are not worth four sous! And read! That’s not what I want, pack of rascals that they are, it’s money! Ah! oney! Never! Because they say that we would go off and drink it up, and that we re drunkards and idlers! And they! What are they, then, and what have they been n their time! Thieves! They never could have become rich otherwise! Oh! Society ught to be grasped by the four corners of the cloth and tossed into the air, ll of it! It would all be smashed, very likely, but at least, no one would have nything, and there would be that much gained! But what is that blockhead of a enevolent gentleman doing? Will he come? Perhaps the animal has forgotten the ddress! I’ll bet that that old beast—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.15#At that moment there came a light tap at the door, the man rushed to it nd opened it, exclaiming, amid profound bows and smiles of adoration:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.16#“Enter, sir! Deign to enter, most respected benefactor, and your charming oung lady, also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.17#A man of ripe age and a young girl made their appearance on the threshold f the attic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.18#Marius had not quitted his post. His feelings for the moment surpassed the owers of the human tongue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.19#It was She!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.20#Whoever has loved knows all the radiant meanings contained in those three etters of that word: She.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.21#It was certainly she. Marius could hardly distinguish her through the uminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes. It was that sweet, bsent being, that star which had beamed upon him for six months; it was those yes, that brow, that mouth, that lovely vanished face which had created night y its departure. The vision had been eclipsed, now it reappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.22#It reappeared in that gloom, in that garret, in that misshapen attic, in ll that horror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.23#Marius shuddered in dismay. What! It was she! The palpitations of his eart troubled his sight. He felt that he was on the brink of bursting into ears! What! He beheld her again at last, after having sought her so long! It eemed to him that he had lost his soul, and that he had just found it gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.24#She was the same as ever, only a little pale; her delicate face was framed n a bonnet of violet velvet, her figure was concealed beneath a pelisse of lack satin. Beneath her long dress, a glimpse could be caught of her tiny foot hod in a silken boot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.25#She was still accompanied by M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.26#She had taken a few steps into the room, and had deposited a tolerably ulky parcel on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.8.27#The eldest Jondrette girl had retired behind the door, and was staring ith sombre eyes at that velvet bonnet, that silk mantle, and that charming, appy face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.head#CHAPTER IX—JONDRETTE COMES NEAR WEEPING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.1#The hovel was so dark, that people coming from without felt on entering it he effect produced on entering a cellar. The two newcomers advanced, therefore, ith a certain hesitation, being hardly able to distinguish the vague forms urrounding them, while they could be clearly seen and scrutinized by the eyes f the inhabitants of the garret, who were accustomed to this twilight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.2#M. Leblanc approached, with his sad but kindly look, and said to Jondrette he father:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.3#“Monsieur, in this package you will find some new clothes and some woollen tockings and blankets.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.4#“Our angelic benefactor overwhelms us,” said Jondrette, bowing to the very arth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.5#Then, bending down to the ear of his eldest daughter, while the two isitors were engaged in examining this lamentable interior, he added in a low nd rapid voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.6#“Hey? What did I say? Duds! No money! They are all alike! By the way, how as the letter to that old blockhead signed?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.7#“Fabantou,” replied the girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.8#“The dramatic artist, good!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.9#It was lucky for Jondrette, that this had occurred to him, for at the very oment, M. Leblanc turned to him, and said to him with the air of a person who s seeking to recall a name:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.10#“I see that you are greatly to be pitied, Monsieur—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.11#“Fabantou,” replied Jondrette quickly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.12#“Monsieur Fabantou, yes, that is it. I remember.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.13#“Dramatic artist, sir, and one who has had some success.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.14#Here Jondrette evidently judged the moment propitious for capturing the philanthropist.” He exclaimed with an accent which smacked at the same time of he vainglory of the mountebank at fairs, and the humility of the mendicant on he highway:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.15#“A pupil of Talma! Sir! I am a pupil of Talma! Fortune formerly smiled on e—Alas! Now it is misfortune’s turn. You see, my benefactor, no bread, no fire. y poor babes have no fire! My only chair has no seat! A broken pane! And in uch weather! My spouse in bed! Ill!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.16#“Poor woman!” said M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.17#“My child wounded!” added Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.18#The child, diverted by the arrival of the strangers, had fallen to ontemplating “the young lady,” and had ceased to sob.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.19#“Cry! bawl!” said Jondrette to her in a low voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.20#At the same time he pinched her sore hand. All this was done with the alent of a juggler.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.21#The little girl gave vent to loud shrieks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.22#The adorable young girl, whom Marius, in his heart, called “his Ursule,” pproached her hastily.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.23#“Poor, dear child!” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.24#“You see, my beautiful young lady,” pursued Jondrette “her bleeding wrist! t came through an accident while working at a machine to earn six sous a day. t may be necessary to cut off her arm.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.25#“Really?” said the old gentleman, in alarm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.26#The little girl, taking this seriously, fell to sobbing more violently han ever.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.27#“Alas! yes, my benefactor!” replied the father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.28#For several minutes, Jondrette had been scrutinizing “the benefactor” in a ingular fashion. As he spoke, he seemed to be examining the other attentively, s though seeking to summon up his recollections. All at once, profiting by a oment when the newcomers were questioning the child with interest as to her njured hand, he passed near his wife, who lay in her bed with a stupid and ejected air, and said to her in a rapid but very low tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.29#“Take a look at that man!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.30#Then, turning to M. Leblanc, and continuing his lamentations:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.31#“You see, sir! All the clothing that I have is my wife’s chemise! And all orn at that! In the depths of winter! I can’t go out for lack of a coat. If I ad a coat of any sort, I would go and see Mademoiselle Mars, who knows me and s very fond of me. Does she not still reside in the Rue de la Tour-des-Dames? o you know, sir? We played together in the provinces. I shared her laurels. élimène would come to my succor, sir! Elmire would bestow alms on Bélisaire! ut no, nothing! And not a sou in the house! My wife ill, and not a sou! My aughter dangerously injured, not a sou! My wife suffers from fits of uffocation. It comes from her age, and besides, her nervous system is affected. he ought to have assistance, and my daughter also! But the doctor! But the pothecary! How am I to pay them? I would kneel to a penny, sir! Such is the ondition to which the arts are reduced. And do you know, my charming young ady, and you, my generous protector, do you know, you who breathe forth virtue nd goodness, and who perfume that church where my daughter sees you every day hen she says her prayers?—For I have brought up my children religiously, sir. I id not want them to take to the theatre. Ah! the hussies! If I catch them ripping! I do not jest, that I don’t! I read them lessons on honor, on orality, on virtue! Ask them! They have got to walk straight. They are none of our unhappy wretches who begin by having no family, and end by espousing the ublic. One is Mamselle Nobody, and one becomes Madame Everybody. Deuce take it! one of that in the Fabantou family! I mean to bring them up virtuously, and hey shall be honest, and nice, and believe in God, by the sacred name! Well, ir, my worthy sir, do you know what is going to happen to-morrow? To-morrow is he fourth day of February, the fatal day, the last day of grace allowed me by y landlord; if by this evening I have not paid my rent, to-morrow my oldest aughter, my spouse with her fever, my child with her wound,—we shall all four e turned out of here and thrown into the street, on the boulevard, without helter, in the rain, in the snow. There, sir. I owe for four quarters—a whole ear! that is to say, sixty francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.32#Jondrette lied. Four quarters would have amounted to only forty francs, nd he could not owe four, because six months had not elapsed since Marius had aid for two.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.33#M. Leblanc drew five francs from his pocket and threw them on the able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.34#Jondrette found time to mutter in the ear of his eldest daughter:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.35#“The scoundrel! What does he think I can do with his five francs? That on’t pay me for my chair and pane of glass! That’s what comes of incurring xpenses!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.36#In the meanwhile, M. Leblanc had removed the large brown great-coat which e wore over his blue coat, and had thrown it over the back of the chair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.37#“Monsieur Fabantou,” he said, “these five francs are all that I have about e, but I shall now take my daughter home, and I will return this evening,—it is his evening that you must pay, is it not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.38#Jondrette’s face lighted up with a strange expression. He replied ivaciously:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.39#“Yes, respected sir. At eight o’clock, I must be at my landlord’s.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.40#“I will be here at six, and I will fetch you the sixty francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.41#“My benefactor!” exclaimed Jondrette, overwhelmed. And he added, in a low one: “Take a good look at him, wife!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.42#M. Leblanc had taken the arm of the young girl, once more, and had turned owards the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.43#“Farewell until this evening, my friends!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.44#“Six o’clock?” said Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.45#“Six o’clock precisely.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.46#At that moment, the overcoat lying on the chair caught the eye of the lder Jondrette girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.47#“You are forgetting your coat, sir,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.48#Jondrette darted an annihilating look at his daughter, accompanied by a ormidable shrug of the shoulders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.49#M. Leblanc turned back and said, with a smile:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.50#“I have not forgotten it, I am leaving it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.51#“O my protector!” said Jondrette, “my august benefactor, I melt into ears! Permit me to accompany you to your carriage.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.52#“If you come out,” answered M. Leblanc, “put on this coat. It really is ery cold.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.9.53#Jondrette did not need to be told twice. He hastily donned the brown reat-coat. And all three went out, Jondrette preceding the two strangers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.head#CHAPTER X—TARIFF OF LICENSED CABS: TWO FRANCS AN HOUR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.1#Marius had lost nothing of this entire scene, and yet, in reality, had seen othing. His eyes had remained fixed on the young girl, his heart had, so to peak, seized her and wholly enveloped her from the moment of her very first tep in that garret. During her entire stay there, he had lived that life of cstasy which suspends material perceptions and precipitates the whole soul on a ingle point. He contemplated, not that girl, but that light which wore a satin elisse and a velvet bonnet. The star Sirius might have entered the room, and he ould not have been any more dazzled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.2#While the young girl was engaged in opening the package, unfolding the lothing and the blankets, questioning the sick mother kindly, and the little njured girl tenderly, he watched her every movement, he sought to catch her ords. He knew her eyes, her brow, her beauty, her form, her walk, he did not now the sound of her voice. He had once fancied that he had caught a few words t the Luxembourg, but he was not absolutely sure of the fact. He would have iven ten years of his life to hear it, in order that he might bear away in his oul a little of that music. But everything was drowned in the lamentable xclamations and trumpet bursts of Jondrette. This added a touch of genuine rath to Marius’ ecstasy. He devoured her with his eyes. He could not believe hat it really was that divine creature whom he saw in the midst of those vile reatures in that monstrous lair. It seemed to him that he beheld a humming-bird n the midst of toads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.3#When she took her departure, he had but one thought, to follow her, to ling to her trace, not to quit her until he learned where she lived, not to ose her again, at least, after having so miraculously re-discovered her. He eaped down from the commode and seized his hat. As he laid his hand on the lock f the door, and was on the point of opening it, a sudden reflection caused him o pause. The corridor was long, the staircase steep, Jondrette was talkative, . Leblanc had, no doubt, not yet regained his carriage; if, on turning round in he corridor, or on the staircase, he were to catch sight of him, Marius, in hat house, he would, evidently, take the alarm, and find means to escape from im again, and this time it would be final. What was he to do? Should he wait a ittle? But while he was waiting, the carriage might drive off. Marius was erplexed. At last he accepted the risk and quitted his room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.4#There was no one in the corridor. He hastened to the stairs. There was no ne on the staircase. He descended in all haste, and reached the boulevard in ime to see a fiacre turning the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier, on its way ack to Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.5#Marius rushed headlong in that direction. On arriving at the angle of the oulevard, he caught sight of the fiacre again, rapidly descending the Rue ouffetard; the carriage was already a long way off, and there was no means of vertaking it; what! run after it? Impossible; and besides, the people in the arriage would assuredly notice an individual running at full speed in pursuit f a fiacre, and the father would recognize him. At that moment, wonderful and nprecedented good luck, Marius perceived an empty cab passing along the oulevard. There was but one thing to be done, to jump into this cab and follow he fiacre. That was sure, efficacious, and free from danger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.6#Marius made the driver a sign to halt, and called to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.7#“By the hour?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.8#Marius wore no cravat, he had on his working-coat, which was destitute of uttons, his shirt was torn along one of the plaits on the bosom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.9#The driver halted, winked, and held out his left hand to Marius, rubbing is forefinger gently with his thumb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.10#“What is it?” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.11#“Pay in advance,” said the coachman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.12#Marius recollected that he had but sixteen sous about him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.13#“How much?” he demanded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.14#“Forty sous.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.15#“I will pay on my return.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.16#The driver’s only reply was to whistle the air of La Palisse and to whip p his horse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.17#Marius stared at the retreating cabriolet with a bewildered air. For the ack of four and twenty sous, he was losing his joy, his happiness, his love! He ad seen, and he was becoming blind again. He reflected bitterly, and it must be onfessed, with profound regret, on the five francs which he had bestowed, that ery morning, on that miserable girl. If he had had those five francs, he would ave been saved, he would have been born again, he would have emerged from the imbo and darkness, he would have made his escape from isolation and spleen, rom his widowed state; he might have re-knotted the black thread of his destiny o that beautiful golden thread, which had just floated before his eyes and had roken at the same instant, once more! He returned to his hovel in despair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.18#He might have told himself that M. Leblanc had promised to return in the vening, and that all he had to do was to set about the matter more skilfully, o that he might follow him on that occasion; but, in his contemplation, it is oubtful whether he had heard this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.19#As he was on the point of mounting the staircase, he perceived, on the ther side of the boulevard, near the deserted wall skirting the Rue De la arrière-des-Gobelins, Jondrette, wrapped in the “philanthropist’s” great-coat, ngaged in conversation with one of those men of disquieting aspect who have een dubbed by common consent, _prowlers of the barriers_; people of equivocal ace, of suspicious monologues, who present the air of having evil minds, and ho generally sleep in the daytime, which suggests the supposition that they ork by night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.20#These two men, standing there motionless and in conversation, in the snow hich was falling in whirlwinds, formed a group that a policeman would surely ave observed, but which Marius hardly noticed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.10.21#Still, in spite of his mournful preoccupation, he could not refrain from aying to himself that this prowler of the barriers with whom Jondrette was alking resembled a certain Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, whom ourfeyrac had once pointed out to him as a very dangerous nocturnal roamer. his man’s name the reader has learned in the preceding book. This Panchaud, lias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, figured later on in many criminal trials, nd became a notorious rascal. He was at that time only a famous rascal. To-day e exists in the state of tradition among ruffians and assassins. He was at the ead of a school towards the end of the last reign. And in the evening, at ightfall, at the hour when groups form and talk in whispers, he was discussed t La Force in the Fosse-aux-Lions. One might even, in that prison, precisely at he spot where the sewer which served the unprecedented escape, in broad aylight, of thirty prisoners, in 1843, passes under the culvert, read his name, ANCHAUD, audaciously carved by his own hand on the wall of the sewer, during ne of his attempts at flight. In 1832, the police already had their eye on him, ut he had not as yet made a serious beginning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.head#CHAPTER XI—OFFERS OF SERVICE FROM MISERY TO WRETCHEDNESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.1#Marius ascended the stairs of the hovel with slow steps; at the moment when e was about to re-enter his cell, he caught sight of the elder Jondrette girl ollowing him through the corridor. The very sight of this girl was odious to im; it was she who had his five francs, it was too late to demand them back, he cab was no longer there, the fiacre was far away. Moreover, she would not ave given them back. As for questioning her about the residence of the persons ho had just been there, that was useless; it was evident that she did not know, ince the letter signed Fabantou had been addressed “to the benevolent gentleman f the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.2#Marius entered his room and pushed the door to after him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.3#It did not close; he turned round and beheld a hand which held the door alf open.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.4#“What is it?” he asked, “who is there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.5#It was the Jondrette girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.6#“Is it you?” resumed Marius almost harshly, “still you! What do you want ith me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.7#She appeared to be thoughtful and did not look at him. She no longer had he air of assurance which had characterized her that morning. She did not nter, but held back in the darkness of the corridor, where Marius could see her hrough the half-open door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.8#“Come now, will you answer?” cried Marius. “What do you want with me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.9#She raised her dull eyes, in which a sort of gleam seemed to flicker aguely, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.10#“Monsieur Marius, you look sad. What is the matter with you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.11#“With me!” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.12#“Yes, you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.13#“There is nothing the matter with me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.14#“Yes, there is!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.15#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.16#“I tell you there is!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.17#“Let me alone!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.18#Marius gave the door another push, but she retained her hold on it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.19#“Stop,” said she, “you are in the wrong. Although you are not rich, you ere kind this morning. Be so again now. You gave me something to eat, now tell e what ails you. You are grieved, that is plain. I do not want you to be rieved. What can be done for it? Can I be of any service? Employ me. I do not sk for your secrets, you need not tell them to me, but I may be of use, evertheless. I may be able to help you, since I help my father. When it is ecessary to carry letters, to go to houses, to inquire from door to door, to ind out an address, to follow any one, I am of service. Well, you may assuredly ell me what is the matter with you, and I will go and speak to the persons; ometimes it is enough if some one speaks to the persons, that suffices to let hem understand matters, and everything comes right. Make use of me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.20#An idea flashed across Marius’ mind. What branch does one disdain when one eels that one is falling?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.21#He drew near to the Jondrette girl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.22#“Listen—” he said to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.23#She interrupted him with a gleam of joy in her eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.24#“Oh yes, do call me _thou!_ I like that better.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.25#“Well,” he resumed, “thou hast brought hither that old gentleman and his aughter!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.26#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.27#“Dost thou know their address?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.28#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.29#“Find it for me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.30#The Jondrette’s dull eyes had grown joyous, and they now became loomy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.31#“Is that what you want?” she demanded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.32#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.33#“Do you know them?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.34#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.35#“That is to say,” she resumed quickly, “you do not know her, but you wish o know her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.36#This _them_ which had turned into _her_ had something indescribably ignificant and bitter about it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.37#“Well, can you do it?” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.38#“You shall have the beautiful lady’s address.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.39#There was still a shade in the words “the beautiful lady” which troubled arius. He resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.40#“Never mind, after all, the address of the father and daughter. Their ddress, indeed!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.41#She gazed fixedly at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.42#“What will you give me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.43#“Anything you like.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.44#“Anything I like?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.45#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.46#“You shall have the address.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.47#She dropped her head; then, with a brusque movement, she pulled to the oor, which closed behind her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.48#Marius found himself alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.49#He dropped into a chair, with his head and both elbows on his bed, bsorbed in thoughts which he could not grasp, and as though a prey to vertigo. ll that had taken place since the morning, the appearance of the angel, her isappearance, what that creature had just said to him, a gleam of hope floating n an immense despair,—this was what filled his brain confusedly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.50#All at once he was violently aroused from his reverie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.51#He heard the shrill, hard voice of Jondrette utter these words, which were raught with a strange interest for him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.52#“I tell you that I am sure of it, and that I recognized him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.53#Of whom was Jondrette speaking? Whom had he recognized? M. Leblanc? The ather of “his Ursule”? What! Did Jondrette know him? Was Marius about to obtain n this abrupt and unexpected fashion all the information without which his life as so dark to him? Was he about to learn at last who it was that he loved, who hat young girl was? Who her father was? Was the dense shadow which enwrapped hem on the point of being dispelled? Was the veil about to be rent? Ah! eavens!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.54#He bounded rather than climbed upon his commode, and resumed his post near he little peep-hole in the partition wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.11.55#Again he beheld the interior of Jondrette’s hovel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.head#CHAPTER XII—THE USE MADE OF M. LEBLANC’S FIVE-FRANC PIECE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.1#Nothing in the aspect of the family was altered, except that the wife and aughters had levied on the package and put on woollen stockings and jackets. wo new blankets were thrown across the two beds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.2#Jondrette had evidently just returned. He still had the breathlessness of ut of doors. His daughters were seated on the floor near the fireplace, the lder engaged in dressing the younger’s wounded hand. His wife had sunk back on he bed near the fireplace, with a face indicative of astonishment. Jondrette as pacing up and down the garret with long strides. His eyes were xtraordinary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.3#The woman, who seemed timid and overwhelmed with stupor in the presence of er husband, turned to say:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.4#“What, really? You are sure?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.5#“Sure! Eight years have passed! But I recognize him! Ah! I recognize him. I new him at once! What! Didn’t it force itself on you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.6#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.7#“But I told you: ‘Pay attention!’ Why, it is his figure, it is his face, nly older,—there are people who do not grow old, I don’t know how they manage t,—it is the very sound of his voice. He is better dressed, that is all! Ah! ou mysterious old devil, I’ve got you, that I have!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.8#He paused, and said to his daughters:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.9#“Get out of here, you!—It’s queer that it didn’t strike you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.10#They arose to obey.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.11#The mother stammered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.12#“With her injured hand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.13#“The air will do it good,” said Jondrette. “Be off.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.14#It was plain that this man was of the sort to whom no one offers to reply. he two girls departed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.15#At the moment when they were about to pass through the door, the father etained the elder by the arm, and said to her with a peculiar accent:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.16#“You will be here at five o’clock precisely. Both of you. I shall need ou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.17#Marius redoubled his attention.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.18#On being left alone with his wife, Jondrette began to pace the room again, nd made the tour of it two or three times in silence. Then he spent several inutes in tucking the lower part of the woman’s chemise which he wore into his rousers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.19#All at once, he turned to the female Jondrette, folded his arms and xclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.20#“And would you like to have me tell you something? The young lady—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.21#“Well, what?” retorted his wife, “the young lady?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.22#Marius could not doubt that it was really she of whom they were speaking. e listened with ardent anxiety. His whole life was in his ears.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.23#But Jondrette had bent over and spoke to his wife in a whisper. Then he traightened himself up and concluded aloud:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.24#“It is she!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.25#“That one?” said his wife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.26#“That very one,” said the husband.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.27#No expression can reproduce the significance of the mother’s words. urprise, rage, hate, wrath, were mingled and combined in one monstrous ntonation. The pronunciation of a few words, the name, no doubt, which her usband had whispered in her ear, had sufficed to rouse this huge, somnolent oman, and from being repulsive she became terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.28#“It is not possible!” she cried. “When I think that my daughters are going arefoot, and have not a gown to their backs! What! A satin pelisse, a velvet onnet, boots, and everything; more than two hundred francs’ worth of clothes! o that one would think she was a lady! No, you are mistaken! Why, in the first lace, the other was hideous, and this one is not so bad-looking! She really is ot bad-looking! It can’t be she!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.29#“I tell you that it is she. You will see.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.30#At this absolute assertion, the Jondrette woman raised her large, red, londe face and stared at the ceiling with a horrible expression. At that oment, she seemed to Marius even more to be feared than her husband. She was a ow with the look of a tigress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.31#“What!” she resumed, “that horrible, beautiful young lady, who gazed at my aughters with an air of pity,—she is that beggar brat! Oh! I should like to ick her stomach in for her!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.32#She sprang off of the bed, and remained standing for a moment, her hair in isorder, her nostrils dilating, her mouth half open, her fists clenched and rawn back. Then she fell back on the bed once more. The man paced to and fro nd paid no attention to his female.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.33#After a silence lasting several minutes, he approached the female ondrette, and halted in front of her, with folded arms, as he had done a moment efore:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.34#“And shall I tell you another thing?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.35#“What is it?” she asked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.36#He answered in a low, curt voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.37#“My fortune is made.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.38#The woman stared at him with the look that signifies: “Is the person who s addressing me on the point of going mad?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.39#He went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.40#“Thunder! It was not so very long ago that I was a parishioner of the arish of die-of-hunger-if-you-have-a-fire,-die-of-cold-if-you-have-bread! I ave had enough of misery! my share and other people’s share! I am not joking ny longer, I don’t find it comic any more, I’ve had enough of puns, good God! o more farces, Eternal Father! I want to eat till I am full, I want to drink my ill! to gormandize! to sleep! to do nothing! I want to have my turn, so I do, ome now! before I die! I want to be a bit of a millionnaire!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.41#He took a turn round the hovel, and added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.42#“Like other people.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.43#“What do you mean by that?” asked the woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.44#He shook his head, winked, screwed up one eye, and raised his voice like a edical professor who is about to make a demonstration:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.45#“What do I mean by that? Listen!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.46#“Hush!” muttered the woman, “not so loud! These are matters which must not e overheard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.47#“Bah! Who’s here? Our neighbor? I saw him go out a little while ago. esides, he doesn’t listen, the big booby. And I tell you that I saw him go ut.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.48#Nevertheless, by a sort of instinct, Jondrette lowered his voice, although ot sufficiently to prevent Marius hearing his words. One favorable ircumstance, which enabled Marius not to lose a word of this conversation was he falling snow which deadened the sound of vehicles on the boulevard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.49#This is what Marius heard:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.50#“Listen carefully. The Crœsus is caught, or as good as caught! That’s all ettled already. Everything is arranged. I have seen some people. He will come ere this evening at six o’clock. To bring sixty francs, the rascal! Did you otice how I played that game on him, my sixty francs, my landlord, my fourth of ebruary? I don’t even owe for one quarter! Isn’t he a fool! So he will come at ix o’clock! That’s the hour when our neighbor goes to his dinner. Mother Bougon s off washing dishes in the city. There’s not a soul in the house. The neighbor ever comes home until eleven o’clock. The children shall stand on watch. You hall help us. He will give in.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.51#“And what if he does not give in?” demanded his wife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.52#Jondrette made a sinister gesture, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.53#“We’ll fix him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.54#And he burst out laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.55#This was the first time Marius had seen him laugh. The laugh was cold and weet, and provoked a shudder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.56#Jondrette opened a cupboard near the fireplace, and drew from it an old ap, which he placed on his head, after brushing it with his sleeve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.57#“Now,” said he, “I’m going out. I have some more people that I must see. ood ones. You’ll see how well the whole thing will work. I shall be away as hort a time as possible, it’s a fine stroke of business, do you look after the ouse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.58#And with both fists thrust into the pockets of his trousers, he stood for moment in thought, then exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.59#“Do you know, it’s mighty lucky, by the way, that he didn’t recognize me! f he had recognized me on his side, he would not have come back again. He would ave slipped through our fingers! It was my beard that saved us! my romantic eard! my pretty little romantic beard!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.60#And again he broke into a laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.61#He stepped to the window. The snow was still falling, and streaking the ray of the sky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.62#“What beastly weather!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.63#Then lapping his overcoat across his breast:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.64#“This rind is too large for me. Never mind,” he added, “he did a devilish ood thing in leaving it for me, the old scoundrel! If it hadn’t been for that, couldn’t have gone out, and everything would have gone wrong! What small oints things hang on, anyway!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.65#And pulling his cap down over his eyes, he quitted the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.66#He had barely had time to take half a dozen steps from the door, when the oor opened again, and his savage but intelligent face made its appearance once ore in the opening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.67#“I came near forgetting,” said he. “You are to have a brazier of charcoal eady.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.68#And he flung into his wife’s apron the five-franc piece which the philanthropist” had left with him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.69#“A brazier of charcoal?” asked his wife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.70#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.71#“How many bushels?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.72#“Two good ones.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.73#“That will come to thirty sous. With the rest I will buy something for inner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.74#“The devil, no.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.75#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.76#“Don’t go and spend the hundred-sou piece.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.77#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.78#“Because I shall have to buy something, too.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.79#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.80#“Something.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.81#“How much shall you need?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.82#“Whereabouts in the neighborhood is there an ironmonger’s shop?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.83#“Rue Mouffetard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.84#“Ah! yes, at the corner of a street; I can see the shop.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.85#“But tell me how much you will need for what you have to purchase?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.86#“Fifty sous—three francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.87#“There won’t be much left for dinner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.88#“Eating is not the point to-day. There’s something better to be done.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.89#“That’s enough, my jewel.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.90#At this word from his wife, Jondrette closed the door again, and this ime, Marius heard his step die away in the corridor of the hovel, and descend he staircase rapidly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.12.91#At that moment, one o’clock struck from the church of Saint-Médard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.head#CHAPTER XIII—SOLUS CUM SOLO, IN LOCO REMOTO, NON COGITABUNTUR ORARE ATER NOSTER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.1#Marius, dreamer as he was, was, as we have said, firm and energetic by ature. His habits of solitary meditation, while they had developed in him ympathy and compassion, had, perhaps, diminished the faculty for irritation, ut had left intact the power of waxing indignant; he had the kindliness of a rahmin, and the severity of a judge; he took pity upon a toad, but he crushed a iper. Now, it was into a hole of vipers that his glance had just been directed, t was a nest of monsters that he had beneath his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.2#“These wretches must be stamped upon,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.3#Not one of the enigmas which he had hoped to see solved had been lucidated; on the contrary, all of them had been rendered more dense, if nything; he knew nothing more about the beautiful maiden of the Luxembourg and he man whom he called M. Leblanc, except that Jondrette was acquainted with hem. Athwart the mysterious words which had been uttered, the only thing of hich he caught a distinct glimpse was the fact that an ambush was in course of reparation, a dark but terrible trap; that both of them were incurring great anger, she probably, her father certainly; that they must be saved; that the ideous plots of the Jondrettes must be thwarted, and the web of these spiders roken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.4#He scanned the female Jondrette for a moment. She had pulled an old heet-iron stove from a corner, and she was rummaging among the old heap of ron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.5#He descended from the commode as softly as possible, taking care not to ake the least noise. Amid his terror as to what was in preparation, and in the orror with which the Jondrettes had inspired him, he experienced a sort of joy t the idea that it might be granted to him perhaps to render a service to the ne whom he loved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.6#But how was it to be done? How warn the persons threatened? He did not know heir address. They had reappeared for an instant before his eyes, and had then lunged back again into the immense depths of Paris. Should he wait for M. eblanc at the door that evening at six o’clock, at the moment of his arrival, nd warn him of the trap? But Jondrette and his men would see him on the watch, he spot was lonely, they were stronger than he, they would devise means to eize him or to get him away, and the man whom Marius was anxious to save would e lost. One o’clock had just struck, the trap was to be sprung at six. Marius ad five hours before him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.7#There was but one thing to be done.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.8#He put on his decent coat, knotted a silk handkerchief round his neck, took is hat, and went out, without making any more noise than if he had been reading on moss with bare feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.9#Moreover, the Jondrette woman continued to rummage among her old iron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.10#Once outside of the house, he made for the Rue du Petit-Banquier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.11#He had almost reached the middle of this street, near a very low wall hich a man can easily step over at certain points, and which abuts on a waste pace, and was walking slowly, in consequence of his preoccupied condition, and he snow deadened the sound of his steps; all at once he heard voices talking ery close by. He turned his head, the street was deserted, there was not a soul n it, it was broad daylight, and yet he distinctly heard voices.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.12#It occurred to him to glance over the wall which he was skirting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.13#There, in fact, sat two men, flat on the snow, with their backs against he wall, talking together in subdued tones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.14#These two persons were strangers to him; one was a bearded man in a louse, and the other a long-haired individual in rags. The bearded man had on a ez, the other’s head was bare, and the snow had lodged in his hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.15#By thrusting his head over the wall, Marius could hear their remarks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.16#The hairy one jogged the other man’s elbow and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.17#“—With the assistance of Patron-Minette, it can’t fail.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.18#“Do you think so?” said the bearded man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.19#And the long-haired one began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.20#“It’s as good as a warrant for each one, of five hundred balls, and the orst that can happen is five years, six years, ten years at the most!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.21#The other replied with some hesitation, and shivering beneath his ez:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.22#“That’s a real thing. You can’t go against such things.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.23#“I tell you that the affair can’t go wrong,” resumed the long-haired man. Father What’s-his-name’s team will be already harnessed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.24#Then they began to discuss a melodrama that they had seen on the preceding vening at the Gaîté Theatre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.25#Marius went his way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.26#It seemed to him that the mysterious words of these men, so strangely idden behind that wall, and crouching in the snow, could not but bear some elation to Jondrette’s abominable projects. That must be _the affair_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.27#He directed his course towards the faubourg Saint-Marceau and asked at the irst shop he came to where he could find a commissary of police.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.28#He was directed to Rue de Pontoise, No. 14.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.29#Thither Marius betook himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.30#As he passed a baker’s shop, he bought a two-penny roll, and ate it, oreseeing that he should not dine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.13.31#On the way, he rendered justice to Providence. He reflected that had he ot given his five francs to the Jondrette girl in the morning, he would have ollowed M. Leblanc’s fiacre, and consequently have remained ignorant of verything, and that there would have been no obstacle to the trap of the ondrettes and that M. Leblanc would have been lost, and his daughter with him, o doubt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.head#CHAPTER XIV—IN WHICH A POLICE AGENT BESTOWS TWO FISTFULS ON A AWYER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.1#On arriving at No. 14, Rue de Pontoise, he ascended to the first floor and nquired for the commissary of police.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.2#“The commissary of police is not here,” said a clerk; “but there is an nspector who takes his place. Would you like to speak to him? Are you in aste?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.3#“Yes,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.4#The clerk introduced him into the commissary’s office. There stood a tall an behind a grating, leaning against a stove, and holding up with both hands he tails of a vast topcoat, with three collars. His face was square, with a hin, firm mouth, thick, gray, and very ferocious whiskers, and a look that was nough to turn your pockets inside out. Of that glance it might have been well aid, not that it penetrated, but that it searched.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.5#This man’s air was not much less ferocious nor less terrible than ondrette’s; the dog is, at times, no less terrible to meet than the wolf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.6#“What do you want?” he said to Marius, without adding “monsieur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.7#“Is this Monsieur le Commissaire de Police?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.8#“He is absent. I am here in his stead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.9#“The matter is very private.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.10#“Then speak.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.11#“And great haste is required.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.12#“Then speak quick.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.13#This calm, abrupt man was both terrifying and reassuring at one and the ame time. He inspired fear and confidence. Marius related the adventure to him: hat a person with whom he was not acquainted otherwise than by sight, was to be nveigled into a trap that very evening; that, as he occupied the room adjoining he den, he, Marius Pontmercy, a lawyer, had heard the whole plot through the artition; that the wretch who had planned the trap was a certain Jondrette; hat there would be accomplices, probably some prowlers of the barriers, among thers a certain Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille; that Jondrette’s aughters were to lie in wait; that there was no way of warning the threatened an, since he did not even know his name; and that, finally, all this was to be arried out at six o’clock that evening, at the most deserted point of the oulevard de l’Hôpital, in house No. 50-52.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.14#At the sound of this number, the inspector raised his head, and said oldly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.15#“So it is in the room at the end of the corridor?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.16#“Precisely,” answered Marius, and he added: “Are you acquainted with that ouse?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.17#The inspector remained silent for a moment, then replied, as he warmed the eel of his boot at the door of the stove:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.18#“Apparently.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.19#He went on, muttering between his teeth, and not addressing Marius so much s his cravat:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.20#“Patron-Minette must have had a hand in this.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.21#This word struck Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.22#“Patron-Minette,” said he, “I did hear that word pronounced, in fact.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.23#And he repeated to the inspector the dialogue between the long-haired man nd the bearded man in the snow behind the wall of the Rue du etit-Banquier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.24#The inspector muttered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.25#“The long-haired man must be Brujon, and the bearded one Demi-Liard, alias eux-Milliards.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.26#He had dropped his eyelids again, and became absorbed in thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.27#“As for Father What’s-his-name, I think I recognize him. Here, I’ve burned y coat. They always have too much fire in these cursed stoves. Number 50-52. ormer property of Gorbeau.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.28#Then he glanced at Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.29#“You saw only that bearded and that long-haired man?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.30#“And Panchaud.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.31#“You didn’t see a little imp of a dandy prowling about the premises?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.32#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.33#“Nor a big lump of matter, resembling an elephant in the Jardin des lantes?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.34#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.35#“Nor a scamp with the air of an old red tail?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.36#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.37#“As for the fourth, no one sees him, not even his adjutants, clerks, and mployees. It is not surprising that you did not see him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.38#“No. Who are all those persons?” asked Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.39#The inspector answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.40#“Besides, this is not the time for them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.41#He relapsed into silence, then resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.42#“50-52. I know that barrack. Impossible to conceal ourselves inside it ithout the artists seeing us, and then they will get off simply by ountermanding the vaudeville. They are so modest! An audience embarrasses them. one of that, none of that. I want to hear them sing and make them dance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.43#This monologue concluded, he turned to Marius, and demanded, gazing at him ntently the while:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.44#“Are you afraid?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.45#“Of what?” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.46#“Of these men?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.47#“No more than yourself!” retorted Marius rudely, who had begun to notice hat this police agent had not yet said “monsieur” to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.48#The inspector stared still more intently at Marius, and continued with ententious solemnity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.49#“There, you speak like a brave man, and like an honest man. Courage does ot fear crime, and honesty does not fear authority.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.50#Marius interrupted him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.51#“That is well, but what do you intend to do?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.52#The inspector contented himself with the remark:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.53#“The lodgers have pass-keys with which to get in at night. You must have ne.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.54#“Yes,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.55#“Have you it about you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.56#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.57#“Give it to me,” said the inspector.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.58#Marius took his key from his waistcoat pocket, handed it to the inspector nd added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.59#“If you will take my advice, you will come in force.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.60#The inspector cast on Marius such a glance as Voltaire might have bestowed n a provincial academician who had suggested a rhyme to him; with one movement e plunged his hands, which were enormous, into the two immense pockets of his op-coat, and pulled out two small steel pistols, of the sort called knock-me-downs.” Then he presented them to Marius, saying rapidly, in a curt one:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.61#“Take these. Go home. Hide in your chamber, so that you may be supposed to ave gone out. They are loaded. Each one carries two balls. You will keep watch; here is a hole in the wall, as you have informed me. These men will come. Leave hem to their own devices for a time. When you think matters have reached a risis, and that it is time to put a stop to them, fire a shot. Not too soon. he rest concerns me. A shot into the ceiling, the air, no matter where. Above ll things, not too soon. Wait until they begin to put their project into xecution; you are a lawyer; you know the proper point.” Marius took the pistols nd put them in the side pocket of his coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.62#“That makes a lump that can be seen,” said the inspector. “Put them in our trousers pocket.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.63#Marius hid the pistols in his trousers pockets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.64#“Now,” pursued the inspector, “there is not a minute more to be lost by ny one. What time is it? Half-past two. Seven o’clock is the hour?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.65#“Six o’clock,” answered Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.66#“I have plenty of time,” said the inspector, “but no more than enough. on’t forget anything that I have said to you. Bang. A pistol shot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.67#“Rest easy,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.68#And as Marius laid his hand on the handle of the door on his way out, the nspector called to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.14.69#“By the way, if you have occasion for my services between now and then, ome or send here. You will ask for Inspector Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.head#CHAPTER XV—JONDRETTE MAKES HIS PURCHASES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.1#A few moments later, about three o’clock, Courfeyrac chanced to be passing long the Rue Mouffetard in company with Bossuet. The snow had redoubled in iolence, and filled the air. Bossuet was just saying to Courfeyrac:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.2#“One would say, to see all these snow-flakes fall, that there was a plague f white butterflies in heaven.” All at once, Bossuet caught sight of Marius oming up the street towards the barrier with a peculiar air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.3#“Hold!” said Bossuet. “There’s Marius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.4#“I saw him,” said Courfeyrac. “Don’t let’s speak to him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.5#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.6#“He is busy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.7#“With what?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.8#“Don’t you see his air?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.9#“What air?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.10#“He has the air of a man who is following some one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.11#“That’s true,” said Bossuet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.12#“Just see the eyes he is making!” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.13#“But who the deuce is he following?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.14#“Some fine, flowery bonneted wench! He’s in love.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.15#“But,” observed Bossuet, “I don’t see any wench nor any flowery bonnet in he street. There’s not a woman round.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.16#Courfeyrac took a survey, and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.17#“He’s following a man!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.18#A man, in fact, wearing a gray cap, and whose gray beard could be istinguished, although they only saw his back, was walking along about twenty aces in advance of Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.19#This man was dressed in a great-coat which was perfectly new and too large or him, and in a frightful pair of trousers all hanging in rags and black with ud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.20#Bossuet burst out laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.21#“Who is that man?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.22#“He?” retorted Courfeyrac, “he’s a poet. Poets are very fond of wearing he trousers of dealers in rabbit skins and the overcoats of peers of rance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.23#“Let’s see where Marius will go,” said Bossuet; “let’s see where the man s going, let’s follow them, hey?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.24#“Bossuet!” exclaimed Courfeyrac, “eagle of Meaux! You are a prodigious rute. Follow a man who is following another man, indeed!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.25#They retraced their steps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.26#Marius had, in fact, seen Jondrette passing along the Rue Mouffetard, and as spying on his proceedings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.27#Jondrette walked straight ahead, without a suspicion that he was already eld by a glance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.28#He quitted the Rue Mouffetard, and Marius saw him enter one of the most errible hovels in the Rue Gracieuse; he remained there about a quarter of an our, then returned to the Rue Mouffetard. He halted at an ironmonger’s shop, hich then stood at the corner of the Rue Pierre-Lombard, and a few minutes ater Marius saw him emerge from the shop, holding in his hand a huge cold hisel with a white wood handle, which he concealed beneath his great-coat. At he top of the Rue Petit-Gentilly he turned to the left and proceeded rapidly to he Rue du Petit-Banquier. The day was declining; the snow, which had ceased for moment, had just begun again. Marius posted himself on the watch at the very orner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier, which was deserted, as usual, and did not ollow Jondrette into it. It was lucky that he did so, for, on arriving in the icinity of the wall where Marius had heard the long-haired man and the bearded an conversing, Jondrette turned round, made sure that no one was following him, id not see him, then sprang across the wall and disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.29#The waste land bordered by this wall communicated with the back yard of an x-livery stable-keeper of bad repute, who had failed and who still kept a few ld single-seated berlins under his sheds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.30#Marius thought that it would be wise to profit by Jondrette’s absence to eturn home; moreover, it was growing late; every evening, Ma’am Bougon when she et out for her dish-washing in town, had a habit of locking the door, which was lways closed at dusk. Marius had given his key to the inspector of police; it as important, therefore, that he should make haste.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.31#Evening had arrived, night had almost closed in; on the horizon and in the mmensity of space, there remained but one spot illuminated by the sun, and that as the moon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.32#It was rising in a ruddy glow behind the low dome of Salpêtrière.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.33#Marius returned to No. 50-52 with great strides. The door was still open hen he arrived. He mounted the stairs on tip-toe and glided along the wall of he corridor to his chamber. This corridor, as the reader will remember, was ordered on both sides by attics, all of which were, for the moment, empty and o let. Ma’am Bougon was in the habit of leaving all the doors open. As he assed one of these attics, Marius thought he perceived in the uninhabited cell he motionless heads of four men, vaguely lighted up by a remnant of daylight, alling through a dormer window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.15.34#Marius made no attempt to see, not wishing to be seen himself. He ucceeded in reaching his chamber without being seen and without making any oise. It was high time. A moment later he heard Ma’am Bougon take her eparture, locking the door of the house behind her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.head#CHAPTER XVI—IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE WORDS TO AN ENGLISH AIR WHICH AS IN FASHION IN 1832
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.1#Marius seated himself on his bed. It might have been half-past five ’clock. Only half an hour separated him from what was about to happen. He heard he beating of his arteries as one hears the ticking of a watch in the dark. He hought of the double march which was going on at that moment in the dark,—crime dvancing on one side, justice coming up on the other. He was not afraid, but he ould not think without a shudder of what was about to take place. As is the ase with all those who are suddenly assailed by an unforeseen adventure, the ntire day produced upon him the effect of a dream, and in order to persuade imself that he was not the prey of a nightmare, he had to feel the cold barrels f the steel pistols in his trousers pockets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.2#It was no longer snowing; the moon disengaged itself more and more clearly rom the mist, and its light, mingled with the white reflection of the snow hich had fallen, communicated to the chamber a sort of twilight aspect.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.3#There was a light in the Jondrette den. Marius saw the hole in the wall hining with a reddish glow which seemed bloody to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.4#It was true that the light could not be produced by a candle. However, here was not a sound in the Jondrette quarters, not a soul was moving there, ot a soul speaking, not a breath; the silence was glacial and profound, and had t not been for that light, he might have thought himself next door to a epulchre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.5#Marius softly removed his boots and pushed them under his bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.6#Several minutes elapsed. Marius heard the lower door turn on its hinges; a eavy step mounted the staircase, and hastened along the corridor; the latch of he hovel was noisily lifted; it was Jondrette returning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.7#Instantly, several voices arose. The whole family was in the garret. Only, t had been silent in the master’s absence, like wolf whelps in the absence of he wolf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.8#“It’s I,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.9#“Good evening, daddy,” yelped the girls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.10#“Well?” said the mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.11#“All’s going first-rate,” responded Jondrette, “but my feet are beastly old. Good! You have dressed up. You have done well! You must inspire onfidence.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.12#“All ready to go out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.13#“Don’t forget what I told you. You will do everything sure?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.14#“Rest easy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.15#“Because—” said Jondrette. And he left the phrase unfinished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.16#Marius heard him lay something heavy on the table, probably the chisel hich he had purchased.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.17#“By the way,” said Jondrette, “have you been eating here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.18#“Yes,” said the mother. “I got three large potatoes and some salt. I took dvantage of the fire to cook them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.19#“Good,” returned Jondrette. “To-morrow I will take you out to dine with e. We will have a duck and fixings. You shall dine like Charles the Tenth; all s going well!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.20#Then he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.21#“The mouse-trap is open. The cats are there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.22#He lowered his voice still further, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.23#“Put this in the fire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.24#Marius heard a sound of charcoal being knocked with the tongs or some iron tensil, and Jondrette continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.25#“Have you greased the hinges of the door so that they will not queak?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.26#“Yes,” replied the mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.27#“What time is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.28#“Nearly six. The half-hour struck from Saint-Médard a while ago.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.29#“The devil!” ejaculated Jondrette; “the children must go and watch. Come ou, do you listen here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.30#A whispering ensued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.31#Jondrette’s voice became audible again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.32#“Has old Bougon left?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.33#“Yes,” said the mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.34#“Are you sure that there is no one in our neighbor’s room?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.35#“He has not been in all day, and you know very well that this is his inner hour.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.36#“You are sure?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.37#“Sure.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.38#“All the same,” said Jondrette, “there’s no harm in going to see whether e is there. Here, my girl, take the candle and go there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.39#Marius fell on his hands and knees and crawled silently under his bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.40#Hardly had he concealed himself, when he perceived a light through the rack of his door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.41#“P’pa,” cried a voice, “he is not in here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.42#He recognized the voice of the eldest daughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.43#“Did you go in?” demanded her father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.44#“No,” replied the girl, “but as his key is in the door, he must be ut.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.45#The father exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.46#“Go in, nevertheless.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.47#The door opened, and Marius saw the tall Jondrette come in with a candle n her hand. She was as she had been in the morning, only still more repulsive n this light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.48#She walked straight up to the bed. Marius endured an indescribable moment f anxiety; but near the bed there was a mirror nailed to the wall, and it was hither that she was directing her steps. She raised herself on tiptoe and ooked at herself in it. In the neighboring room, the sound of iron articles eing moved was audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.49#She smoothed her hair with the palm of her hand, and smiled into the irror, humming with her cracked and sepulchral voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.50#Nos amours ont duré toute une semaine, Mais que du bonheur les instants ont courts! S’adorer huit jours, c‘était bien la peine! Le temps des amours evrait durer toujours! Devrait durer toujours! devrait durer toujours!28
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.51#In the meantime, Marius trembled. It seemed impossible to him that she hould not hear his breathing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.52#She stepped to the window and looked out with the half-foolish way she ad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.53#“How ugly Paris is when it has put on a white chemise!” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.54#She returned to the mirror and began again to put on airs before it, crutinizing herself full-face and three-quarters face in turn.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.55#“Well!” cried her father, “what are you about there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.56#“I am looking under the bed and the furniture,” she replied, continuing to rrange her hair; “there’s no one here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.57#“Booby!” yelled her father. “Come here this minute! And don’t waste any ime about it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.58#“Coming! Coming!” said she. “One has no time for anything in this ovel!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.59#She hummed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.60#Vous me quittez pour aller à la gloire; Mon triste cœur suivra artout.29
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.61#She cast a parting glance in the mirror and went out, shutting the door ehind her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.62#A moment more, and Marius heard the sound of the two young girls’ bare eet in the corridor, and Jondrette’s voice shouting to them:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.63#“Pay strict heed! One on the side of the barrier, the other at the corner f the Rue du Petit-Banquier. Don’t lose sight for a moment of the door of this ouse, and the moment you see anything, rush here on the instant! as hard as you an go! You have a key to get in.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.64#The eldest girl grumbled:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.65#“The idea of standing watch in the snow barefoot!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.66#“To-morrow you shall have some dainty little green silk boots!” said the ather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.67#They ran downstairs, and a few seconds later the shock of the outer door s it banged to announced that they were outside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.16.68#There now remained in the house only Marius, the Jondrettes and probably, lso, the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught a glimpse in the wilight, behind the door of the unused attic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.head#CHAPTER XVII—THE USE MADE OF MARIUS’ FIVE-FRANC PIECE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.1#Marius decided that the moment had now arrived when he must resume his post t his observatory. In a twinkling, and with the agility of his age, he had eached the hole in the partition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.2#He looked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.3#The interior of the Jondrette apartment presented a curious aspect, and arius found an explanation of the singular light which he had noticed. A candle as burning in a candlestick covered with verdigris, but that was not what eally lighted the chamber. The hovel was completely illuminated, as it were, by he reflection from a rather large sheet-iron brazier standing in the fireplace, nd filled with burning charcoal, the brazier prepared by the Jondrette woman hat morning. The charcoal was glowing hot and the brazier was red; a blue flame lickered over it, and helped him to make out the form of the chisel purchased y Jondrette in the Rue Pierre-Lombard, where it had been thrust into the razier to heat. In one corner, near the door, and as though prepared for some efinite use, two heaps were visible, which appeared to be, the one a heap of ld iron, the other a heap of ropes. All this would have caused the mind of a erson who knew nothing of what was in preparation, to waver between a very inister and a very simple idea. The lair thus lighted up more resembled a forge han a mouth of hell, but Jondrette, in this light, had rather the air of a emon than of a smith.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.4#The heat of the brazier was so great, that the candle on the table was elting on the side next the chafing-dish, and was drooping over. An old ark-lantern of copper, worthy of Diogenes turned Cartouche, stood on the himney-piece.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.5#The brazier, placed in the fireplace itself, beside the nearly extinct rands, sent its vapors up the chimney, and gave out no odor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.6#The moon, entering through the four panes of the window, cast its whiteness nto the crimson and flaming garret; and to the poetic spirit of Marius, who was reamy even in the moment of action, it was like a thought of heaven mingled ith the misshapen reveries of earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.7#A breath of air which made its way in through the open pane, helped to issipate the smell of the charcoal and to conceal the presence of the razier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.8#The Jondrette lair was, if the reader recalls what we have said of the orbeau building, admirably chosen to serve as the theatre of a violent and ombre deed, and as the envelope for a crime. It was the most retired chamber in he most isolated house on the most deserted boulevard in Paris. If the system f ambush and traps had not already existed, they would have been invented here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.9#The whole thickness of a house and a multitude of uninhabited rooms eparated this den from the boulevard, and the only window that existed opened n waste lands enclosed with walls and palisades.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.10#Jondrette had lighted his pipe, seated himself on the seatless chair, and as engaged in smoking. His wife was talking to him in a low tone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.11#If Marius had been Courfeyrac, that is to say, one of those men who laugh n every occasion in life, he would have burst with laughter when his gaze fell n the Jondrette woman. She had on a black bonnet with plumes not unlike the ats of the heralds-at-arms at the coronation of Charles X., an immense tartan hawl over her knitted petticoat, and the man’s shoes which her daughter had corned in the morning. It was this toilette which had extracted from Jondrette he exclamation: “Good! You have dressed up. You have done well. You must nspire confidence!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.12#As for Jondrette, he had not taken off the new surtout, which was too arge for him, and which M. Leblanc had given him, and his costume continued to resent that contrast of coat and trousers which constituted the ideal of a poet n Courfeyrac’s eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.13#All at once, Jondrette lifted up his voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.14#“By the way! Now that I think of it. In this weather, he will come in a arriage. Light the lantern, take it and go downstairs. You will stand behind he lower door. The very moment that you hear the carriage stop, you will open he door, instantly, he will come up, you will light the staircase and the orridor, and when he enters here, you will go downstairs again as speedily as ossible, you will pay the coachman, and dismiss the fiacre.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.15#“And the money?” inquired the woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.16#Jondrette fumbled in his trousers pocket and handed her five francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.17#“What’s this?” she exclaimed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.18#Jondrette replied with dignity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.19#“That is the monarch which our neighbor gave us this morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.20#And he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.21#“Do you know what? Two chairs will be needed here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.22#“What for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.23#“To sit on.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.24#Marius felt a cold chill pass through his limbs at hearing this mild nswer from Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.25#“Pardieu! I’ll go and get one of our neighbor’s.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.26#And with a rapid movement, she opened the door of the den, and went out nto the corridor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.27#Marius absolutely had not the time to descend from the commode, reach his ed, and conceal himself beneath it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.28#“Take the candle,” cried Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.29#“No,” said she, “it would embarrass me, I have the two chairs to carry. here is moonlight.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.30#Marius heard Mother Jondrette’s heavy hand fumbling at his lock in the ark. The door opened. He remained nailed to the spot with the shock and with orror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.31#The Jondrette entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.32#The dormer window permitted the entrance of a ray of moonlight between two locks of shadow. One of these blocks of shadow entirely covered the wall gainst which Marius was leaning, so that he disappeared within it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.33#Mother Jondrette raised her eyes, did not see Marius, took the two chairs, he only ones which Marius possessed, and went away, letting the door fall eavily to behind her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.34#She re-entered the lair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.35#“Here are the two chairs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.36#“And here is the lantern. Go down as quick as you can.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.37#She hastily obeyed, and Jondrette was left alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.38#He placed the two chairs on opposite sides of the table, turned the chisel n the brazier, set in front of the fireplace an old screen which masked the hafing-dish, then went to the corner where lay the pile of rope, and bent down s though to examine something. Marius then recognized the fact, that what he ad taken for a shapeless mass was a very well-made rope-ladder, with wooden ungs and two hooks with which to attach it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.39#This ladder, and some large tools, veritable masses of iron, which were ingled with the old iron piled up behind the door, had not been in the ondrette hovel in the morning, and had evidently been brought thither in the fternoon, during Marius’ absence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.40#“Those are the utensils of an edge-tool maker,” thought Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.41#Had Marius been a little more learned in this line, he would have ecognized in what he took for the engines of an edge-tool maker, certain nstruments which will force a lock or pick a lock, and others which will cut or lice, the two families of tools which burglars call _cadets_ and fauchants_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.42#The fireplace and the two chairs were exactly opposite Marius. The brazier eing concealed, the only light in the room was now furnished by the candle; the mallest bit of crockery on the table or on the chimney-piece cast a large hadow. There was something indescribably calm, threatening, and hideous about his chamber. One felt that there existed in it the anticipation of something errible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.43#Jondrette had allowed his pipe to go out, a serious sign of preoccupation, nd had again seated himself. The candle brought out the fierce and the fine ngles of his countenance. He indulged in scowls and in abrupt unfoldings of the ight hand, as though he were responding to the last counsels of a sombre inward onologue. In the course of one of these dark replies which he was making to imself, he pulled the table drawer rapidly towards him, took out a long kitchen nife which was concealed there, and tried the edge of its blade on his nail. hat done, he put the knife back in the drawer and shut it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.44#Marius, on his side, grasped the pistol in his right pocket, drew it out nd cocked it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.45#The pistol emitted a sharp, clear click, as he cocked it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.46#Jondrette started, half rose, listened a moment, then began to laugh and aid:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.47#“What a fool I am! It’s the partition cracking!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.17.48#Marius kept the pistol in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.head#CHAPTER XVIII—MARIUS’ TWO CHAIRS FORM A VIS-A-VIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.1#Suddenly, the distant and melancholy vibration of a clock shook the panes. ix o’clock was striking from Saint-Médard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.2#Jondrette marked off each stroke with a toss of his head. When the sixth ad struck, he snuffed the candle with his fingers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.3#Then he began to pace up and down the room, listened at the corridor, alked on again, then listened once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.4#“Provided only that he comes!” he muttered, then he returned to his hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.5#He had hardly reseated himself when the door opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.6#Mother Jondrette had opened it, and now remained in the corridor making a orrible, amiable grimace, which one of the holes of the dark-lantern lluminated from below.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.7#“Enter, sir,” she said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.8#“Enter, my benefactor,” repeated Jondrette, rising hastily.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.9#M. Leblanc made his appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.10#He wore an air of serenity which rendered him singularly venerable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.11#He laid four louis on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.12#“Monsieur Fabantou,” said he, “this is for your rent and your most ressing necessities. We will attend to the rest hereafter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.13#“May God requite it to you, my generous benefactor!” said Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.14#And rapidly approaching his wife:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.15#“Dismiss the carriage!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.16#She slipped out while her husband was lavishing salutes and offering M. eblanc a chair. An instant later she returned and whispered in his ear:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.17#“‘Tis done.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.18#The snow, which had not ceased falling since the morning, was so deep that he arrival of the fiacre had not been audible, and they did not now hear its eparture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.19#Meanwhile, M. Leblanc had seated himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.20#Jondrette had taken possession of the other chair, facing M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.21#Now, in order to form an idea of the scene which is to follow, let the eader picture to himself in his own mind, a cold night, the solitudes of the alpêtrière covered with snow and white as winding-sheets in the moonlight, the aper-like lights of the street lanterns which shone redly here and there along hose tragic boulevards, and the long rows of black elms, not a passer-by for erhaps a quarter of a league around, the Gorbeau hovel, at its highest pitch of ilence, of horror, and of darkness; in that building, in the midst of those olitudes, in the midst of that darkness, the vast Jondrette garret lighted by a ingle candle, and in that den two men seated at a table, M. Leblanc tranquil, ondrette smiling and alarming, the Jondrette woman, the female wolf, in one orner, and, behind the partition, Marius, invisible, erect, not losing a word, ot missing a single movement, his eye on the watch, and pistol in hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.22#However, Marius experienced only an emotion of horror, but no fear. He lasped the stock of the pistol firmly and felt reassured. “I shall be able to top that wretch whenever I please,” he thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.23#He felt that the police were there somewhere in ambuscade, waiting for the ignal agreed upon and ready to stretch out their arm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.18.24#Moreover, he was in hopes, that this violent encounter between Jondrette nd M. Leblanc would cast some light on all the things which he was interested n learning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.head#CHAPTER XIX—OCCUPYING ONE’S SELF WITH OBSCURE DEPTHS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.1#Hardly was M. Leblanc seated, when he turned his eyes towards the pallets, hich were empty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.2#“How is the poor little wounded girl?” he inquired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.3#“Bad,” replied Jondrette with a heart-broken and grateful smile, “very bad, y worthy sir. Her elder sister has taken her to the Bourbe to have her hurt ressed. You will see them presently; they will be back immediately.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.4#“Madame Fabantou seems to me to be better,” went on M. Leblanc, casting his yes on the eccentric costume of the Jondrette woman, as she stood between him nd the door, as though already guarding the exit, and gazed at him in an ttitude of menace and almost of combat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.5#“She is dying,” said Jondrette. “But what do you expect, sir! She has so uch courage, that woman has! She’s not a woman, she’s an ox.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.6#The Jondrette, touched by his compliment, deprecated it with the affected irs of a flattered monster.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.7#“You are always too good to me, Monsieur Jondrette!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.8#“Jondrette!” said M. Leblanc, “I thought your name was Fabantou?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.9#“Fabantou, alias Jondrette!” replied the husband hurriedly. “An artistic obriquet!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.10#And launching at his wife a shrug of the shoulders which M. Leblanc did ot catch, he continued with an emphatic and caressing inflection of voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.11#“Ah! we have had a happy life together, this poor darling and I! What ould there be left for us if we had not that? We are so wretched, my espectable sir! We have arms, but there is no work! We have the will, no work! don’t know how the government arranges that, but, on my word of honor, sir, I m not Jacobin, sir, I am not a bousingot.30 I don’t wish them any evil, but if were the ministers, on my most sacred word, things would be different. Here, or instance, I wanted to have my girls taught the trade of paper-box makers. ou will say to me: ‘What! a trade?’ Yes! A trade! A simple trade! A read-winner! What a fall, my benefactor! What a degradation, when one has been hat we have been! Alas! There is nothing left to us of our days of prosperity! ne thing only, a picture, of which I think a great deal, but which I am willing o part with, for I must live! Item, one must live!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.12#While Jondrette thus talked, with an apparent incoherence which detracted othing from the thoughtful and sagacious expression of his physiognomy, Marius aised his eyes, and perceived at the other end of the room a person whom he had ot seen before. A man had just entered, so softly that the door had not been eard to turn on its hinges. This man wore a violet knitted vest, which was old, orn, spotted, cut and gaping at every fold, wide trousers of cotton velvet, ooden shoes on his feet, no shirt, had his neck bare, his bare arms tattooed, nd his face smeared with black. He had seated himself in silence on the nearest ed, and, as he was behind Jondrette, he could only be indistinctly seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.13#That sort of magnetic instinct which turns aside the gaze, caused M. eblanc to turn round almost at the same moment as Marius. He could not refrain rom a gesture of surprise which did not escape Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.14#“Ah! I see!” exclaimed Jondrette, buttoning up his coat with an air of omplaisance, “you are looking at your overcoat? It fits me! My faith, but it its me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.15#“Who is that man?” said M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.16#“Him?” ejaculated Jondrette, “he’s a neighbor of mine. Don’t pay any ttention to him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.17#The neighbor was a singular-looking individual. However, manufactories of hemical products abound in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. Many of the workmen ight have black faces. Besides this, M. Leblanc’s whole person was expressive f candid and intrepid confidence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.18#He went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.19#“Excuse me; what were you saying, M. Fabantou?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.20#“I was telling you, sir, and dear protector,” replied Jondrette placing is elbows on the table and contemplating M. Leblanc with steady and tender yes, not unlike the eyes of the boa-constrictor, “I was telling you, that I ave a picture to sell.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.21#A slight sound came from the door. A second man had just entered and eated himself on the bed, behind Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.22#Like the first, his arms were bare, and he had a mask of ink or ampblack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.23#Although this man had, literally, glided into the room, he had not been ble to prevent M. Leblanc catching sight of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.24#“Don’t mind them,” said Jondrette, “they are people who belong in the ouse. So I was saying, that there remains in my possession a valuable picture. ut stop, sir, take a look at it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.25#He rose, went to the wall at the foot of which stood the panel which we ave already mentioned, and turned it round, still leaving it supported against he wall. It really was something which resembled a picture, and which the andle illuminated, somewhat. Marius could make nothing out of it, as Jondrette tood between the picture and him; he only saw a coarse daub, and a sort of rincipal personage colored with the harsh crudity of foreign canvasses and creen paintings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.26#“What is that?” asked M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.27#Jondrette exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.28#“A painting by a master, a picture of great value, my benefactor! I am as uch attached to it as I am to my two daughters; it recalls souvenirs to me! But have told you, and I will not take it back, that I am so wretched that I will art with it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.29#Either by chance, or because he had begun to feel a dawning uneasiness, M. eblanc’s glance returned to the bottom of the room as he examined the icture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.30#There were now four men, three seated on the bed, one standing near the oor-post, all four with bare arms and motionless, with faces smeared with lack. One of those on the bed was leaning against the wall, with closed eyes, nd it might have been supposed that he was asleep. He was old; his white hair ontrasting with his blackened face produced a horrible effect. The other two eemed to be young; one wore a beard, the other wore his hair long. None of them ad on shoes; those who did not wear socks were barefooted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.31#Jondrette noticed that M. Leblanc’s eye was fixed on these men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.32#“They are friends. They are neighbors,” said he. “Their faces are black ecause they work in charcoal. They are chimney-builders. Don’t trouble yourself bout them, my benefactor, but buy my picture. Have pity on my misery. I will ot ask you much for it. How much do you think it is worth?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.33#“Well,” said M. Leblanc, looking Jondrette full in the eye, and with the anner of a man who is on his guard, “it is some signboard for a tavern, and is orth about three francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.34#Jondrette replied sweetly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.35#“Have you your pocket-book with you? I should be satisfied with a thousand rowns.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.36#M. Leblanc sprang up, placed his back against the wall, and cast a rapid lance around the room. He had Jondrette on his left, on the side next the indow, and the Jondrette woman and the four men on his right, on the side next he door. The four men did not stir, and did not even seem to be looking on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.37#Jondrette had again begun to speak in a plaintive tone, with so vague an ye, and so lamentable an intonation, that M. Leblanc might have supposed that hat he had before him was a man who had simply gone mad with misery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.38#“If you do not buy my picture, my dear benefactor,” said Jondrette, “I hall be left without resources; there will be nothing left for me but to throw yself into the river. When I think that I wanted to have my two girls taught he middle-class paper-box trade, the making of boxes for New Year’s gifts! ell! A table with a board at the end to keep the glasses from falling off is equired, then a special stove is needed, a pot with three compartments for the ifferent degrees of strength of the paste, according as it is to be used for ood, paper, or stuff, a paring-knife to cut the cardboard, a mould to adjust t, a hammer to nail the steels, pincers, how the devil do I know what all? And ll that in order to earn four sous a day! And you have to work fourteen hours a ay! And each box passes through the workwoman’s hands thirteen times! And you an’t wet the paper! And you mustn’t spot anything! And you must keep the paste ot. The devil, I tell you! Four sous a day! How do you suppose a man is to ive?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.39#As he spoke, Jondrette did not look at M. Leblanc, who was observing him. . Leblanc’s eye was fixed on Jondrette, and Jondrette’s eye was fixed on the oor. Marius’ eager attention was transferred from one to the other. M. Leblanc eemed to be asking himself: “Is this man an idiot?” Jondrette repeated two or hree distinct times, with all manner of varying inflections of the whining and upplicating order: “There is nothing left for me but to throw myself into the iver! I went down three steps at the side of the bridge of Austerlitz the other ay for that purpose.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.19.40#All at once his dull eyes lighted up with a hideous flash; the little man rew himself up and became terrible, took a step toward M. Leblanc and cried in voice of thunder: “That has nothing to do with the question! Do you know e?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.head#CHAPTER XX—THE TRAP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.1#The door of the garret had just opened abruptly, and allowed a view of hree men clad in blue linen blouses, and masked with masks of black paper. The irst was thin, and had a long, iron-tipped cudgel; the second, who was a sort f colossus, carried, by the middle of the handle, with the blade downward, a utcher’s pole-axe for slaughtering cattle. The third, a man with thick-set houlders, not so slender as the first, held in his hand an enormous key stolen rom the door of some prison.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.2#It appeared that the arrival of these men was what Jondrette had been aiting for. A rapid dialogue ensued between him and the man with the cudgel, he thin one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.3#“Is everything ready?” said Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.4#“Yes,” replied the thin man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.5#“Where is Montparnasse?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.6#“The young principal actor stopped to chat with your girl.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.7#“Which?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.8#“The eldest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.9#“Is there a carriage at the door?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.10#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.11#“Is the team harnessed?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.12#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.13#“With two good horses?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.14#“Excellent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.15#“Is it waiting where I ordered?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.16#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.17#“Good,” said Jondrette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.18#M. Leblanc was very pale. He was scrutinizing everything around him in the en, like a man who understands what he has fallen into, and his head, directed n turn toward all the heads which surrounded him, moved on his neck with an stonished and attentive slowness, but there was nothing in his air which esembled fear. He had improvised an intrenchment out of the table; and the man, ho but an instant previously, had borne merely the appearance of a kindly old an, had suddenly become a sort of athlete, and placed his robust fist on the ack of his chair, with a formidable and surprising gesture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.19#This old man, who was so firm and so brave in the presence of such a anger, seemed to possess one of those natures which are as courageous as they re kind, both easily and simply. The father of a woman whom we love is never a tranger to us. Marius felt proud of that unknown man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.20#Three of the men, of whom Jondrette had said: “They are chimney-builders,” ad armed themselves from the pile of old iron, one with a heavy pair of shears, he second with weighing-tongs, the third with a hammer, and had placed hemselves across the entrance without uttering a syllable. The old man had emained on the bed, and had merely opened his eyes. The Jondrette woman had eated herself beside him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.21#Marius decided that in a few seconds more the moment for intervention ould arrive, and he raised his right hand towards the ceiling, in the direction f the corridor, in readiness to discharge his pistol.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.22#Jondrette having terminated his colloquy with the man with the cudgel, urned once more to M. Leblanc, and repeated his question, accompanying it with hat low, repressed, and terrible laugh which was peculiar to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.23#“So you do not recognize me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.24#M. Leblanc looked him full in the face, and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.25#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.26#Then Jondrette advanced to the table. He leaned across the candle, rossing his arms, putting his angular and ferocious jaw close to M. Leblanc’s alm face, and advancing as far as possible without forcing M. Leblanc to etreat, and, in this posture of a wild beast who is about to bite, he xclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.27#“My name is not Fabantou, my name is not Jondrette, my name is Thénardier. am the inn-keeper of Montfermeil! Do you understand? Thénardier! Now do you now me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.28#An almost imperceptible flush crossed M. Leblanc’s brow, and he replied ith a voice which neither trembled nor rose above its ordinary level, with his ccustomed placidity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.29#“No more than before.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.30#Marius did not hear this reply. Any one who had seen him at that moment hrough the darkness would have perceived that he was haggard, stupid, hunder-struck. At the moment when Jondrette said: “My name is Thénardier,” arius had trembled in every limb, and had leaned against the wall, as though he elt the cold of a steel blade through his heart. Then his right arm, all ready o discharge the signal shot, dropped slowly, and at the moment when Jondrette epeated, “Thénardier, do you understand?” Marius’s faltering fingers had come ear letting the pistol fall. Jondrette, by revealing his identity, had not oved M. Leblanc, but he had quite upset Marius. That name of Thénardier, with hich M. Leblanc did not seem to be acquainted, Marius knew well. Let the reader ecall what that name meant to him! That name he had worn on his heart, nscribed in his father’s testament! He bore it at the bottom of his mind, in he depths of his memory, in that sacred injunction: “A certain Thénardier saved y life. If my son encounters him, he will do him all the good that lies in his ower.” That name, it will be remembered, was one of the pieties of his soul; he ingled it with the name of his father in his worship. What! This man was that hénardier, that inn-keeper of Montfermeil whom he had so long and so vainly ought! He had found him at last, and how? His father’s saviour was a ruffian! hat man, to whose service Marius was burning to devote himself, was a monster! hat liberator of Colonel Pontmercy was on the point of committing a crime whose cope Marius did not, as yet, clearly comprehend, but which resembled an ssassination! And against whom, great God! what a fatality! What a bitter ockery of fate! His father had commanded him from the depths of his coffin to o all the good in his power to this Thénardier, and for four years Marius had herished no other thought than to acquit this debt of his father’s, and at the oment when he was on the eve of having a brigand seized in the very act of rime by justice, destiny cried to him: “This is Thénardier!” He could at last epay this man for his father’s life, saved amid a hail-storm of grape-shot on he heroic field of Waterloo, and repay it with the scaffold! He had sworn to imself that if ever he found that Thénardier, he would address him only by hrowing himself at his feet; and now he actually had found him, but it was only o deliver him over to the executioner! His father said to him: “Succor hénardier!” And he replied to that adored and sainted voice by crushing hénardier! He was about to offer to his father in his grave the spectacle of hat man who had torn him from death at the peril of his own life, executed on he Place Saint-Jacques through the means of his son, of that Marius to whom he ad entrusted that man by his will! And what a mockery to have so long worn on is breast his father’s last commands, written in his own hand, only to act in o horribly contrary a sense! But, on the other hand, now look on that trap and ot prevent it! Condemn the victim and to spare the assassin! Could one be held o any gratitude towards so miserable a wretch? All the ideas which Marius had herished for the last four years were pierced through and through, as it were, y this unforeseen blow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.31#He shuddered. Everything depended on him. Unknown to themselves, he held n his hand all those beings who were moving about there before his eyes. If he ired his pistol, M. Leblanc was saved, and Thénardier lost; if he did not fire, . Leblanc would be sacrificed, and, who knows? Thénardier would escape. Should e dash down the one or allow the other to fall? Remorse awaited him in either ase.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.32#What was he to do? What should he choose? Be false to the most imperious ouvenirs, to all those solemn vows to himself, to the most sacred duty, to the ost venerated text! Should he ignore his father’s testament, or allow the erpetration of a crime! On the one hand, it seemed to him that he heard “his rsule” supplicating for her father and on the other, the colonel commending hénardier to his care. He felt that he was going mad. His knees gave way eneath him. And he had not even the time for deliberation, so great was the ury with which the scene before his eyes was hastening to its catastrophe. It as like a whirlwind of which he had thought himself the master, and which was ow sweeping him away. He was on the verge of swooning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.33#In the meantime, Thénardier, whom we shall henceforth call by no other ame, was pacing up and down in front of the table in a sort of frenzy and wild riumph.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.34#He seized the candle in his fist, and set it on the chimney-piece with so iolent a bang that the wick came near being extinguished, and the tallow espattered the wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.35#Then he turned to M. Leblanc with a horrible look, and spit out these ords:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.36#“Done for! Smoked brown! Cooked! Spitchcocked!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.37#And again he began to march back and forth, in full eruption.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.38#“Ah!” he cried, “so I’ve found you again at last, Mister philanthropist! ister threadbare millionnaire! Mister giver of dolls! you old ninny! Ah! so you on’t recognize me! No, it wasn’t you who came to Montfermeil, to my inn, eight ears ago, on Christmas eve, 1823! It wasn’t you who carried off that Fantine’s hild from me! The Lark! It wasn’t you who had a yellow great-coat! No! Nor a ackage of duds in your hand, as you had this morning here! Say, wife, it seems o be his mania to carry packets of woollen stockings into houses! Old charity onger, get out with you! Are you a hosier, Mister millionnaire? You give away our stock in trade to the poor, holy man! What bosh! merry Andrew! Ah! and you on’t recognize me? Well, I recognize you, that I do! I recognized you the very oment you poked your snout in here. Ah! you’ll find out presently, that it sn’t all roses to thrust yourself in that fashion into people’s houses, under he pretext that they are taverns, in wretched clothes, with the air of a poor an, to whom one would give a sou, to deceive persons, to play the generous, to ake away their means of livelihood, and to make threats in the woods, and you an’t call things quits because afterwards, when people are ruined, you bring a oat that is too large, and two miserable hospital blankets, you old blackguard, ou child-stealer!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.39#He paused, and seemed to be talking to himself for a moment. One would ave said that his wrath had fallen into some hole, like the Rhone; then, as hough he were concluding aloud the things which he had been saying to himself n a whisper, he smote the table with his fist, and shouted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.40#“And with his goody-goody air!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.41#And, apostrophizing M. Leblanc:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.42#“Parbleu! You made game of me in the past! You are the cause of all my isfortunes! For fifteen hundred francs you got a girl whom I had, and who ertainly belonged to rich people, and who had already brought in a great deal f money, and from whom I might have extracted enough to live on all my life! A irl who would have made up to me for everything that I lost in that vile ook-shop, where there was nothing but one continual row, and where, like a ool, I ate up my last farthing! Oh! I wish all the wine folks drank in my house ad been poison to those who drank it! Well, never mind! Say, now! You must have hought me ridiculous when you went off with the Lark! You had your cudgel in he forest. You were the stronger. Revenge. I’m the one to hold the trumps o-day! You’re in a sorry case, my good fellow! Oh, but I can laugh! Really, I augh! Didn’t he fall into the trap! I told him that I was an actor, that my ame was Fabantou, that I had played comedy with Mamselle Mars, with Mamselle uche, that my landlord insisted on being paid tomorrow, the 4th of February, nd he didn’t even notice that the 8th of January, and not the 4th of February s the time when the quarter runs out! Absurd idiot! And the four miserable hilippes which he has brought me! Scoundrel! He hadn’t the heart even to go as igh as a hundred francs! And how he swallowed my platitudes! That did amuse me. said to myself: ‘Blockhead! Come, I’ve got you! I lick your paws this morning, ut I’ll gnaw your heart this evening!’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.43#Thénardier paused. He was out of breath. His little, narrow chest panted ike a forge bellows. His eyes were full of the ignoble happiness of a feeble, ruel, and cowardly creature, which finds that it can, at last, harass what it as feared, and insult what it has flattered, the joy of a dwarf who should be ble to set his heel on the head of Goliath, the joy of a jackal which is eginning to rend a sick bull, so nearly dead that he can no longer defend imself, but sufficiently alive to suffer still.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.44#M. Leblanc did not interrupt him, but said to him when he paused:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.45#“I do not know what you mean to say. You are mistaken in me. I am a very oor man, and anything but a millionnaire. I do not know you. You are mistaking e for some other person.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.46#“Ah!” roared Thénardier hoarsely, “a pretty lie! You stick to that leasantry, do you! You’re floundering, my old buck! Ah! You don’t remember! You on’t see who I am?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.47#“Excuse me, sir,” said M. Leblanc with a politeness of accent, which at hat moment seemed peculiarly strange and powerful, “I see that you are a illain!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.48#Who has not remarked the fact that odious creatures possess a usceptibility of their own, that monsters are ticklish! At this word “villain,” he female Thénardier sprang from the bed, Thénardier grasped his chair as hough he were about to crush it in his hands. “Don’t you stir!” he shouted to is wife; and, turning to M. Leblanc:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.49#“Villain! Yes, I know that you call us that, you rich gentlemen! Stop! t’s true that I became bankrupt, that I am in hiding, that I have no bread, hat I have not a single sou, that I am a villain! It’s three days since I have ad anything to eat, so I’m a villain! Ah! you folks warm your feet, you have akoski boots, you have wadded great-coats, like archbishops, you lodge on the irst floor in houses that have porters, you eat truffles, you eat asparagus at orty francs the bunch in the month of January, and green peas, you gorge ourselves, and when you want to know whether it is cold, you look in the papers o see what the engineer Chevalier’s thermometer says about it. We, it is we who re thermometers. We don’t need to go out and look on the quay at the corner of he Tour de l’Horologe, to find out the number of degrees of cold; we feel our lood congealing in our veins, and the ice forming round our hearts, and we say: There is no God!’ And you come to our caverns, yes our caverns, for the purpose f calling us villains! But we’ll devour you! But we’ll devour you, poor little hings! Just see here, Mister millionnaire: I have been a solid man, I have held license, I have been an elector, I am a bourgeois, that I am! And it’s quite ossible that you are not!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.50#Here Thénardier took a step towards the men who stood near the door, and dded with a shudder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.51#“When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like a obbler!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.52#Then addressing M. Leblanc with a fresh outburst of frenzy:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.53#“And listen to this also, Mister philanthropist! I’m not a suspicious haracter, not a bit of it! I’m not a man whose name nobody knows, and who comes nd abducts children from houses! I’m an old French soldier, I ought to have een decorated! I was at Waterloo, so I was! And in the battle I saved a general alled the Comte of I don’t know what. He told me his name, but his beastly oice was so weak that I didn’t hear. All I caught was Merci [thanks]. I’d ather have had his name than his thanks. That would have helped me to find him gain. The picture that you see here, and which was painted by David at ruqueselles,—do you know what it represents? It represents me. David wished to mmortalize that feat of prowess. I have that general on my back, and I am arrying him through the grape-shot. There’s the history of it! That general ever did a single thing for me; he was no better than the rest! But onetheless, I saved his life at the risk of my own, and I have the certificate f the fact in my pocket! I am a soldier of Waterloo, by all the furies! And now hat I have had the goodness to tell you all this, let’s have an end of it. I ant money, I want a deal of money, I must have an enormous lot of money, or ’ll exterminate you, by the thunder of the good God!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.54#Marius had regained some measure of control over his anguish, and was istening. The last possibility of doubt had just vanished. It certainly was the hénardier of the will. Marius shuddered at that reproach of ingratitude irected against his father, and which he was on the point of so fatally ustifying. His perplexity was redoubled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.55#Moreover, there was in all these words of Thénardier, in his accent, in is gesture, in his glance which darted flames at every word, there was, in this xplosion of an evil nature disclosing everything, in that mixture of raggadocio and abjectness, of pride and pettiness, of rage and folly, in that haos of real griefs and false sentiments, in that immodesty of a malicious man asting the voluptuous delights of violence, in that shameless nudity of a epulsive soul, in that conflagration of all sufferings combined with all atreds, something which was as hideous as evil, and as heart-rending as the ruth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.56#The picture of the master, the painting by David which he had proposed hat M. Leblanc should purchase, was nothing else, as the reader has divined, han the sign of his tavern painted, as it will be remembered, by himself, the nly relic which he had preserved from his shipwreck at Montfermeil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.57#As he had ceased to intercept Marius’ visual ray, Marius could examine his thing, and in the daub, he actually did recognize a battle, a background of moke, and a man carrying another man. It was the group composed of Pontmercy nd Thénardier; the sergeant the rescuer, the colonel rescued. Marius was like a runken man; this picture restored his father to life in some sort; it was no onger the signboard of the wine-shop at Montfermeil, it was a resurrection; a omb had yawned, a phantom had risen there. Marius heard his heart beating in is temples, he had the cannon of Waterloo in his ears, his bleeding father, aguely depicted on that sinister panel terrified him, and it seemed to him that he misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.58#When Thénardier had recovered his breath, he turned his bloodshot eyes on . Leblanc, and said to him in a low, curt voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.59#“What have you to say before we put the handcuffs on you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.60#M. Leblanc held his peace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.61#In the midst of this silence, a cracked voice launched this lugubrious arcasm from the corridor:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.62#“If there’s any wood to be split, I’m there!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.63#It was the man with the axe, who was growing merry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.64#At the same moment, an enormous, bristling, and clayey face made its ppearance at the door, with a hideous laugh which exhibited not teeth, but angs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.65#It was the face of the man with the butcher’s axe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.66#“Why have you taken off your mask?” cried Thénardier in a rage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.67#“For fun,” retorted the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.68#For the last few minutes M. Leblanc had appeared to be watching and ollowing all the movements of Thénardier, who, blinded and dazzled by his own age, was stalking to and fro in the den with full confidence that the door was uarded, and of holding an unarmed man fast, he being armed himself, of being ine against one, supposing that the female Thénardier counted for but one an.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.69#During his address to the man with the pole-axe, he had turned his back to . Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.70#M. Leblanc seized this moment, overturned the chair with his foot and the able with his fist, and with one bound, with prodigious agility, before hénardier had time to turn round, he had reached the window. To open it, to cale the frame, to bestride it, was the work of a second only. He was half out hen six robust fists seized him and dragged him back energetically into the ovel. These were the three “chimney-builders,” who had flung themselves upon im. At the same time the Thénardier woman had wound her hands in his hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.71#At the trampling which ensued, the other ruffians rushed up from the orridor. The old man on the bed, who seemed under the influence of wine, escended from the pallet and came reeling up, with a stone-breaker’s hammer in is hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.72#One of the “chimney-builders,” whose smirched face was lighted up by the andle, and in whom Marius recognized, in spite of his daubing, Panchaud, alias rintanier, alias Bigrenaille, lifted above M. Leblanc’s head a sort of bludgeon ade of two balls of lead, at the two ends of a bar of iron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.73#Marius could not resist this sight. “My father,” he thought, “forgive e!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.74#And his finger sought the trigger of his pistol.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.75#The shot was on the point of being discharged when Thénardier’s voice houted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.76#“Don’t harm him!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.77#This desperate attempt of the victim, far from exasperating Thénardier, ad calmed him. There existed in him two men, the ferocious man and the adroit an. Up to that moment, in the excess of his triumph in the presence of the prey hich had been brought down, and which did not stir, the ferocious man had revailed; when the victim struggled and tried to resist, the adroit man eappeared and took the upper hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.78#“Don’t hurt him!” he repeated, and without suspecting it, his first uccess was to arrest the pistol in the act of being discharged, and to paralyze arius, in whose opinion the urgency of the case disappeared, and who, in the ace of this new phase, saw no inconvenience in waiting a while longer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.79#Who knows whether some chance would not arise which would deliver him from he horrible alternative of allowing Ursule’s father to perish, or of destroying he colonel’s saviour?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.80#A herculean struggle had begun. With one blow full in the chest, M. eblanc had sent the old man tumbling, rolling in the middle of the room, then ith two backward sweeps of his hand he had overthrown two more assailants, and e held one under each of his knees; the wretches were rattling in the throat eneath this pressure as under a granite millstone; but the other four had eized the formidable old man by both arms and the back of his neck, and were olding him doubled up over the two “chimney-builders” on the floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.81#Thus, the master of some and mastered by the rest, crushing those beneath im and stifling under those on top of him, endeavoring in vain to shake off all he efforts which were heaped upon him, M. Leblanc disappeared under the orrible group of ruffians like the wild boar beneath a howling pile of dogs and ounds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.82#They succeeded in overthrowing him upon the bed nearest the window, and here they held him in awe. The Thénardier woman had not released her clutch on is hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.83#“Don’t you mix yourself up in this affair,” said Thénardier. “You’ll tear our shawl.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.84#The Thénardier obeyed, as the female wolf obeys the male wolf, with a rowl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.85#“Now,” said Thénardier, “search him, you other fellows!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.86#M. Leblanc seemed to have renounced the idea of resistance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.87#They searched him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.88#He had nothing on his person except a leather purse containing six francs, nd his handkerchief.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.89#Thénardier put the handkerchief into his own pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.90#“What! No pocket-book?” he demanded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.91#“No, nor watch,” replied one of the “chimney-builders.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.92#“Never mind,” murmured the masked man who carried the big key, in the oice of a ventriloquist, “he’s a tough old fellow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.93#Thénardier went to the corner near the door, picked up a bundle of ropes nd threw them at the men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.94#“Tie him to the leg of the bed,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.95#And, catching sight of the old man who had been stretched across the room y the blow from M. Leblanc’s fist, and who made no movement, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.96#“Is Boulatruelle dead?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.97#“No,” replied Bigrenaille, “he’s drunk.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.98#“Sweep him into a corner,” said Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.99#Two of the “chimney-builders” pushed the drunken man into the corner near he heap of old iron with their feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.100#“Babet,” said Thénardier in a low tone to the man with the cudgel, “why id you bring so many; they were not needed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.101#“What can you do?” replied the man with the cudgel, “they all wanted to e in it. This is a bad season. There’s no business going on.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.102#The pallet on which M. Leblanc had been thrown was a sort of hospital ed, elevated on four coarse wooden legs, roughly hewn.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.103#M. Leblanc let them take their own course.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.104#The ruffians bound him securely, in an upright attitude, with his feet on he ground at the head of the bed, the end which was most remote from the indow, and nearest to the fireplace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.105#When the last knot had been tied, Thénardier took a chair and seated imself almost facing M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.106#Thénardier no longer looked like himself; in the course of a few moments is face had passed from unbridled violence to tranquil and cunning weetness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.107#Marius found it difficult to recognize in that polished smile of a man in fficial life the almost bestial mouth which had been foaming but a moment efore; he gazed with amazement on that fantastic and alarming metamorphosis, nd he felt as a man might feel who should behold a tiger converted into a awyer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.108#“Monsieur—” said Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.109#And dismissing with a gesture the ruffians who still kept their hands on . Leblanc:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.110#“Stand off a little, and let me have a talk with the gentleman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.111#All retired towards the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.112#He went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.113#“Monsieur, you did wrong to try to jump out of the window. You might have roken your leg. Now, if you will permit me, we will converse quietly. In the irst place, I must communicate to you an observation which I have made which s, that you have not uttered the faintest cry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.114#Thénardier was right, this detail was correct, although it had escaped arius in his agitation. M. Leblanc had barely pronounced a few words, without aising his voice, and even during his struggle with the six ruffians near the indow he had preserved the most profound and singular silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.115#Thénardier continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.116#“Mon Dieu! You might have shouted ‘stop thief’ a bit, and I should not ave thought it improper. ‘Murder!’ That, too, is said occasionally, and, so far s I am concerned, I should not have taken it in bad part. It is very natural hat you should make a little row when you find yourself with persons who don’t nspire you with sufficient confidence. You might have done that, and no one ould have troubled you on that account. You would not even have been gagged. nd I will tell you why. This room is very private. That’s its only ecommendation, but it has that in its favor. You might fire off a mortar and it ould produce about as much noise at the nearest police station as the snores of drunken man. Here a cannon would make a _boum_, and the thunder would make a pouf_. It’s a handy lodging. But, in short, you did not shout, and it is better o. I present you my compliments, and I will tell you the conclusion that I draw rom that fact: My dear sir, when a man shouts, who comes? The police. And after he police? Justice. Well! You have not made an outcry; that is because you on’t care to have the police and the courts come in any more than we do. It is ecause,—I have long suspected it,—you have some interest in hiding something. n our side we have the same interest. So we can come to an understanding.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.117#As he spoke thus, it seemed as though Thénardier, who kept his eyes fixed n M. Leblanc, were trying to plunge the sharp points which darted from the upils into the very conscience of his prisoner. Moreover, his language, which as stamped with a sort of moderated, subdued insolence and crafty insolence, as reserved and almost choice, and in that rascal, who had been nothing but a obber a short time previously, one now felt “the man who had studied for the riesthood.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.118#The silence preserved by the prisoner, that precaution which had been arried to the point of forgetting all anxiety for his own life, that resistance pposed to the first impulse of nature, which is to utter a cry, all this, it ust be confessed, now that his attention had been called to it, troubled arius, and affected him with painful astonishment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.119#Thénardier’s well-grounded observation still further obscured for Marius he dense mystery which enveloped that grave and singular person on whom ourfeyrac had bestowed the sobriquet of Monsieur Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.120#But whoever he was, bound with ropes, surrounded with executioners, half lunged, so to speak, in a grave which was closing in upon him to the extent of degree with every moment that passed, in the presence of Thénardier’s wrath, s in the presence of his sweetness, this man remained impassive; and Marius ould not refrain from admiring at such a moment the superbly melancholy isage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.121#Here, evidently, was a soul which was inaccessible to terror, and which id not know the meaning of despair. Here was one of those men who command mazement in desperate circumstances. Extreme as was the crisis, inevitable as as the catastrophe, there was nothing here of the agony of the drowning man, ho opens his horror-filled eyes under the water.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.122#Thénardier rose in an unpretending manner, went to the fireplace, shoved side the screen, which he leaned against the neighboring pallet, and thus nmasked the brazier full of glowing coals, in which the prisoner could plainly ee the chisel white-hot and spotted here and there with tiny scarlet stars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.123#Then Thénardier returned to his seat beside M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.124#“I continue,” said he. “We can come to an understanding. Let us arrange his matter in an amicable way. I was wrong to lose my temper just now, I don’t now what I was thinking of, I went a great deal too far, I said extravagant hings. For example, because you are a millionnaire, I told you that I exacted oney, a lot of money, a deal of money. That would not be reasonable. Mon Dieu, n spite of your riches, you have expenses of your own—who has not? I don’t want o ruin you, I am not a greedy fellow, after all. I am not one of those people ho, because they have the advantage of the position, profit by the fact to make hemselves ridiculous. Why, I’m taking things into consideration and making a acrifice on my side. I only want two hundred thousand francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.125#M. Leblanc uttered not a word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.126#Thénardier went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.127#“You see that I put not a little water in my wine; I’m very moderate. I on’t know the state of your fortune, but I do know that you don’t stick at oney, and a benevolent man like yourself can certainly give two hundred housand francs to the father of a family who is out of luck. Certainly, you are easonable, too; you haven’t imagined that I should take all the trouble I have o-day and organized this affair this evening, which has been labor well estowed, in the opinion of these gentlemen, merely to wind up by asking you for nough to go and drink red wine at fifteen sous and eat veal at Desnoyer’s. Two undred thousand francs—it’s surely worth all that. This trifle once out of your ocket, I guarantee you that that’s the end of the matter, and that you have no urther demands to fear. You will say to me: ‘But I haven’t two hundred thousand rancs about me.’ Oh! I’m not extortionate. I don’t demand that. I only ask one hing of you. Have the goodness to write what I am about to dictate to you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.128#Here Thénardier paused; then he added, emphasizing his words, and casting smile in the direction of the brazier:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.129#“I warn you that I shall not admit that you don’t know how to write.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.130#A grand inquisitor might have envied that smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.131#Thénardier pushed the table close to M. Leblanc, and took an inkstand, a en, and a sheet of paper from the drawer which he left half open, and in which leamed the long blade of the knife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.132#He placed the sheet of paper before M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.133#“Write,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.134#The prisoner spoke at last.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.135#“How do you expect me to write? I am bound.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.136#“That’s true, excuse me!” ejaculated Thénardier, “you are quite ight.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.137#And turning to Bigrenaille:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.138#“Untie the gentleman’s right arm.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.139#Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, executed Thénardier’s rder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.140#When the prisoner’s right arm was free, Thénardier dipped the pen in the nk and presented it to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.141#“Understand thoroughly, sir, that you are in our power, at our iscretion, that no human power can get you out of this, and that we shall be eally grieved if we are forced to proceed to disagreeable extremities. I know either your name, nor your address, but I warn you, that you will remain bound ntil the person charged with carrying the letter which you are about to write hall have returned. Now, be so good as to write.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.142#“What?” demanded the prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.143#“I will dictate.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.144#M. Leblanc took the pen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.145#Thénardier began to dictate:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.146#“My daughter—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.147#The prisoner shuddered, and raised his eyes to Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.148#“Put down ‘My dear daughter’—” said Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.149#M. Leblanc obeyed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.150#Thénardier continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.151#“Come instantly—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.152#He paused:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.153#“You address her as _thou_, do you not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.154#“Who?” asked M. Leblanc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.155#“Parbleu!” cried Thénardier, “the little one, the Lark.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.156#M. Leblanc replied without the slightest apparent emotion:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.157#“I do not know what you mean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.158#“Go on, nevertheless,” ejaculated Thénardier, and he continued to ictate:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.159#“Come immediately, I am in absolute need of thee. The person who will eliver this note to thee is instructed to conduct thee to me. I am waiting for hee. Come with confidence.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.160#M. Leblanc had written the whole of this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.161#Thénardier resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.162#“Ah! erase ‘come with confidence’; that might lead her to suppose that verything was not as it should be, and that distrust is possible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.163#M. Leblanc erased the three words.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.164#“Now,” pursued Thénardier, “sign it. What’s your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.165#The prisoner laid down the pen and demanded:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.166#“For whom is this letter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.167#“You know well,” retorted Thénardier, “for the little one I just told you o.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.168#It was evident that Thénardier avoided naming the young girl in question. e said “the Lark,” he said “the little one,” but he did not pronounce her ame—the precaution of a clever man guarding his secret from his accomplices. To ention the name was to deliver the whole “affair” into their hands, and to tell hem more about it than there was any need of their knowing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.169#He went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.170#“Sign. What is your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.171#“Urbain Fabre,” said the prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.172#Thénardier, with the movement of a cat, dashed his hand into his pocket nd drew out the handkerchief which had been seized on M. Leblanc. He looked for he mark on it, and held it close to the candle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.173#“U. F. That’s it. Urbain Fabre. Well, sign it U. F.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.174#The prisoner signed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.175#“As two hands are required to fold the letter, give it to me, I will fold t.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.176#That done, Thénardier resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.177#“Address it, ‘Mademoiselle Fabre,’ at your house. I know that you live a ong distance from here, near Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, because you go to mass here every day, but I don’t know in what street. I see that you understand your ituation. As you have not lied about your name, you will not lie about your ddress. Write it yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.178#The prisoner paused thoughtfully for a moment, then he took the pen and rote:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.179#“Mademoiselle Fabre, at M. Urbain Fabre’s, Rue Saint-Dominique-D’Enfer, o. 17.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.180#Thénardier seized the letter with a sort of feverish convulsion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.181#“Wife!” he cried.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.182#The Thénardier woman hastened to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.183#“Here’s the letter. You know what you have to do. There is a carriage at he door. Set out at once, and return ditto.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.184#And addressing the man with the meat-axe:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.185#“Since you have taken off your nose-screen, accompany the mistress. You ill get up behind the fiacre. You know where you left the team?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.186#“Yes,” said the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.187#And depositing his axe in a corner, he followed Madame Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.188#As they set off, Thénardier thrust his head through the half-open door, nd shouted into the corridor:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.189#“Above all things, don’t lose the letter! remember that you carry two undred thousand francs with you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.190#The Thénardier’s hoarse voice replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.191#“Be easy. I have it in my bosom.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.192#A minute had not elapsed, when the sound of the cracking of a whip was eard, which rapidly retreated and died away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.193#“Good!” growled Thénardier. “They’re going at a fine pace. At such a allop, the bourgeoise will be back inside three-quarters of an hour.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.194#He drew a chair close to the fireplace, folding his arms, and presenting is muddy boots to the brazier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.195#“My feet are cold!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.196#Only five ruffians now remained in the den with Thénardier and the risoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.197#These men, through the black masks or paste which covered their faces, nd made of them, at fear’s pleasure, charcoal-burners, negroes, or demons, had stupid and gloomy air, and it could be felt that they perpetrated a crime like bit of work, tranquilly, without either wrath or mercy, with a sort of ennui. hey were crowded together in one corner like brutes, and remained silent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.198#Thénardier warmed his feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.199#The prisoner had relapsed into his taciturnity. A sombre calm had ucceeded to the wild uproar which had filled the garret but a few moments efore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.200#The candle, on which a large “stranger” had formed, cast but a dim light n the immense hovel, the brazier had grown dull, and all those monstrous heads ast misshapen shadows on the walls and ceiling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.201#No sound was audible except the quiet breathing of the old drunken man, ho was fast asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.202#Marius waited in a state of anxiety that was augmented by every trifle. he enigma was more impenetrable than ever.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.203#Who was this “little one” whom Thénardier had called the Lark? Was she is “Ursule”? The prisoner had not seemed to be affected by that word, “the ark,” and had replied in the most natural manner in the world: “I do not know hat you mean.” On the other hand, the two letters U. F. were explained; they eant Urbain Fabre; and Ursule was no longer named Ursule. This was what Marius erceived most clearly of all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.204#A sort of horrible fascination held him nailed to his post, from which he as observing and commanding this whole scene. There he stood, almost incapable f movement or reflection, as though annihilated by the abominable things viewed t such close quarters. He waited, in the hope of some incident, no matter of hat nature, since he could not collect his thoughts and did not know upon what ourse to decide.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.205#“In any case,” he said, “if she is the Lark, I shall see her, for the hénardier woman is to bring her hither. That will be the end, and then I will ive my life and my blood if necessary, but I will deliver her! Nothing shall top me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.206#Nearly half an hour passed in this manner. Thénardier seemed to be bsorbed in gloomy reflections, the prisoner did not stir. Still, Marius fancied hat at intervals, and for the last few moments, he had heard a faint, dull oise in the direction of the prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.207#All at once, Thénardier addressed the prisoner:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.208#“By the way, Monsieur Fabre, I might as well say it to you at once.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.209#These few words appeared to be the beginning of an explanation. Marius trained his ears.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.210#“My wife will be back shortly, don’t get impatient. I think that the Lark eally is your daughter, and it seems to me quite natural that you should keep er. Only, listen to me a bit. My wife will go and hunt her up with your letter. told my wife to dress herself in the way she did, so that your young lady ight make no difficulty about following her. They will both enter the carriage ith my comrade behind. Somewhere, outside the barrier, there is a trap arnessed to two very good horses. Your young lady will be taken to it. She will light from the fiacre. My comrade will enter the other vehicle with her, and my ife will come back here to tell us: ‘It’s done.’ As for the young lady, no harm ill be done to her; the trap will conduct her to a place where she will be uiet, and just as soon as you have handed over to me those little two hundred housand francs, she will be returned to you. If you have me arrested, my omrade will give a turn of his thumb to the Lark, that’s all.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.211#The prisoner uttered not a syllable. After a pause, Thénardier ontinued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.212#“It’s very simple, as you see. There’ll be no harm done unless you wish hat there should be harm done. I’m telling you how things stand. I warn you so hat you may be prepared.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.213#He paused: the prisoner did not break the silence, and Thénardier esumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.214#“As soon as my wife returns and says to me: ‘The Lark is on the way,’ we ill release you, and you will be free to go and sleep at home. You see that our ntentions are not evil.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.215#Terrible images passed through Marius’ mind. What! That young girl whom hey were abducting was not to be brought back? One of those monsters was to ear her off into the darkness? Whither? And what if it were she!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.216#It was clear that it was she. Marius felt his heart stop beating.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.217#What was he to do? Discharge the pistol? Place all those scoundrels in he hands of justice? But the horrible man with the meat-axe would, nonetheless, e out of reach with the young girl, and Marius reflected on Thénardier’s words, f which he perceived the bloody significance: “If you have me arrested, my omrade will give a turn of his thumb to the Lark.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.218#Now, it was not alone by the colonel’s testament, it was by his own love, t was by the peril of the one he loved, that he felt himself restrained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.219#This frightful situation, which had already lasted above half an hour, as changing its aspect every moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.220#Marius had sufficient strength of mind to review in succession all the ost heart-breaking conjectures, seeking hope and finding none.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.221#The tumult of his thoughts contrasted with the funereal silence of the en.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.222#In the midst of this silence, the door at the bottom of the staircase was eard to open and shut again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.223#The prisoner made a movement in his bonds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.224#“Here’s the bourgeoise,” said Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.225#He had hardly uttered the words, when the Thénardier woman did in fact ush hastily into the room, red, panting, breathless, with flaming eyes, and ried, as she smote her huge hands on her thighs simultaneously:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.226#“False address!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.227#The ruffian who had gone with her made his appearance behind her and icked up his axe again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.228#She resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.229#“Nobody there! Rue Saint-Dominique, No. 17, no Monsieur Urbain Fabre! hey know not what it means!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.230#She paused, choking, then went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.231#“Monsieur Thénardier! That old fellow has duped you! You are too good, ou see! If it had been me, I’d have chopped the beast in four quarters to begin ith! And if he had acted ugly, I’d have boiled him alive! He would have been bliged to speak, and say where the girl is, and where he keeps his shiners! hat’s the way I should have managed matters! People are perfectly right when hey say that men are a deal stupider than women! Nobody at No. 17. It’s nothing ut a big carriage gate! No Monsieur Fabre in the Rue Saint-Dominique! And after ll that racing and fee to the coachman and all! I spoke to both the porter and he portress, a fine, stout woman, and they know nothing about him!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.232#Marius breathed freely once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.233#She, Ursule or the Lark, he no longer knew what to call her, was afe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.234#While his exasperated wife vociferated, Thénardier had seated himself on he table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.235#For several minutes he uttered not a word, but swung his right foot, hich hung down, and stared at the brazier with an air of savage reverie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.236#Finally, he said to the prisoner, with a slow and singularly ferocious one:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.237#“A false address? What did you expect to gain by that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.238#“To gain time!” cried the prisoner in a thundering voice, and at the same nstant he shook off his bonds; they were cut. The prisoner was only attached to he bed now by one leg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.239#Before the seven men had time to collect their senses and dash forward, e had bent down into the fireplace, had stretched out his hand to the brazier, nd had then straightened himself up again, and now Thénardier, the female hénardier, and the ruffians, huddled in amazement at the extremity of the ovel, stared at him in stupefaction, as almost free and in a formidable ttitude, he brandished above his head the red-hot chisel, which emitted a hreatening glow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.240#The judicial examination to which the ambush in the Gorbeau house ventually gave rise, established the fact that a large sou piece, cut and orked in a peculiar fashion, was found in the garret, when the police made heir descent on it. This sou piece was one of those marvels of industry, which re engendered by the patience of the galleys in the shadows and for the hadows, marvels which are nothing else than instruments of escape. These ideous and delicate products of wonderful art are to jewellers’ work what the etaphors of slang are to poetry. There are Benvenuto Cellinis in the galleys, ust as there are Villons in language. The unhappy wretch who aspires to eliverance finds means sometimes without tools, sometimes with a common ooden-handled knife, to saw a sou into two thin plates, to hollow out these lates without affecting the coinage stamp, and to make a furrow on the edge of he sou in such a manner that the plates will adhere again. This can be screwed ogether and unscrewed at will; it is a box. In this box he hides a atch-spring, and this watch-spring, properly handled, cuts good-sized chains nd bars of iron. The unfortunate convict is supposed to possess merely a sou; ot at all, he possesses liberty. It was a large sou of this sort which, during he subsequent search of the police, was found under the bed near the window. hey also found a tiny saw of blue steel which would fit the sou.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.241#It is probable that the prisoner had this sou piece on his person at the oment when the ruffians searched him, that he contrived to conceal it in his and, and that afterward, having his right hand free, he unscrewed it, and used t as a saw to cut the cords which fastened him, which would explain the faint oise and almost imperceptible movements which Marius had observed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.242#As he had not been able to bend down, for fear of betraying himself, he ad not cut the bonds of his left leg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.243#The ruffians had recovered from their first surprise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.244#“Be easy,” said Bigrenaille to Thénardier. “He still holds by one leg, nd he can’t get away. I’ll answer for that. I tied that paw for him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.245#In the meanwhile, the prisoner had begun to speak:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.246#“You are wretches, but my life is not worth the trouble of defending it. hen you think that you can make me speak, that you can make me write what I do ot choose to write, that you can make me say what I do not choose to say—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.247#He stripped up his left sleeve, and added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.248#“See here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.249#At the same moment he extended his arm, and laid the glowing chisel which e held in his left hand by its wooden handle on his bare flesh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.250#The crackling of the burning flesh became audible, and the odor peculiar o chambers of torture filled the hovel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.251#Marius reeled in utter horror, the very ruffians shuddered, hardly a uscle of the old man’s face contracted, and while the red-hot iron sank into he smoking wound, impassive and almost august, he fixed on Thénardier his eautiful glance, in which there was no hatred, and where suffering vanished in erene majesty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.252#With grand and lofty natures, the revolts of the flesh and the senses hen subjected to physical suffering cause the soul to spring forth, and make it ppear on the brow, just as rebellions among the soldiery force the captain to how himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.253#“Wretches!” said he, “have no more fear of me than I have for you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.254#And, tearing the chisel from the wound, he hurled it through the window, hich had been left open; the horrible, glowing tool disappeared into the night, hirling as it flew, and fell far away on the snow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.255#The prisoner resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.256#“Do what you please with me.” He was disarmed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.257#“Seize him!” said Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.258#Two of the ruffians laid their hands on his shoulder, and the masked man ith the ventriloquist’s voice took up his station in front of him, ready to mash his skull at the slightest movement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.259#At the same time, Marius heard below him, at the base of the partition, ut so near that he could not see who was speaking, this colloquy conducted in a ow tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.260#“There is only one thing left to do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.261#“Cut his throat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.262#“That’s it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.263#It was the husband and wife taking counsel together.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.264#Thénardier walked slowly towards the table, opened the drawer, and took ut the knife. Marius fretted with the handle of his pistol. Unprecedented erplexity! For the last hour he had had two voices in his conscience, the one njoining him to respect his father’s testament, the other crying to him to escue the prisoner. These two voices continued uninterruptedly that struggle hich tormented him to agony. Up to that moment he had cherished a vague hope hat he should find some means of reconciling these two duties, but nothing ithin the limits of possibility had presented itself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.265#However, the peril was urgent, the last bounds of delay had been reached; hénardier was standing thoughtfully a few paces distant from the prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.266#Marius cast a wild glance about him, the last mechanical resource of espair. All at once a shudder ran through him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.267#At his feet, on the table, a bright ray of light from the full moon lluminated and seemed to point out to him a sheet of paper. On this paper he ead the following line written that very morning, in large letters, by the ldest of the Thénardier girls:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.268#“THE BOBBIES ARE HERE.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.269#An idea, a flash, crossed Marius’ mind; this was the expedient of which e was in search, the solution of that frightful problem which was torturing im, of sparing the assassin and saving the victim.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.270#He knelt down on his commode, stretched out his arm, seized the sheet of aper, softly detached a bit of plaster from the wall, wrapped the paper round t, and tossed the whole through the crevice into the middle of the den.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.271#It was high time. Thénardier had conquered his last fears or his last cruples, and was advancing on the prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.272#“Something is falling!” cried the Thénardier woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.273#“What is it?” asked her husband.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.274#The woman darted forward and picked up the bit of plaster. She handed it o her husband.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.275#“Where did this come from?” demanded Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.276#“Pardie!” ejaculated his wife, “where do you suppose it came from? hrough the window, of course.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.277#“I saw it pass,” said Bigrenaille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.278#Thénardier rapidly unfolded the paper and held it close to the andle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.279#“It’s in Éponine’s handwriting. The devil!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.280#He made a sign to his wife, who hastily drew near, and showed her the ine written on the sheet of paper, then he added in a subdued voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.281#“Quick! The ladder! Let’s leave the bacon in the mousetrap and ecamp!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.282#“Without cutting that man’s throat?” asked, the Thénardier woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.283#“We haven’t the time.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.284#“Through what?” resumed Bigrenaille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.285#“Through the window,” replied Thénardier. “Since Ponine has thrown the tone through the window, it indicates that the house is not watched on that ide.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.286#The mask with the ventriloquist’s voice deposited his huge key on the loor, raised both arms in the air, and opened and clenched his fists, three imes rapidly without uttering a word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.287#This was the signal like the signal for clearing the decks for action on oard ship.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.288#The ruffians who were holding the prisoner released him; in the twinkling f an eye the rope ladder was unrolled outside the window, and solidly fastened o the sill by the two iron hooks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.289#The prisoner paid no attention to what was going on around him. He seemed o be dreaming or praying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.290#As soon as the ladder was arranged, Thénardier cried:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.291#“Come! the bourgeoise first!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.292#And he rushed headlong to the window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.293#But just as he was about to throw his leg over, Bigrenaille seized him oughly by the collar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.294#“Not much, come now, you old dog, after us!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.295#“After us!” yelled the ruffians.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.296#“You are children,” said Thénardier, “we are losing time. The police are n our heels.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.297#“Well,” said the ruffians, “let’s draw lots to see who shall go down irst.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.298#Thénardier exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.299#“Are you mad! Are you crazy! What a pack of boobies! You want to waste ime, do you? Draw lots, do you? By a wet finger, by a short straw! With written ames! Thrown into a hat!—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.300#“Would you like my hat?” cried a voice on the threshold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.301#All wheeled round. It was Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.20.302#He had his hat in his hand, and was holding it out to them with a mile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.head#CHAPTER XXI—ONE SHOULD ALWAYS BEGIN BY ARRESTING THE VICTIMS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.1#At nightfall, Javert had posted his men and had gone into ambush himself etween the trees of the Rue de la Barrière-des-Gobelins which faced the Gorbeau ouse, on the other side of the boulevard. He had begun operations by opening his pockets,” and dropping into it the two young girls who were charged with eeping a watch on the approaches to the den. But he had only “caged” Azelma. As or Éponine, she was not at her post, she had disappeared, and he had not been ble to seize her. Then Javert had made a point and had bent his ear to waiting or the signal agreed upon. The comings and goings of the fiacres had greatly gitated him. At last, he had grown impatient, and, _sure that there was a nest here_, sure of being in “luck,” having recognized many of the ruffians who had ntered, he had finally decided to go upstairs without waiting for the istol-shot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.2#It will be remembered that he had Marius’ pass-key.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.3#He had arrived just in the nick of time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.4#The terrified ruffians flung themselves on the arms which they had bandoned in all the corners at the moment of flight. In less than a second, hese seven men, horrible to behold, had grouped themselves in an attitude of efence, one with his meat-axe, another with his key, another with his bludgeon, he rest with shears, pincers, and hammers. Thénardier had his knife in his ist. The Thénardier woman snatched up an enormous paving-stone which lay in the ngle of the window and served her daughters as an ottoman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.5#Javert put on his hat again, and advanced a couple of paces into the room, ith arms folded, his cane under one arm, his sword in its sheath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.6#“Halt there,” said he. “You shall not go out by the window, you shall go hrough the door. It’s less unhealthy. There are seven of you, there are fifteen f us. Don’t let’s fall to collaring each other like men of Auvergne.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.7#Bigrenaille drew out a pistol which he had kept concealed under his blouse, nd put it in Thénardier’s hand, whispering in the latter’s ear:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.8#“It’s Javert. I don’t dare fire at that man. Do you dare?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.9#“Parbleu!” replied Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.10#“Well, then, fire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.11#Thénardier took the pistol and aimed at Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.12#Javert, who was only three paces from him, stared intently at him and ontented himself with saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.13#“Come now, don’t fire. You’ll miss fire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.14#Thénardier pulled the trigger. The pistol missed fire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.15#“Didn’t I tell you so!” ejaculated Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.16#Bigrenaille flung his bludgeon at Javert’s feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.17#“You’re the emperor of the fiends! I surrender.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.18#“And you?” Javert asked the rest of the ruffians.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.19#They replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.20#“So do we.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.21#Javert began again calmly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.22#“That’s right, that’s good, I said so, you are nice fellows.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.23#“I only ask one thing,” said Bigrenaille, “and that is, that I may not be enied tobacco while I am in confinement.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.24#“Granted,” said Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.25#And turning round and calling behind him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.26#“Come in now!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.27#A squad of policemen, sword in hand, and agents armed with bludgeons and udgels, rushed in at Javert’s summons. They pinioned the ruffians.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.28#This throng of men, sparely lighted by the single candle, filled the den ith shadows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.29#“Handcuff them all!” shouted Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.30#“Come on!” cried a voice which was not the voice of a man, but of which no ne would ever have said: “It is a woman’s voice.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.31#The Thénardier woman had entrenched herself in one of the angles of the indow, and it was she who had just given vent to this roar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.32#The policemen and agents recoiled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.33#She had thrown off her shawl, but retained her bonnet; her husband, who as crouching behind her, was almost hidden under the discarded shawl, and she as shielding him with her body, as she elevated the paving-stone above her head ith the gesture of a giantess on the point of hurling a rock.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.34#“Beware!” she shouted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.35#All crowded back towards the corridor. A broad open space was cleared in he middle of the garret.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.36#The Thénardier woman cast a glance at the ruffians who had allowed hemselves to be pinioned, and muttered in hoarse and guttural accents:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.37#“The cowards!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.38#Javert smiled, and advanced across the open space which the Thénardier was evouring with her eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.39#“Don’t come near me,” she cried, “or I’ll crush you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.40#“What a grenadier!” ejaculated Javert; “you’ve got a beard like a man, other, but I have claws like a woman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.41#And he continued to advance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.42#The Thénardier, dishevelled and terrible, set her feet far apart, threw erself backwards, and hurled the paving-stone at Javert’s head. Javert ducked, he stone passed over him, struck the wall behind, knocked off a huge piece of lastering, and, rebounding from angle to angle across the hovel, now luckily lmost empty, rested at Javert’s feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.43#At the same moment, Javert reached the Thénardier couple. One of his big ands descended on the woman’s shoulder; the other on the husband’s head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.44#“The handcuffs!” he shouted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.45#The policemen trooped in in force, and in a few seconds Javert’s order had een executed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.46#The Thénardier female, overwhelmed, stared at her pinioned hands, and at hose of her husband, who had dropped to the floor, and exclaimed, weeping:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.47#“My daughters!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.48#“They are in the jug,” said Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.49#In the meanwhile, the agents had caught sight of the drunken man asleep ehind the door, and were shaking him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.50#He awoke, stammering:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.51#“Is it all over, Jondrette?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.52#“Yes,” replied Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.53#The six pinioned ruffians were standing, and still preserved their pectral mien; all three besmeared with black, all three masked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.54#“Keep on your masks,” said Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.55#And passing them in review with a glance of a Frederick II. at a Potsdam arade, he said to the three “chimney-builders”:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.56#“Good day, Bigrenaille! good day, Brujon! good day, Deuxmilliards!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.57#Then turning to the three masked men, he said to the man with the eat-axe:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.58#“Good day, Gueulemer!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.59#And to the man with the cudgel:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.60#“Good day, Babet!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.61#And to the ventriloquist:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.62#“Your health, Claquesous.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.63#At that moment, he caught sight of the ruffians’ prisoner, who, ever since he entrance of the police, had not uttered a word, and had held his head own.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.64#“Untie the gentleman!” said Javert, “and let no one go out!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.65#That said, he seated himself with sovereign dignity before the table, here the candle and the writing-materials still remained, drew a stamped paper rom his pocket, and began to prepare his report.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.66#When he had written the first lines, which are formulas that never vary, e raised his eyes:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.67#“Let the gentleman whom these gentlemen bound step forward.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.68#The policemen glanced round them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.69#“Well,” said Javert, “where is he?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.70#The prisoner of the ruffians, M. Leblanc, M. Urbain Fabre, the father of rsule or the Lark, had disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.71#The door was guarded, but the window was not. As soon as he had found imself released from his bonds, and while Javert was drawing up his report, he ad taken advantage of confusion, the crowd, the darkness, and of a moment when he general attention was diverted from him, to dash out of the window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.72#An agent sprang to the opening and looked out. He saw no one outside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.73#The rope ladder was still shaking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.21.74#“The devil!” ejaculated Javert between his teeth, “he must have been the ost valuable of the lot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.head#CHAPTER XXII—THE LITTLE ONE WHO WAS CRYING IN VOLUME TWO
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.1#On the day following that on which these events took place in the house on he Boulevard de l’Hôpital, a child, who seemed to be coming from the direction f the bridge of Austerlitz, was ascending the side-alley on the right in the irection of the Barrière de Fontainebleau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.2#Night had fully come.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.3#This lad was pale, thin, clad in rags, with linen trousers in the month of ebruary, and was singing at the top of his voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.4#At the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier, a bent old woman was rummaging n a heap of refuse by the light of a street lantern; the child jostled her as e passed, then recoiled, exclaiming:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.5#“Hello! And I took it for an enormous, enormous dog!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.6#He pronounced the word _enormous_ the second time with a jeering swell of he voice which might be tolerably well represented by capitals: “an enormous, NORMOUS dog.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.7#The old woman straightened herself up in a fury.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.8#“Nasty brat!” she grumbled. “If I hadn’t been bending over, I know well here I would have planted my foot on you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.9#The boy was already far away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.10#“Kisss! kisss!” he cried. “After that, I don’t think I was mistaken!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.11#The old woman, choking with indignation, now rose completely upright, and he red gleam of the lantern fully lighted up her livid face, all hollowed into ngles and wrinkles, with crow’s-feet meeting the corners of her mouth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.12#Her body was lost in the darkness, and only her head was visible. One ould have pronounced her a mask of Decrepitude carved out by a light from the ight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.13#The boy surveyed her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.14#“Madame,” said he, “does not possess that style of beauty which pleases e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.15#He then pursued his road, and resumed his song:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.16#“Le roi Coupdesabot S’en allait à la chasse, À la chasse aux orbeaux—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.17#At the end of these three lines he paused. He had arrived in front of No. 0-52, and finding the door fastened, he began to assault it with resounding and eroic kicks, which betrayed rather the man’s shoes that he was wearing than the hild’s feet which he owned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.18#In the meanwhile, the very old woman whom he had encountered at the corner f the Rue du Petit-Banquier hastened up behind him, uttering clamorous cries nd indulging in lavish and exaggerated gestures.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.19#“What’s this? What’s this? Lord God! He’s battering the door down! He’s nocking the house down.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.20#The kicks continued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.21#The old woman strained her lungs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.22#“Is that the way buildings are treated nowadays?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.23#All at once she paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.24#She had recognized the gamin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.25#“What! so it’s that imp!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.26#“Why, it’s the old lady,” said the lad. “Good day, Bougonmuche. I have ome to see my ancestors.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.27#The old woman retorted with a composite grimace, and a wonderful mprovisation of hatred taking advantage of feebleness and ugliness, which was, nfortunately, wasted in the dark:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.28#“There’s no one here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.29#“Bah!” retorted the boy, “where’s my father?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.30#“At La Force.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.31#“Come, now! And my mother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.32#“At Saint-Lazare.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.33#“Well! And my sisters?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.34#“At the Madelonettes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.35#The lad scratched his head behind his ear, stared at Ma’am Bougon, and aid:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.36#“Ah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.37#Then he executed a pirouette on his heel; a moment later, the old woman, ho had remained on the door-step, heard him singing in his clear, young voice, s he plunged under the black elm-trees, in the wintry wind:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.38#“Le roi Coupdesabot S’en allait à la chasse, À la chasse aux corbeaux, onté sur deux échasses. Quand on passait dessous, On lui payait deux ous."31
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:3.8.22.39#[THE END OF VOLUME III “MARIUS”]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.head#VOLUME IV—SAINT-DENIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1#THE IDYL IN THE RUE PLUMET AND THE EPIC IN THE RUE SAINT-DENIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.head#BOOK FIRST—A FEW PAGES OF HISTORY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.head#CHAPTER I—WELL CUT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.1#1831 and 1832, the two years which are immediately connected with the evolution of July, form one of the most peculiar and striking moments of istory. These two years rise like two mountains midway between those which recede and those which follow them. They have a revolutionary grandeur. recipices are to be distinguished there. The social masses, the very assizes of ivilization, the solid group of superposed and adhering interests, the entury-old profiles of the ancient French formation, appear and disappear in hem every instant, athwart the storm clouds of systems, of passions, and of heories. These appearances and disappearances have been designated as movement nd resistance. At intervals, truth, that daylight of the human soul, can be escried shining there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.2#This remarkable epoch is decidedly circumscribed and is beginning to be ufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principal lines even t the present day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.3#We shall make the attempt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.4#The Restoration had been one of those intermediate phases, hard to define, n which there is fatigue, buzzing, murmurs, sleep, tumult, and which are othing else than the arrival of a great nation at a halting-place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.5#These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire to convert hem to profit. In the beginning, the nation asks nothing but repose; it thirsts or but one thing, peace; it has but one ambition, to be small. Which is the ranslation of remaining tranquil. Of great events, great hazards, great dventures, great men, thank God, we have seen enough, we have them heaped igher than our heads. We would exchange Cæsar for Prusias, and Napoleon for the ing of Yvetot. “What a good little king was he!” We have marched since aybreak, we have reached the evening of a long and toilsome day; we have made ur first change with Mirabeau, the second with Robespierre, the third with onaparte; we are worn out. Each one demands a bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.6#Devotion which is weary, heroism which has grown old, ambitions which are ated, fortunes which are made, seek, demand, implore, solicit, what? A shelter. hey have it. They take possession of peace, of tranquillity, of leisure; ehold, they are content. But, at the same time certain facts arise, compel ecognition, and knock at the door in their turn. These facts are the products f revolutions and wars, they are, they exist, they have the right to install hemselves in society, and they do install themselves therein; and most of the ime, facts are the stewards of the household and fouriers32 who do nothing but repare lodgings for principles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.7#This, then, is what appears to philosophical politicians:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.8#At the same time that weary men demand repose, accomplished facts demand uarantees. Guarantees are the same to facts that repose is to men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.9#This is what England demanded of the Stuarts after the Protector; this is hat France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.10#These guarantees are a necessity of the times. They must be accorded. rinces “grant” them, but in reality, it is the force of things which gives hem. A profound truth, and one useful to know, which the Stuarts did not uspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a glimpse of in 814.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.11#The predestined family, which returned to France when Napoleon fell, had he fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed, and that what t had bestowed it could take back again; that the House of Bourbon possessed he right divine, that France possessed nothing, and that the political right onceded in the charter of Louis XVIII. was merely a branch of the right divine, as detached by the House of Bourbon and graciously given to the people until uch day as it should please the King to reassume it. Still, the House of ourbon should have felt, from the displeasure created by the gift, that it did ot come from it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.12#This house was churlish to the nineteenth century. It put on an ll-tempered look at every development of the nation. To make use of a trivial ord, that is to say, of a popular and a true word, it looked glum. The people aw this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.13#It thought it possessed strength because the Empire had been carried away efore it like a theatrical stage-setting. It did not perceive that it had, tself, been brought in in the same fashion. It did not perceive that it also ay in that hand which had removed Napoleon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.14#It thought that it had roots, because it was the past. It was mistaken; it ormed a part of the past, but the whole past was France. The roots of French ociety were not fixed in the Bourbons, but in the nations. These obscure and ively roots constituted, not the right of a family, but the history of a eople. They were everywhere, except under the throne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.15#The House of Bourbon was to France the illustrious and bleeding knot in er history, but was no longer the principal element of her destiny, and the ecessary base of her politics. She could get along without the Bourbons; she ad done without them for two and twenty years; there had been a break of ontinuity; they did not suspect the fact. And how should they have suspected t, they who fancied that Louis XVII. reigned on the 9th of Thermidor, and that ouis XVIII. was reigning at the battle of Marengo? Never, since the origin of istory, had princes been so blind in the presence of facts and the portion of ivine authority which facts contain and promulgate. Never had that pretension ere below which is called the right of kings denied to such a point the right rom on high.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.16#A capital error which led this family to lay its hand once more on the uarantees “granted” in 1814, on the concessions, as it termed them. Sad. A sad hing! What it termed its concessions were our conquests; what it termed our ncroachments were our rights.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.17#When the hour seemed to it to have come, the Restoration, supposing itself ictorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country, that is to say, elieving itself to be strong and deep, abruptly decided on its plan of action, nd risked its stroke. One morning it drew itself up before the face of France, nd, elevating its voice, it contested the collective title and the individual ight of the nation to sovereignty, of the citizen to liberty. In other words, t denied to the nation that which made it a nation, and to the citizen that hich made him a citizen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.18#This is the foundation of those famous acts which are called the rdinances of July. The Restoration fell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.19#It fell justly. But, we admit, it had not been absolutely hostile to all orms of progress. Great things had been accomplished, with it alongside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.20#Under the Restoration, the nation had grown accustomed to calm discussion, hich had been lacking under the Republic, and to grandeur in peace, which had een wanting under the Empire. France free and strong had offered an encouraging pectacle to the other peoples of Europe. The Revolution had had the word under obespierre; the cannon had had the word under Bonaparte; it was under Louis VIII. and Charles X. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word. The ind ceased, the torch was lighted once more. On the lofty heights, the pure ight of mind could be seen flickering. A magnificent, useful, and charming pectacle. For a space of fifteen years, those great principles which are so old or the thinker, so new for the statesman, could be seen at work in perfect eace, on the public square; equality before the law, liberty of conscience, iberty of speech, liberty of the press, the accessibility of all aptitudes to ll functions. Thus it proceeded until 1830. The Bourbons were an instrument of ivilization which broke in the hands of Providence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.21#The fall of the Bourbons was full of grandeur, not on their side, but on he side of the nation. They quitted the throne with gravity, but without uthority; their descent into the night was not one of those solemn isappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history; it was neither the pectral calm of Charles I., nor the eagle scream of Napoleon. They departed, hat is all. They laid down the crown, and retained no aureole. They were orthy, but they were not august. They lacked, in a certain measure, the majesty f their misfortune. Charles X. during the voyage from Cherbourg, causing a ound table to be cut over into a square table, appeared to be more anxious bout imperilled etiquette than about the crumbling monarchy. This diminution addened devoted men who loved their persons, and serious men who honored their ace. The populace was admirable. The nation, attacked one morning with weapons, y a sort of royal insurrection, felt itself in the possession of so much force hat it did not go into a rage. It defended itself, restrained itself, restored hings to their places, the government to law, the Bourbons to exile, alas! and hen halted! It took the old king Charles X. from beneath that dais which had heltered Louis XIV. and set him gently on the ground. It touched the royal ersonages only with sadness and precaution. It was not one man, it was not a ew men, it was France, France entire, France victorious and intoxicated with er victory, who seemed to be coming to herself, and who put into practice, efore the eyes of the whole world, these grave words of Guillaume du Vair after he day of the Barricades:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.22#“It is easy for those who are accustomed to skim the favors of the great, nd to spring, like a bird from bough to bough, from an afflicted fortune to a lourishing one, to show themselves harsh towards their Prince in his adversity; ut as for me, the fortune of my Kings and especially of my afflicted Kings, ill always be venerable to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.23#The Bourbons carried away with them respect, but not regret. As we have ust stated, their misfortune was greater than they were. They faded out in the orizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.24#The Revolution of July instantly had friends and enemies throughout the ntire world. The first rushed toward her with joy and enthusiasm, the others urned away, each according to his nature. At the first blush, the princes of urope, the owls of this dawn, shut their eyes, wounded and stupefied, and only pened them to threaten. A fright which can be comprehended, a wrath which can e pardoned. This strange revolution had hardly produced a shock; it had not ven paid to vanquished royalty the honor of treating it as an enemy, and of hedding its blood. In the eyes of despotic governments, who are always nterested in having liberty calumniate itself, the Revolution of July committed he fault of being formidable and of remaining gentle. Nothing, however, was ttempted or plotted against it. The most discontented, the most irritated, the ost trembling, saluted it; whatever our egotism and our rancor may be, a ysterious respect springs from events in which we are sensible of the ollaboration of some one who is working above man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.25#The Revolution of July is the triumph of right overthrowing the fact. A hing which is full of splendor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.26#Right overthrowing the fact. Hence the brilliancy of the Revolution of 830, hence, also, its mildness. Right triumphant has no need of being iolent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.27#Right is the just and the true.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.28#The property of right is to remain eternally beautiful and pure. The fact, ven when most necessary to all appearances, even when most thoroughly accepted y contemporaries, if it exist only as a fact, and if it contain only too little f right, or none at all, is infallibly destined to become, in the course of ime, deformed, impure, perhaps, even monstrous. If one desires to learn at one low, to what degree of hideousness the fact can attain, viewed at the distance f centuries, let him look at Machiavelli. Machiavelli is not an evil genius, or a demon, nor a miserable and cowardly writer; he is nothing but the fact. nd he is not only the Italian fact; he is the European fact, the fact of the ixteenth century. He seems hideous, and so he is, in the presence of the moral dea of the nineteenth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.1.29#This conflict of right and fact has been going on ever since the origin of ociety. To terminate this duel, to amalgamate the pure idea with the humane eality, to cause right to penetrate pacifically into the fact and the fact into ight, that is the task of sages.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.head#CHAPTER II—BADLY SEWED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.1#But the task of sages is one thing, the task of clever men is another. The evolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.2#As soon as a revolution has made the coast, the skilful make haste to repare the shipwreck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.3#The skilful in our century have conferred on themselves the title of tatesmen; so that this word, _statesmen_, has ended by becoming somewhat of a lang word. It must be borne in mind, in fact, that wherever there is nothing ut skill, there is necessarily pettiness. To say “the skilful” amounts to aying “the mediocre.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.4#In the same way, to say “statesmen” is sometimes equivalent to saying traitors.” If, then, we are to believe the skilful, revolutions like the evolution of July are severed arteries; a prompt ligature is indispensable. The ight, too grandly proclaimed, is shaken. Also, right once firmly fixed, the tate must be strengthened. Liberty once assured, attention must be directed to ower.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.5#Here the sages are not, as yet, separated from the skilful, but they begin o be distrustful. Power, very good. But, in the first place, what is power? In he second, whence comes it? The skilful do not seem to hear the murmured bjection, and they continue their manœuvres.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.6#According to the politicians, who are ingenious in putting the mask of ecessity on profitable fictions, the first requirement of a people after a evolution, when this people forms part of a monarchical continent, is to rocure for itself a dynasty. In this way, say they, peace, that is to say, time o dress our wounds, and to repair the house, can be had after a revolution. The ynasty conceals the scaffolding and covers the ambulance. Now, it is not always asy to procure a dynasty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.7#If it is absolutely necessary, the first man of genius or even the first an of fortune who comes to hand suffices for the manufacturing of a king. You ave, in the first case, Napoleon; in the second, Iturbide.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.8#But the first family that comes to hand does not suffice to make a dynasty. here is necessarily required a certain modicum of antiquity in a race, and the rinkle of the centuries cannot be improvised.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.9#If we place ourselves at the point of view of the “statesmen,” after making ll allowances, of course, after a revolution, what are the qualities of the ing which result from it? He may be and it is useful for him to be a evolutionary; that is to say, a participant in his own person in that evolution, that he should have lent a hand to it, that he should have either ompromised or distinguished himself therein, that he should have touched the xe or wielded the sword in it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.10#What are the qualities of a dynasty? It should be national; that is to ay, revolutionary at a distance, not through acts committed, but by reason of deas accepted. It should be composed of past and be historic; be composed of uture and be sympathetic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.11#All this explains why the early revolutions contented themselves with inding a man, Cromwell or Napoleon; and why the second absolutely insisted on inding a family, the House of Brunswick or the House of Orleans.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.12#Royal houses resemble those Indian fig-trees, each branch of which, ending over to the earth, takes root and becomes a fig-tree itself. Each branch ay become a dynasty. On the sole condition that it shall bend down to the eople.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.13#Such is the theory of the skilful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.14#Here, then, lies the great art: to make a little render to success the ound of a catastrophe in order that those who profit by it may tremble from it lso, to season with fear every step that is taken, to augment the curve of the ransition to the point of retarding progress, to dull that aurora, to denounce nd retrench the harshness of enthusiasm, to cut all angles and nails, to wad riumph, to muffle up right, to envelop the giant-people in flannel, and to put t to bed very speedily, to impose a diet on that excess of health, to put ercules on the treatment of a convalescent, to dilute the event with the xpedient, to offer to spirits thirsting for the ideal that nectar thinned out ith a potion, to take one’s precautions against too much success, to garnish he revolution with a shade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.15#1830 practised this theory, already applied to England by 1688.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.16#1830 is a revolution arrested midway. Half of progress, quasi-right. Now, ogic knows not the “almost,” absolutely as the sun knows not the candle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.17#Who arrests revolutions half-way? The bourgeoisie?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.18#Why?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.19#Because the bourgeoisie is interest which has reached satisfaction. esterday it was appetite, to-day it is plenitude, to-morrow it will be atiety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.20#The phenomenon of 1814 after Napoleon was reproduced in 1830 after Charles .
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.21#The attempt has been made, and wrongly, to make a class of the ourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie is simply the contented portion of the people. The ourgeois is the man who now has time to sit down. A chair is not a caste.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.22#But through a desire to sit down too soon, one may arrest the very march f the human race. This has often been the fault of the bourgeoisie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.23#One is not a class because one has committed a fault. Selfishness is not ne of the divisions of the social order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.24#Moreover, we must be just to selfishness. The state to which that part of he nation which is called the bourgeoisie aspired after the shock of 1830 was ot the inertia which is complicated with indifference and laziness, and which ontains a little shame; it was not the slumber which presupposes a momentary orgetfulness accessible to dreams; it was the halt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.25#The halt is a word formed of a singular double and almost contradictory ense: a troop on the march, that is to say, movement; a stand, that is to say, epose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.26#The halt is the restoration of forces; it is repose armed and on the lert; it is the accomplished fact which posts sentinels and holds itself on its uard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.27#The halt presupposes the combat of yesterday and the combat of o-morrow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.28#It is the partition between 1830 and 1848.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.29#What we here call combat may also be designated as progress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.30#The bourgeoisie then, as well as the statesmen, required a man who should xpress this word Halt. An Although-Because. A composite individuality, ignifying revolution and signifying stability, in other terms, strengthening he present by the evident compatibility of the past with the future.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.31#This man was “already found.” His name was Louis Philippe d’Orleans.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.32#The 221 made Louis Philippe King. Lafayette undertook the coronation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.33#He called it _the best of republics_. The town-hall of Paris took the lace of the Cathedral of Rheims.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.34#This substitution of a half-throne for a whole throne was “the work of 830.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.2.35#When the skilful had finished, the immense vice of their solution became pparent. All this had been accomplished outside the bounds of absolute right. bsolute right cried: “I protest!” then, terrible to say, it retired into the arkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.head#CHAPTER III—LOUIS PHILIPPE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.1#Revolutions have a terrible arm and a happy hand, they strike firmly and hoose well. Even incomplete, even debased and abused and reduced to the state f a junior revolution like the Revolution of 1830, they nearly always retain ufficient providential lucidity to prevent them from falling amiss. Their clipse is never an abdication.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.2#Nevertheless, let us not boast too loudly; revolutions also may be eceived, and grave errors have been seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.3#Let us return to 1830. 1830, in its deviation, had good luck. In the stablishment which entitled itself order after the revolution had been cut hort, the King amounted to more than royalty. Louis Philippe was a rare an.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.4#The son of a father to whom history will accord certain attenuating ircumstances, but also as worthy of esteem as that father had been of blame; ossessing all private virtues and many public virtues; careful of his health, f his fortune, of his person, of his affairs, knowing the value of a minute and ot always the value of a year; sober, serene, peaceable, patient; a good man nd a good prince; sleeping with his wife, and having in his palace lackeys harged with the duty of showing the conjugal bed to the bourgeois, an stentation of the regular sleeping-apartment which had become useful after the ormer illegitimate displays of the elder branch; knowing all the languages of urope, and, what is more rare, all the languages of all interests, and speaking hem; an admirable representative of the “middle class,” but outstripping it, nd in every way greater than it; possessing excellent sense, while appreciating he blood from which he had sprung, counting most of all on his intrinsic worth, nd, on the question of his race, very particular, declaring himself Orleans and ot Bourbon; thoroughly the first Prince of the Blood Royal while he was still nly a Serene Highness, but a frank bourgeois from the day he became king; iffuse in public, concise in private; reputed, but not proved to be a miser; at ottom, one of those economists who are readily prodigal at their own fancy or uty; lettered, but not very sensitive to letters; a gentleman, but not a hevalier; simple, calm, and strong; adored by his family and his household; a ascinating talker, an undeceived statesman, inwardly cold, dominated by mmediate interest, always governing at the shortest range, incapable of rancor nd of gratitude, making use without mercy of superiority on mediocrity, clever n getting parliamentary majorities to put in the wrong those mysterious nanimities which mutter dully under thrones; unreserved, sometimes imprudent in is lack of reserve, but with marvellous address in that imprudence; fertile in xpedients, in countenances, in masks; making France fear Europe and Europe rance! Incontestably fond of his country, but preferring his family; assuming ore domination than authority and more authority than dignity, a disposition hich has this unfortunate property, that as it turns everything to success, it dmits of ruse and does not absolutely repudiate baseness, but which has this aluable side, that it preserves politics from violent shocks, the state from ractures, and society from catastrophes; minute, correct, vigilant, attentive, agacious, indefatigable; contradicting himself at times and giving himself the ie; bold against Austria at Ancona, obstinate against England in Spain, ombarding Antwerp, and paying off Pritchard; singing the Marseillaise with onviction, inaccessible to despondency, to lassitude, to the taste for the eautiful and the ideal, to daring generosity, to Utopia, to chimæras, to wrath, o vanity, to fear; possessing all the forms of personal intrepidity; a general t Valmy; a soldier at Jemappes; attacked eight times by regicides and always miling. Brave as a grenadier, courageous as a thinker; uneasy only in the face f the chances of a European shaking up, and unfitted for great political dventures; always ready to risk his life, never his work; disguising his will n influence, in order that he might be obeyed as an intelligence rather than as king; endowed with observation and not with divination; not very attentive to inds, but knowing men, that is to say requiring to see in order to judge; rompt and penetrating good sense, practical wisdom, easy speech, prodigious emory; drawing incessantly on this memory, his only point of resemblance with æsar, Alexander, and Napoleon; knowing deeds, facts, details, dates, proper ames, ignorant of tendencies, passions, the diverse geniuses of the crowd, the nterior aspirations, the hidden and obscure uprisings of souls, in a word, all hat can be designated as the invisible currents of consciences; accepted by the urface, but little in accord with France lower down; extricating himself by int of tact; governing too much and not enough; his own first minister; xcellent at creating out of the pettiness of realities an obstacle to the mmensity of ideas; mingling a genuine creative faculty of civilization, of rder and organization, an indescribable spirit of proceedings and chicanery, he founder and lawyer of a dynasty; having something of Charlemagne and omething of an attorney; in short, a lofty and original figure, a prince who nderstood how to create authority in spite of the uneasiness of France, and ower in spite of the jealousy of Europe. Louis Philippe will be classed among he eminent men of his century, and would be ranked among the most illustrious overnors of history had he loved glory but a little, and if he had had the entiment of what is great to the same degree as the feeling for what is seful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.5#Louis Philippe had been handsome, and in his old age he remained graceful; ot always approved by the nation, he always was so by the masses; he pleased. e had that gift of charming. He lacked majesty; he wore no crown, although a ing, and no white hair, although an old man; his manners belonged to the old egime and his habits to the new; a mixture of the noble and the bourgeois which uited 1830; Louis Philippe was transition reigning; he had preserved the ncient pronunciation and the ancient orthography which he placed at the service f opinions modern; he loved Poland and Hungary, but he wrote _les Polonois_, nd he pronounced _les Hongrais_. He wore the uniform of the national guard, ike Charles X., and the ribbon of the Legion of Honor, like Napoleon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.6#He went a little to chapel, not at all to the chase, never to the opera. ncorruptible by sacristans, by whippers-in, by ballet-dancers; this made a part f his bourgeois popularity. He had no heart. He went out with his umbrella nder his arm, and this umbrella long formed a part of his aureole. He was a bit f a mason, a bit of a gardener, something of a doctor; he bled a postilion who ad tumbled from his horse; Louis Philippe no more went about without his ancet, than did Henri IV. without his poniard. The Royalists jeered at this idiculous king, the first who had ever shed blood with the object of ealing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.7#For the grievances against Louis Philippe, there is one deduction to be ade; there is that which accuses royalty, that which accuses the reign, that hich accuses the King; three columns which all give different totals. emocratic right confiscated, progress becomes a matter of secondary interest, he protests of the street violently repressed, military execution of nsurrections, the rising passed over by arms, the Rue Transnonain, the counsels f war, the absorption of the real country by the legal country, on half shares ith three hundred thousand privileged persons,—these are the deeds of royalty; elgium refused, Algeria too harshly conquered, and, as in the case of India by he English, with more barbarism than civilization, the breach of faith, to bd-el-Kader, Blaye, Deutz bought, Pritchard paid,—these are the doings of the eign; the policy which was more domestic than national was the doing of the ing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.8#As will be seen, the proper deduction having been made, the King’s charge s decreased.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.9#This is his great fault; he was modest in the name of France.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.10#Whence arises this fault?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.11#We will state it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.12#Louis Philippe was rather too much of a paternal king; that incubation of family with the object of founding a dynasty is afraid of everything and does ot like to be disturbed; hence excessive timidity, which is displeasing to the eople, who have the 14th of July in their civil and Austerlitz in their ilitary tradition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.13#Moreover, if we deduct the public duties which require to be fulfilled irst of all, that deep tenderness of Louis Philippe towards his family was eserved by the family. That domestic group was worthy of admiration. Virtues here dwelt side by side with talents. One of Louis Philippe’s daughters, Marie ’Orleans, placed the name of her race among artists, as Charles d’Orleans had laced it among poets. She made of her soul a marble which she named Jeanne ’Arc. Two of Louis Philippe’s daughters elicited from Metternich this eulogium: They are young people such as are rarely seen, and princes such as are never een.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.14#This, without any dissimulation, and also without any exaggeration, is the ruth about Louis Philippe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.15#To be Prince Equality, to bear in his own person the contradiction of the estoration and the Revolution, to have that disquieting side of the evolutionary which becomes reassuring in governing power, therein lay the ortune of Louis Philippe in 1830; never was there a more complete adaptation of man to an event; the one entered into the other, and the incarnation took lace. Louis Philippe is 1830 made man. Moreover, he had in his favor that great ecommendation to the throne, exile. He had been proscribed, a wanderer, poor. e had lived by his own labor. In Switzerland, this heir to the richest princely omains in France had sold an old horse in order to obtain bread. At Reichenau, e gave lessons in mathematics, while his sister Adelaide did wool work and ewed. These souvenirs connected with a king rendered the bourgeoisie nthusiastic. He had, with his own hands, demolished the iron cage of ont-Saint-Michel, built by Louis XI., and used by Louis XV. He was the ompanion of Dumouriez, he was the friend of Lafayette; he had belonged to the acobins’ club; Mirabeau had slapped him on the shoulder; Danton had said to im: “Young man!” At the age of four and twenty, in ’93, being then M. de hartres, he had witnessed, from the depth of a box, the trial of Louis XVI., so ell named _that poor tyrant_. The blind clairvoyance of the Revolution, reaking royalty in the King and the King with royalty, did so almost without oticing the man in the fierce crushing of the idea, the vast storm of the ssembly-Tribunal, the public wrath interrogating, Capet not knowing what to eply, the alarming, stupefied vacillation by that royal head beneath that ombre breath, the relative innocence of all in that catastrophe, of those who ondemned as well as of the man condemned,—he had looked on those things, he had ontemplated that giddiness; he had seen the centuries appear before the bar of he Assembly-Convention; he had beheld, behind Louis XVI., that unfortunate asser-by who was made responsible, the terrible culprit, the monarchy, rise hrough the shadows; and there had lingered in his soul the respectful fear of hese immense justices of the populace, which are almost as impersonal as the ustice of God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.16#The trace left in him by the Revolution was prodigious. Its memory was ike a living imprint of those great years, minute by minute. One day, in the resence of a witness whom we are not permitted to doubt, he rectified from emory the whole of the letter A in the alphabetical list of the Constituent ssembly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.17#Louis Philippe was a king of the broad daylight. While he reigned the ress was free, the tribune was free, conscience and speech were free. The laws f September are open to sight. Although fully aware of the gnawing power of ight on privileges, he left his throne exposed to the light. History will do ustice to him for this loyalty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.18#Louis Philippe, like all historical men who have passed from the scene, is o-day put on his trial by the human conscience. His case is, as yet, only in he lower court.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.19#The hour when history speaks with its free and venerable accent, has not et sounded for him; the moment has not come to pronounce a definite judgment on his king; the austere and illustrious historian Louis Blanc has himself ecently softened his first verdict; Louis Philippe was elected by those two almosts_ which are called the 221 and 1830, that is to say, by a alf-Parliament, and a half-revolution; and in any case, from the superior point f view where philosophy must place itself, we cannot judge him here, as the eader has seen above, except with certain reservations in the name of the bsolute democratic principle; in the eyes of the absolute, outside these two ights, the right of man in the first place, the right of the people in the econd, all is usurpation; but what we can say, even at the present day, that fter making these reserves is, that to sum up the whole, and in whatever manner e is considered, Louis Philippe, taken in himself, and from the point of view f human goodness, will remain, to use the antique language of ancient history, ne of the best princes who ever sat on a throne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.20#What is there against him? That throne. Take away Louis Philippe the king, here remains the man. And the man is good. He is good at times even to the oint of being admirable. Often, in the midst of his gravest souvenirs, after a ay of conflict with the whole diplomacy of the continent, he returned at night o his apartments, and there, exhausted with fatigue, overwhelmed with sleep, hat did he do? He took a death sentence and passed the night in revising a riminal suit, considering it something to hold his own against Europe, but that t was a still greater matter to rescue a man from the executioner. He bstinately maintained his opinion against his keeper of the seals; he disputed he ground with the guillotine foot by foot against the crown attorneys, those chatterers of the law_, as he called them. Sometimes the pile of sentences overed his table; he examined them all; it was anguish to him to abandon these iserable, condemned heads. One day, he said to the same witness to whom we have ecently referred: “I won seven last night.” During the early years of his eign, the death penalty was as good as abolished, and the erection of a caffold was a violence committed against the King. The Grève having disappeared ith the elder branch, a bourgeois place of execution was instituted under the ame of the Barrière-Saint-Jacques; “practical men” felt the necessity of a uasi-legitimate guillotine; and this was one of the victories of Casimir érier, who represented the narrow sides of the bourgeoisie, over Louis hilippe, who represented its liberal sides. Louis Philippe annotated Beccaria ith his own hand. After the Fieschi machine, he exclaimed: “What a pity that I as not wounded! Then I might have pardoned!” On another occasion, alluding to he resistance offered by his ministry, he wrote in connection with a political riminal, who is one of the most generous figures of our day: “His pardon is ranted; it only remains for me to obtain it.” Louis Philippe was as gentle as ouis IX. and as kindly as Henri IV.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.21#Now, to our mind, in history, where kindness is the rarest of pearls, the an who is kindly almost takes precedence of the man who is great.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.3.22#Louis Philippe having been severely judged by some, harshly, perhaps, by thers, it is quite natural that a man, himself a phantom at the present day, ho knew that king, should come and testify in his favor before history; this eposition, whatever else it may be, is evidently and above all things, entirely isinterested; an epitaph penned by a dead man is sincere; one shade may console nother shade; the sharing of the same shadows confers the right to praise it; t is not greatly to be feared that it will ever be said of two tombs in exile: This one flattered the other.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.head#CHAPTER IV—CRACKS BENEATH THE FOUNDATION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.1#At the moment when the drama which we are narrating is on the point of enetrating into the depths of one of the tragic clouds which envelop the eginning of Louis Philippe’s reign, it was necessary that there should be no quivoque, and it became requisite that this book should offer some explanation ith regard to this king.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.2#Louis Philippe had entered into possession of his royal authority without iolence, without any direct action on his part, by virtue of a revolutionary hange, evidently quite distinct from the real aim of the Revolution, but in hich he, the Duc d’Orléans, exercised no personal initiative. He had been born Prince, and he believed himself to have been elected King. He had not served his mandate on himself; he had not taken it; it had been offered to him, and he ad accepted it; convinced, wrongly, to be sure, but convinced nevertheless, hat the offer was in accordance with right and that the acceptance of it was in ccordance with duty. Hence his possession was in good faith. Now, we say it in ood conscience, Louis Philippe being in possession in perfect good faith, and he democracy being in good faith in its attack, the amount of terror discharged y the social conflicts weighs neither on the King nor on the democracy. A clash f principles resembles a clash of elements. The ocean defends the water, the urricane defends the air, the King defends Royalty, the democracy defends the eople; the relative, which is the monarchy, resists the absolute, which is the epublic; society bleeds in this conflict, but that which constitutes its uffering to-day will constitute its safety later on; and, in any case, those ho combat are not to be blamed; one of the two parties is evidently mistaken; he right is not, like the Colossus of Rhodes, on two shores at once, with one oot on the republic, and one in Royalty; it is indivisible, and all on one ide; but those who are in error are so sincerely; a blind man is no more a riminal than a Vendean is a ruffian. Let us, then, impute to the fatality of hings alone these formidable collisions. Whatever the nature of these tempests ay be, human irresponsibility is mingled with them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.3#Let us complete this exposition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.4#The government of 1840 led a hard life immediately. Born yesterday, it was bliged to fight to-day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.5#Hardly installed, it was already everywhere conscious of vague movements of raction on the apparatus of July so recently laid, and so lacking in olidity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.6#Resistance was born on the morrow; perhaps even, it was born on the receding evening. From month to month the hostility increased, and from being oncealed it became patent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.7#The Revolution of July, which gained but little acceptance outside of rance by kings, had been diversely interpreted in France, as we have said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.8#God delivers over to men his visible will in events, an obscure text ritten in a mysterious tongue. Men immediately make translations of it; ranslations hasty, incorrect, full of errors, of gaps, and of nonsense. Very ew minds comprehend the divine language. The most sagacious, the calmest, the ost profound, decipher slowly, and when they arrive with their text, the task as long been completed; there are already twenty translations on the public lace. From each remaining springs a party, and from each misinterpretation a action; and each party thinks that it alone has the true text, and each faction hinks that it possesses the light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.9#Power itself is often a faction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.10#There are, in revolutions, swimmers who go against the current; they are he old parties.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.11#For the old parties who clung to heredity by the grace of God, think that evolutions, having sprung from the right to revolt, one has the right to revolt gainst them. Error. For in these revolutions, the one who revolts is not the eople; it is the king. Revolution is precisely the contrary of revolt. Every evolution, being a normal outcome, contains within itself its legitimacy, which alse revolutionists sometimes dishonor, but which remains even when soiled, hich survives even when stained with blood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.12#Revolutions spring not from an accident, but from necessity. A revolution s a return from the fictitious to the real. It is because it must be that it s.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.13#Nonetheless did the old legitimist parties assail the Revolution of 1830 ith all the vehemence which arises from false reasoning. Errors make excellent rojectiles. They strike it cleverly in its vulnerable spot, in default of a uirass, in its lack of logic; they attacked this revolution in its royalty. hey shouted to it: “Revolution, why this king?” Factions are blind men who aim orrectly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.14#This cry was uttered equally by the republicans. But coming from them, his cry was logical. What was blindness in the legitimists was clearness of ision in the democrats. 1830 had bankrupted the people. The enraged democracy eproached it with this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.15#Between the attack of the past and the attack of the future, the stablishment of July struggled. It represented the minute at loggerheads on the ne hand with the monarchical centuries, on the other hand with eternal ight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.16#In addition, and beside all this, as it was no longer revolution and had ecome a monarchy, 1830 was obliged to take precedence of all Europe. To keep he peace, was an increase of complication. A harmony established contrary to ense is often more onerous than a war. From this secret conflict, always uzzled, but always growling, was born armed peace, that ruinous expedient of ivilization which in the harness of the European cabinets is suspicious in tself. The Royalty of July reared up, in spite of the fact that it caught it in he harness of European cabinets. Metternich would gladly have put it in icking-straps. Pushed on in France by progress, it pushed on the monarchies, hose loiterers in Europe. After having been towed, it undertook to tow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.17#Meanwhile, within her, pauperism, the proletariat, salary, education, enal servitude, prostitution, the fate of the woman, wealth, misery, roduction, consumption, division, exchange, coin, credit, the rights of apital, the rights of labor,—all these questions were multiplied above society, terrible slope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.18#Outside of political parties properly so called, another movement became anifest. Philosophical fermentation replied to democratic fermentation. The lect felt troubled as well as the masses; in another manner, but quite as uch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.19#Thinkers meditated, while the soil, that is to say, the people, traversed y revolutionary currents, trembled under them with indescribably vague pileptic shocks. These dreamers, some isolated, others united in families and lmost in communion, turned over social questions in a pacific but profound anner; impassive miners, who tranquilly pushed their galleries into the depths f a volcano, hardly disturbed by the dull commotion and the furnaces of which hey caught glimpses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.20#This tranquillity was not the least beautiful spectacle of this agitated poch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.21#These men left to political parties the question of rights, they occupied hemselves with the question of happiness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.22#The well-being of man, that was what they wanted to extract from ociety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.23#They raised material questions, questions of agriculture, of industry, of ommerce, almost to the dignity of a religion. In civilization, such as it has ormed itself, a little by the command of God, a great deal by the agency of an, interests combine, unite, and amalgamate in a manner to form a veritable ard rock, in accordance with a dynamic law, patiently studied by economists, hose geologists of politics. These men who grouped themselves under different ppellations, but who may all be designated by the generic title of socialists, ndeavored to pierce that rock and to cause it to spout forth the living waters f human felicity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.24#From the question of the scaffold to the question of war, their works mbraced everything. To the rights of man, as proclaimed by the French evolution, they added the rights of woman and the rights of the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.25#The reader will not be surprised if, for various reasons, we do not here reat in a thorough manner, from the theoretical point of view, the questions aised by socialism. We confine ourselves to indicating them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.26#All the problems that the socialists proposed to themselves, cosmogonic isions, reverie and mysticism being cast aside, can be reduced to two principal roblems.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.27#First problem: To produce wealth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.28#Second problem: To share it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.29#The first problem contains the question of work.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.30#The second contains the question of salary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.31#In the first problem the employment of forces is in question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.32#In the second, the distribution of enjoyment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.33#From the proper employment of forces results public power.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.34#From a good distribution of enjoyments results individual happiness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.35#By a good distribution, not an equal but an equitable distribution must be nderstood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.36#From these two things combined, the public power without, individual appiness within, results social prosperity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.37#Social prosperity means the man happy, the citizen free, the nation reat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.38#England solves the first of these two problems. She creates wealth dmirably, she divides it badly. This solution which is complete on one side nly leads her fatally to two extremes: monstrous opulence, monstrous retchedness. All enjoyments for some, all privations for the rest, that is to ay, for the people; privilege, exception, monopoly, feudalism, born from toil tself. A false and dangerous situation, which sates public power or private isery, which sets the roots of the State in the sufferings of the individual. A adly constituted grandeur in which are combined all the material elements and nto which no moral element enters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.39#Communism and agrarian law think that they solve the second problem. They re mistaken. Their division kills production. Equal partition abolishes mulation; and consequently labor. It is a partition made by the butcher, which ills that which it divides. It is therefore impossible to pause over these retended solutions. Slaying wealth is not the same thing as dividing it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.40#The two problems require to be solved together, to be well solved. The two roblems must be combined and made but one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.41#Solve only the first of the two problems; you will be Venice, you will be ngland. You will have, like Venice, an artificial power, or, like England, a aterial power; you will be the wicked rich man. You will die by an act of iolence, as Venice died, or by bankruptcy, as England will fall. And the world ill allow to die and fall all that is merely selfishness, all that does not epresent for the human race either a virtue or an idea.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.42#It is well understood here, that by the words Venice, England, we esignate not the peoples, but social structures; the oligarchies superposed on ations, and not the nations themselves. The nations always have our respect and ur sympathy. Venice, as a people, will live again; England, the aristocracy, ill fall, but England, the nation, is immortal. That said, we continue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.43#Solve the two problems, encourage the wealthy, and protect the poor, uppress misery, put an end to the unjust farming out of the feeble by the trong, put a bridle on the iniquitous jealousy of the man who is making his way gainst the man who has reached the goal, adjust, mathematically and raternally, salary to labor, mingle gratuitous and compulsory education with he growth of childhood, and make of science the base of manliness, develop inds while keeping arms busy, be at one and the same time a powerful people and family of happy men, render property democratic, not by abolishing it, but by aking it universal, so that every citizen, without exception, may be a roprietor, an easier matter than is generally supposed; in two words, learn how o produce wealth and how to distribute it, and you will have at once moral and aterial greatness; and you will be worthy to call yourself France.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.44#This is what socialism said outside and above a few sects which have gone stray; that is what it sought in facts, that is what it sketched out in inds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.45#Efforts worthy of admiration! Sacred attempts!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.46#These doctrines, these theories, these resistances, the unforeseen ecessity for the statesman to take philosophers into account, confused vidences of which we catch a glimpse, a new system of politics to be created, hich shall be in accord with the old world without too much disaccord with the ew revolutionary ideal, a situation in which it became necessary to use afayette to defend Polignac, the intuition of progress transparent beneath the evolt, the chambers and streets, the competitions to be brought into quilibrium around him, his faith in the Revolution, perhaps an eventual ndefinable resignation born of the vague acceptance of a superior definitive ight, his desire to remain of his race, his domestic spirit, his sincere espect for the people, his own honesty, preoccupied Louis Philippe almost ainfully, and there were moments when strong and courageous as he was, he was verwhelmed by the difficulties of being a king.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.47#He felt under his feet a formidable disaggregation, which was not, evertheless, a reduction to dust, France being more France than ever.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.48#Piles of shadows covered the horizon. A strange shade, gradually drawing earer, extended little by little over men, over things, over ideas; a shade hich came from wraths and systems. Everything which had been hastily stifled as moving and fermenting. At times the conscience of the honest man resumed its reathing, so great was the discomfort of that air in which sophisms were ntermingled with truths. Spirits trembled in the social anxiety like leaves at he approach of a storm. The electric tension was such that at certain instants, he first comer, a stranger, brought light. Then the twilight obscurity closed n again. At intervals, deep and dull mutterings allowed a judgment to be formed s to the quantity of thunder contained by the cloud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.49#Twenty months had barely elapsed since the Revolution of July, the year 832 had opened with an aspect of something impending and threatening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.4.50#The distress of the people, the laborers without bread, the last Prince de ondé engulfed in the shadows, Brussels expelling the Nassaus as Paris did the ourbons, Belgium offering herself to a French Prince and giving herself to an nglish Prince, the Russian hatred of Nicolas, behind us the demons of the outh, Ferdinand in Spain, Miguel in Portugal, the earth quaking in Italy, etternich extending his hand over Bologna, France treating Austria sharply at ncona, at the North no one knew what sinister sound of the hammer nailing up oland in her coffin, irritated glances watching France narrowly all over urope, England, a suspected ally, ready to give a push to that which was ottering and to hurl herself on that which should fall, the peerage sheltering tself behind Beccaria to refuse four heads to the law, the fleurs-de-lys erased rom the King’s carriage, the cross torn from Notre Dame, Lafayette lessened, affitte ruined, Benjamin Constant dead in indigence, Casimir Périer dead in the xhaustion of his power; political and social malady breaking out simultaneously n the two capitals of the kingdom, the one in the city of thought, the other in he city of toil; at Paris civil war, at Lyons servile war; in the two cities, he same glare of the furnace; a crater-like crimson on the brow of the people; he South rendered fanatic, the West troubled, the Duchesse de Berry in la endée, plots, conspiracies, risings, cholera, added the sombre roar of tumult f events to the sombre roar of ideas.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.head#CHAPTER V—FACTS WHENCE HISTORY SPRINGS AND WHICH HISTORY GNORES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.1#Towards the end of April, everything had become aggravated. The ermentation entered the boiling state. Ever since 1830, petty partial revolts ad been going on here and there, which were quickly suppressed, but ever ursting forth afresh, the sign of a vast underlying conflagration. Something errible was in preparation. Glimpses could be caught of the features still ndistinct and imperfectly lighted, of a possible revolution. France kept an eye n Paris; Paris kept an eye on the Faubourg Saint-Antoine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.2#The Faubourg Saint-Antoine, which was in a dull glow, was beginning its bullition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.3#The wine-shops of the Rue de Charonne were, although the union of the two pithets seems singular when applied to wine-shops, grave and stormy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.4#The government was there purely and simply called in question. There people ublicly discussed the _question of fighting or of keeping quiet_. There were ack shops where workingmen were made to swear that they would hasten into the treet at the first cry of alarm, and “that they would fight without counting he number of the enemy.” This engagement once entered into, a man seated in the orner of the wine-shop “assumed a sonorous tone,” and said, “You understand! ou have sworn!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.5#Sometimes they went upstairs, to a private room on the first floor, and here scenes that were almost masonic were enacted. They made the initiated take aths _to render service to himself as well as to the fathers of families_. That as the formula.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.6#In the tap-rooms, “subversive” pamphlets were read. _They treated the overnment with contempt_, says a secret report of that time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.7#Words like the following could be heard there:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.8#“I don’t know the names of the leaders. We folks shall not know the day ntil two hours beforehand.” One workman said: “There are three hundred of us, et each contribute ten sous, that will make one hundred and fifty francs with hich to procure powder and shot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.9#Another said: “I don’t ask for six months, I don’t ask for even two. In ess than a fortnight we shall be parallel with the government. With twenty-five housand men we can face them.” Another said: “I don’t sleep at night, because I ake cartridges all night.” From time to time, men “of bourgeois appearance, and n good coats” came and “caused embarrassment,” and with the air of “command,” hook hands with _the most important_, and then went away. They never stayed ore than ten minutes. Significant remarks were exchanged in a low tone: “The lot is ripe, the matter is arranged.” “It was murmured by all who were there,” o borrow the very expression of one of those who were present. The exaltation as such that one day, a workingman exclaimed, before the whole wine-shop: “We ave no arms!” One of his comrades replied: “The soldiers have!” thus parodying ithout being aware of the fact, Bonaparte’s proclamation to the army in Italy: When they had anything of a more secret nature on hand,” adds one report, “they id not communicate it to each other.” It is not easy to understand what they ould conceal after what they said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.10#These reunions were sometimes periodical. At certain ones of them, there ere never more than eight or ten persons present, and they were always the ame. In others, any one entered who wished, and the room was so full that they ere forced to stand. Some went thither through enthusiasm and passion; others ecause it _was on their way to their work_. As during the Revolution, there ere patriotic women in some of these wine-shops who embraced newcomers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.11#Other expressive facts came to light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.12#A man would enter a shop, drink, and go his way with the remark: Wine-merchant, the revolution will pay what is due to you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.13#Revolutionary agents were appointed in a wine-shop facing the Rue de haronne. The balloting was carried on in their caps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.14#Workingmen met at the house of a fencing-master who gave lessons in the ue de Cotte. There there was a trophy of arms formed of wooden broadswords, anes, clubs, and foils. One day, the buttons were removed from the foils.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.15#A workman said: “There are twenty-five of us, but they don’t count on me, ecause I am looked upon as a machine.” Later on, that machine became uenisset.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.16#The indefinite things which were brewing gradually acquired a strange and ndescribable notoriety. A woman sweeping off her doorsteps said to another oman: “For a long time, there has been a strong force busy making cartridges.” n the open street, proclamation could be seen addressed to the National Guard n the departments. One of these proclamations was signed: _Burtot, ine-merchant_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.17#One day a man with his beard worn like a collar and with an Italian accent ounted a stone post at the door of a liquor-seller in the Marché Lenoir, and ead aloud a singular document, which seemed to emanate from an occult power. roups formed around him, and applauded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.18#The passages which touched the crowd most deeply were collected and noted own. “—Our doctrines are trammelled, our proclamations torn, our bill-stickers re spied upon and thrown into prison.”—“The breakdown which has recently taken lace in cottons has converted to us many mediums.”—“The future of nations is eing worked out in our obscure ranks.”—“Here are the fixed terms: action or eaction, revolution or counter-revolution. For, at our epoch, we no longer elieve either in inertia or in immobility. For the people against the people, hat is the question. There is no other.”—“On the day when we cease to suit you, reak us, but up to that day, help us to march on.” All this in broad aylight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.19#Other deeds, more audacious still, were suspicious in the eyes of the eople by reason of their very audacity. On the 4th of April, 1832, a passer-by ounted the post on the corner which forms the angle of the Rue ainte-Marguerite and shouted: “I am a Babouvist!” But beneath Babeuf, the eople scented Gisquet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.20#Among other things, this man said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.21#“Down with property! The opposition of the left is cowardly and reacherous. When it wants to be on the right side, it preaches revolution, it s democratic in order to escape being beaten, and royalist so that it may not ave to fight. The republicans are beasts with feathers. Distrust the epublicans, citizens of the laboring classes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.22#“Silence, citizen spy!” cried an artisan.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.23#This shout put an end to the discourse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.24#Mysterious incidents occurred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.25#At nightfall, a workingman encountered near the canal a “very well dressed an,” who said to him: “Whither are you bound, citizen?” “Sir,” replied the orkingman, “I have not the honor of your acquaintance.” “I know you very well, owever.” And the man added: “Don’t be alarmed, I am an agent of the committee. ou are suspected of not being quite faithful. You know that if you reveal nything, there is an eye fixed on you.” Then he shook hands with the workingman nd went away, saying: “We shall meet again soon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.26#The police, who were on the alert, collected singular dialogues, not only n the wine-shops, but in the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.27#“Get yourself received very soon,” said a weaver to a cabinet-maker.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.28#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.29#“There is going to be a shot to fire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.30#Two ragged pedestrians exchanged these remarkable replies, fraught with vident Jacquerie:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.31#“Who governs us?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.32#“M. Philippe.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.33#“No, it is the bourgeoisie.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.34#The reader is mistaken if he thinks that we take the word _Jacquerie_ in a ad sense. The Jacques were the poor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.35#On another occasion two men were heard to say to each other as they passed y: “We have a good plan of attack.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.36#Only the following was caught of a private conversation between four men ho were crouching in a ditch of the circle of the Barrière du Trône:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.37#“Everything possible will be done to prevent his walking about Paris any ore.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.38#Who was the _he?_ Menacing obscurity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.39#“The principal leaders,” as they said in the faubourg, held themselves part. It was supposed that they met for consultation in a wine-shop near the oint Saint-Eustache. A certain Aug—, chief of the Society aid for tailors, Rue ondétour, had the reputation of serving as intermediary central between the eaders and the Faubourg Saint-Antoine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.40#Nevertheless, there was always a great deal of mystery about these eaders, and no certain fact can invalidate the singular arrogance of this reply ade later on by a man accused before the Court of Peers:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.41#“Who was your leader?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.42#_“I knew of none and I recognized none.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.43#There was nothing but words, transparent but vague; sometimes idle eports, rumors, hearsay. Other indications cropped up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.44#A carpenter, occupied in nailing boards to a fence around the ground on hich a house was in process of construction, in the Rue de Reuilly found on hat plot the torn fragment of a letter on which were still legible the ollowing lines:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.45#The committee must take measures to prevent recruiting in the sections for he different societies.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.46#And, as a postscript:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.47#We have learned that there are guns in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière, o. 5 [bis], to the number of five or six thousand, in the house of a gunsmith n that court. The section owns no arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.48#What excited the carpenter and caused him to show this thing to his eighbors was the fact, that a few paces further on he picked up another paper, orn like the first, and still more significant, of which we reproduce a acsimile, because of the historical interest attaching to these strange ocuments:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.49#Code Table 4b1-5 Page 26
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.50#+——————————————————————————————+ | Q | C | D | E | Learn this list by eart. After so doing | | | | | | you will tear it up. The men admitted will do he same | | | | | | when you have transmitted their orders to them. Health and | | | | | Fraternity, u og a’ fe L. | +——————————————————————————————+
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.51#It was only later on that the persons who were in the secret of this find t the time, learned the significance of those four capital letters: quinturions, centurions, decurions, éclaireurs_ [scouts], and the sense of the etters: _u og a’ fe_, which was a date, and meant April 15th, 1832. Under each apital letter were inscribed names followed by very characteristic notes. Thus: . _Bannerel_. 8 guns, 83 cartridges. A safe man.—C. _Boubière_. 1 pistol, 40 artridges.—D. _Rollet_. 1 foil, 1 pistol, 1 pound of powder.—E. _Tessier_. 1 word, 1 cartridge-box. Exact.— _Terreur_. 8 guns. Brave, etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.52#Finally, this carpenter found, still in the same enclosure, a third paper n which was written in pencil, but very legibly, this sort of enigmatical ist:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.53#Unité: Blanchard: Arbre-Sec. 6. Barra. Soize. Salle-au-Comte. Kosciusko. ubry the Butcher? J. J. R. Caius Gracchus. Right of revision. Dufond. Four. all of the Girondists. Derbac. Maubuée. Washington. Pinson. 1 pistol, 86 artridges. Marseillaise. Sovereignty of the people. Michel. Quincampoix. Sword. oche. Marceau. Plato. Arbre-Sec. Warsaw. Tilly, crier of the Populaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.54#The honest bourgeois into whose hands this list fell knew its ignificance. It appears that this list was the complete nomenclature of the ections of the fourth arondissement of the Society of the Rights of Man, with he names and dwellings of the chiefs of sections. To-day, when all these facts hich were obscure are nothing more than history, we may publish them. It should e added, that the foundation of the Society of the Rights of Man seems to have een posterior to the date when this paper was found. Perhaps this was only a ough draft.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.55#Still, according to all the remarks and the words, according to written otes, material facts begin to make their appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.56#In the Rue Popincourt, in the house of a dealer in bric-à-brac, there were eized seven sheets of gray paper, all folded alike lengthwise and in four; hese sheets enclosed twenty-six squares of this same gray paper folded in the orm of a cartridge, and a card, on which was written the following:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.57#Saltpetre . . . . . . . . . . . 12 ounces. Sulphur . . . . . . . . . . . 2 unces. Charcoal . . . . . . . . . . . 2 ounces and a half. Water . . . . . . . . . . 2 ounces.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.58#The report of the seizure stated that the drawer exhaled a strong smell of owder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.59#A mason returning from his day’s work, left behind him a little package on bench near the bridge of Austerlitz. This package was taken to the police tation. It was opened, and in it were found two printed dialogues, signed Lahautière_, a song entitled: “Workmen, band together,” and a tin box full of artridges.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.60#One artisan drinking with a comrade made the latter feel him to see how arm he was; the other man felt a pistol under his waistcoat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.61#In a ditch on the boulevard, between Père-Lachaise and the Barrière du rône, at the most deserted spot, some children, while playing, discovered eneath a mass of shavings and refuse bits of wood, a bag containing a ullet-mould, a wooden punch for the preparation of cartridges, a wooden bowl, n which there were grains of hunting-powder, and a little cast-iron pot whose nterior presented evident traces of melted lead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.62#Police agents, making their way suddenly and unexpectedly at five o’clock n the morning, into the dwelling of a certain Pardon, who was afterwards a ember of the Barricade-Merry section and got himself killed in the insurrection f April, 1834, found him standing near his bed, and holding in his hand some artridges which he was in the act of preparing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.63#Towards the hour when workingmen repose, two men were seen to meet between he Barrière Picpus and the Barrière Charenton in a little lane between two alls, near a wine-shop, in front of which there was a “Jeu de Siam."33 One drew pistol from beneath his blouse and handed it to the other. As he was handing t to him, he noticed that the perspiration of his chest had made the powder amp. He primed the pistol and added more powder to what was already in the pan. hen the two men parted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.64#A certain Gallais, afterwards killed in the Rue Beaubourg in the affair of pril, boasted of having in his house seven hundred cartridges and twenty-four lints.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.65#The government one day received a warning that arms and two hundred housand cartridges had just been distributed in the faubourg. On the following eek thirty thousand cartridges were distributed. The remarkable point about it as, that the police were not able to seize a single one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.66#An intercepted letter read: “The day is not far distant when, within four ours by the clock, eighty thousand patriots will be under arms.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.67#All this fermentation was public, one might almost say tranquil. The pproaching insurrection was preparing its storm calmly in the face of the overnment. No singularity was lacking to this still subterranean crisis, which as already perceptible. The bourgeois talked peaceably to the working-classes f what was in preparation. They said: “How is the rising coming along?” in the ame tone in which they would have said: “How is your wife?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.68#A furniture-dealer, of the Rue Moreau, inquired: “Well, when are you going o make the attack?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.69#Another shop-keeper said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.70#“The attack will be made soon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.71#“I know it. A month ago, there were fifteen thousand of you, now there are wenty-five thousand.” He offered his gun, and a neighbor offered a small pistol hich he was willing to sell for seven francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.72#Moreover, the revolutionary fever was growing. Not a point in Paris nor in rance was exempt from it. The artery was beating everywhere. Like those embranes which arise from certain inflammations and form in the human body, the etwork of secret societies began to spread all over the country. From the ssociations of the Friends of the People, which was at the same time public and ecret, sprang the Society of the Rights of Man, which also dated from one of he orders of the day: _Pluviôse, Year 40 of the republican era_, which was estined to survive even the mandate of the Court of Assizes which pronounced ts dissolution, and which did not hesitate to bestow on its sections ignificant names like the following:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.73#Pikes. Tocsin. Signal cannon. Phrygian cap. January 21. The beggars. The agabonds. Forward march. Robespierre. Level. Ça Ira.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.74#The Society of the Rights of Man engendered the Society of Action. These ere impatient individuals who broke away and hastened ahead. Other associations ought to recruit themselves from the great mother societies. The members of ections complained that they were torn asunder. Thus, the Gallic Society, and he committee of organization of the Municipalities. Thus the associations for he liberty of the press, for individual liberty, for the instruction of the eople against indirect taxes. Then the Society of Equal Workingmen which was ivided into three fractions, the levellers, the communists, the reformers. Then he Army of the Bastilles, a sort of cohort organized on a military footing, our men commanded by a corporal, ten by a sergeant, twenty by a sub-lieutenant, orty by a lieutenant; there were never more than five men who knew each other. reation where precaution is combined with audacity and which seemed stamped ith the genius of Venice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.75#The central committee, which was at the head, had two arms, the Society of ction, and the Army of the Bastilles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.76#A legitimist association, the Chevaliers of Fidelity, stirred about among hese the republican affiliations. It was denounced and repudiated there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.77#The Parisian societies had ramifications in the principal cities, Lyons, antes, Lille, Marseilles, and each had its Society of the Rights of Man, the harbonnière, and The Free Men. All had a revolutionary society which was called he Cougourde. We have already mentioned this word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.78#In Paris, the Faubourg Saint-Marceau kept up an equal buzzing with the aubourg Saint-Antoine, and the schools were no less moved than the faubourgs. A afé in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the _Seven Billiards_, Rue es Mathurins-Saint-Jacques, served as rallying points for the students. The ociety of the Friends of the A B C affiliated to the Mutualists of Angers, and o the Cougourde of Aix, met, as we have seen, in the Café Musain. These same oung men assembled also, as we have stated already, in a restaurant wine-shop f the Rue Mondétour which was called Corinthe. These meetings were secret. thers were as public as possible, and the reader can judge of their boldness rom these fragments of an interrogatory undergone in one of the ulterior rosecutions: “Where was this meeting held?” “In the Rue de la Paix.” “At whose ouse?” “In the street.” “What sections were there?” “Only one.” “Which?” “The anuel section.” “Who was its leader?” “I.” “You are too young to have decided lone upon the bold course of attacking the government. Where did your nstructions come from?” “From the central committee.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.79#The army was mined at the same time as the population, as was proved ubsequently by the operations of Béford, Luneville, and Épinard. They counted n the fifty-second regiment, on the fifth, on the eighth, on the hirty-seventh, and on the twentieth light cavalry. In Burgundy and in the outhern towns they planted the liberty tree; that is to say, a pole surmounted y a red cap.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.80#Such was the situation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.81#The Faubourg Saint-Antoine, more than any other group of the population, s we stated in the beginning, accentuated this situation and made it felt. That as the sore point. This old faubourg, peopled like an ant-hill, laborious, ourageous, and angry as a hive of bees, was quivering with expectation and with he desire for a tumult. Everything was in a state of agitation there, without ny interruption, however, of the regular work. It is impossible to convey an dea of this lively yet sombre physiognomy. In this faubourg exists poignant istress hidden under attic roofs; there also exist rare and ardent minds. It is articularly in the matter of distress and intelligence that it is dangerous to ave extremes meet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.82#The Faubourg Saint-Antoine had also other causes to tremble; for it eceived the counter-shock of commercial crises, of failures, strikes, slack easons, all inherent to great political disturbances. In times of revolution isery is both cause and effect. The blow which it deals rebounds upon it. This opulation full of proud virtue, capable to the highest degree of latent heat, lways ready to fly to arms, prompt to explode, irritated, deep, undermined, eemed to be only awaiting the fall of a spark. Whenever certain sparks float on he horizon chased by the wind of events, it is impossible not to think of the aubourg Saint-Antoine and of the formidable chance which has placed at the very ates of Paris that powder-house of suffering and ideas.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.83#The wine-shops of the _Faubourg Antoine_, which have been more than once rawn in the sketches which the reader has just perused, possess historical otoriety. In troublous times people grow intoxicated there more on words than n wine. A sort of prophetic spirit and an afflatus of the future circulates here, swelling hearts and enlarging souls. The cabarets of the Faubourg aint-Antoine resemble those taverns of Mont Aventine erected on the cave of the ibyl and communicating with the profound and sacred breath; taverns where the ables were almost tripods, and where was drunk what Ennius calls the _sibylline ine_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.84#The Faubourg Saint-Antoine is a reservoir of people. Revolutionary gitations create fissures there, through which trickles the popular overeignty. This sovereignty may do evil; it can be mistaken like any other; ut, even when led astray, it remains great. We may say of it as of the blind yclops, _Ingens_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.85#In ’93, according as the idea which was floating about was good or evil, ccording as it was the day of fanaticism or of enthusiasm, there leaped forth rom the Faubourg Saint-Antoine now savage legions, now heroic bands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.86#Savage. Let us explain this word. When these bristling men, who in the arly days of the revolutionary chaos, tattered, howling, wild, with uplifted ludgeon, pike on high, hurled themselves upon ancient Paris in an uproar, what id they want? They wanted an end to oppression, an end to tyranny, an end to he sword, work for men, instruction for the child, social sweetness for the oman, liberty, equality, fraternity, bread for all, the idea for all, the denizing of the world. Progress; and that holy, sweet, and good thing, rogress, they claimed in terrible wise, driven to extremities as they were, alf naked, club in fist, a roar in their mouths. They were savages, yes; but he savages of civilization.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.87#They proclaimed right furiously; they were desirous, if only with fear and rembling, to force the human race to paradise. They seemed barbarians, and they ere saviours. They demanded light with the mask of night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.88#Facing these men, who were ferocious, we admit, and terrifying, but erocious and terrifying for good ends, there are other men, smiling, mbroidered, gilded, beribboned, starred, in silk stockings, in white plumes, in ellow gloves, in varnished shoes, who, with their elbows on a velvet table, eside a marble chimney-piece, insist gently on demeanor and the preservation of he past, of the Middle Ages, of divine right, of fanaticism, of innocence, of lavery, of the death penalty, of war, glorifying in low tones and with oliteness, the sword, the stake, and the scaffold. For our part, if we were orced to make a choice between the barbarians of civilization and the civilized en of barbarism, we should choose the barbarians.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.89#But, thank Heaven, still another choice is possible. No perpendicular fall s necessary, in front any more than in the rear.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.90#Neither despotism nor terrorism. We desire progress with a gentle lope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.5.91#God takes care of that. God’s whole policy consists in rendering slopes ess steep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.head#CHAPTER VI—ENJOLRAS AND HIS LIEUTENANTS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.1#It was about this epoch that Enjolras, in view of a possible catastrophe, nstituted a kind of mysterious census.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.2#All were present at a secret meeting at the Café Musain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.3#Enjolras said, mixing his words with a few half-enigmatical but significant etaphors:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.4#“It is proper that we should know where we stand and on whom we may count. f combatants are required, they must be provided. It can do no harm to have omething with which to strike. Passers-by always have more chance of being ored when there are bulls on the road than when there are none. Let us, herefore, reckon a little on the herd. How many of us are there? There is no uestion of postponing this task until to-morrow. Revolutionists should always e hurried; progress has no time to lose. Let us mistrust the unexpected. Let us ot be caught unprepared. We must go over all the seams that we have made and ee whether they hold fast. This business ought to be concluded to-day. ourfeyrac, you will see the polytechnic students. It is their day to go out. o-day is Wednesday. Feuilly, you will see those of the Glacière, will you not? ombeferre has promised me to go to Picpus. There is a perfect swarm and an xcellent one there. Bahorel will visit the Estrapade. Prouvaire, the masons are rowing lukewarm; you will bring us news from the lodge of the Rue de renelle-Saint-Honoré. Joly will go to Dupuytren’s clinical lecture, and feel he pulse of the medical school. Bossuet will take a little turn in the court nd talk with the young law licentiates. I will take charge of the Cougourde yself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.5#“That arranges everything,” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.6#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.7#“What else is there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.8#“A very important thing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.9#“What is that?” asked Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.10#“The Barrière du Maine,” replied Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.11#Enjolras remained for a moment as though absorbed in reflection, then he esumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.12#“At the Barrière du Maine there are marble-workers, painters, and ourneymen in the studios of sculptors. They are an enthusiastic family, but iable to cool off. I don’t know what has been the matter with them for some ime past. They are thinking of something else. They are becoming extinguished. hey pass their time playing dominoes. There is urgent need that some one should o and talk with them a little, but with firmness. They meet at Richefeu’s. They re to be found there between twelve and one o’clock. Those ashes must be fanned nto a glow. For that errand I had counted on that abstracted Marius, who is a ood fellow on the whole, but he no longer comes to us. I need some one for the arrière du Maine. I have no one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.13#“What about me?” said Grantaire. “Here am I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.14#“You?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.15#“I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.16#“You indoctrinate republicans! you warm up hearts that have grown cold in he name of principle!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.17#“Why not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.18#“Are you good for anything?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.19#“I have a vague ambition in that direction,” said Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.20#“You do not believe in everything.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.21#“I believe in you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.22#“Grantaire will you do me a service?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.23#“Anything. I’ll black your boots.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.24#“Well, don’t meddle with our affairs. Sleep yourself sober from your bsinthe.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.25#“You are an ingrate, Enjolras.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.26#“You the man to go to the Barrière du Maine! You capable of it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.27#“I am capable of descending the Rue de Grès, of crossing the Place aint-Michel, of sloping through the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince, of taking the Rue e Vaugirard, of passing the Carmelites, of turning into the Rue d’Assas, of eaching the Rue du Cherche-Midi, of leaving behind me the Conseil de Guerre, of acing the Rue des Vieilles-Tuileries, of striding across the boulevard, of ollowing the Chaussée du Maine, of passing the barrier, and entering ichefeu’s. I am capable of that. My shoes are capable of that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.28#“Do you know anything of those comrades who meet at Richefeu’s?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.29#“Not much. We only address each other as _thou_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.30#“What will you say to them?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.31#“I will speak to them of Robespierre, pardi! Of Danton. Of rinciples.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.32#“You?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.33#“I. But I don’t receive justice. When I set about it, I am terrible. I ave read Prudhomme, I know the Social Contract, I know my constitution of the ear Two by heart. ‘The liberty of one citizen ends where the liberty of another itizen begins.’ Do you take me for a brute? I have an old bank-bill of the epublic in my drawer. The Rights of Man, the sovereignty of the people, apristi! I am even a bit of a Hébertist. I can talk the most superb twaddle for ix hours by the clock, watch in hand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.34#“Be serious,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.35#“I am wild,” replied Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.36#Enjolras meditated for a few moments, and made the gesture of a man who as taken a resolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.37#“Grantaire,” he said gravely, “I consent to try you. You shall go to the arrière du Maine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.38#Grantaire lived in furnished lodgings very near the Café Musain. He went ut, and five minutes later he returned. He had gone home to put on a obespierre waistcoat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.39#“Red,” said he as he entered, and he looked intently at Enjolras. Then, ith the palm of his energetic hand, he laid the two scarlet points of the aistcoat across his breast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.40#And stepping up to Enjolras, he whispered in his ear:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.41#“Be easy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.42#He jammed his hat on resolutely and departed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.43#A quarter of an hour later, the back room of the Café Musain was deserted. ll the friends of the A B C were gone, each in his own direction, each to his wn task. Enjolras, who had reserved the Cougourde of Aix for himself, was the ast to leave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.44#Those members of the Cougourde of Aix who were in Paris then met on the lain of Issy, in one of the abandoned quarries which are so numerous in that ide of Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.45#As Enjolras walked towards this place, he passed the whole situation in eview in his own mind. The gravity of events was self-evident. When facts, the remonitory symptoms of latent social malady, move heavily, the slightest omplication stops and entangles them. A phenomenon whence arises ruin and new irths. Enjolras descried a luminous uplifting beneath the gloomy skirts of the uture. Who knows? Perhaps the moment was at hand. The people were again taking ossession of right, and what a fine spectacle! The revolution was again ajestically taking possession of France and saying to the world: “The sequel o-morrow!” Enjolras was content. The furnace was being heated. He had at that oment a powder train of friends scattered all over Paris. He composed, in his wn mind, with Combeferre’s philosophical and penetrating eloquence, Feuilly’s osmopolitan enthusiasm, Courfeyrac’s dash, Bahorel’s smile, Jean Prouvaire’s elancholy, Joly’s science, Bossuet’s sarcasms, a sort of electric spark which ook fire nearly everywhere at once. All hands to work. Surely, the result would nswer to the effort. This was well. This made him think of Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.46#“Hold,” said he to himself, “the Barrière du Maine will not take me far ut of my way. What if I were to go on as far as Richefeu’s? Let us have a look t what Grantaire is about, and see how he is getting on.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.47#One o’clock was striking from the Vaugirard steeple when Enjolras reached he Richefeu smoking-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.48#He pushed open the door, entered, folded his arms, letting the door fall o and strike his shoulders, and gazed at that room filled with tables, men, and moke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.49#A voice broke forth from the mist of smoke, interrupted by another voice. t was Grantaire holding a dialogue with an adversary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.50#Grantaire was sitting opposite another figure, at a marble Saint-Anne able, strewn with grains of bran and dotted with dominos. He was hammering the able with his fist, and this is what Enjolras heard:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.51#“Double-six.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.52#“Fours.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.53#“The pig! I have no more.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.54#“You are dead. A two.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.55#“Six.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.56#“Three.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.57#“One.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.58#“It’s my move.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.59#“Four points.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.60#“Not much.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.61#“It’s your turn.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.62#“I have made an enormous mistake.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.63#“You are doing well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.64#“Fifteen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.65#“Seven more.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.66#“That makes me twenty-two.” [Thoughtfully, “Twenty-two!”]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.67#“You weren’t expecting that double-six. If I had placed it at the eginning, the whole play would have been changed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.68#“A two again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.69#“One.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.70#“One! Well, five.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.71#“I haven’t any.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.72#“It was your play, I believe?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.73#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.74#“Blank.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.75#“What luck he has! Ah! You are lucky! [Long reverie.] Two.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.76#“One.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.77#“Neither five nor one. That’s bad for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.78#“Domino.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.1.6.79#“Plague take it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.head#BOOK SECOND—ÉPONINE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE LARK’S MEADOW
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.1#Marius had witnessed the unexpected termination of the ambush upon whose rack he had set Javert; but Javert had no sooner quitted the building, bearing ff his prisoners in three hackney-coaches, than Marius also glided out of the ouse. It was only nine o’clock in the evening. Marius betook himself to ourfeyrac. Courfeyrac was no longer the imperturbable inhabitant of the Latin uarter, he had gone to live in the Rue de la Verrerie “for political reasons”; his quarter was one where, at that epoch, insurrection liked to install itself. arius said to Courfeyrac: “I have come to sleep with you.” Courfeyrac dragged a attress off his bed, which was furnished with two, spread it out on the floor, nd said: “There.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.2#At seven o’clock on the following morning, Marius returned to the hovel, aid the quarter’s rent which he owed to Ma’am Bougon, had his books, his bed, is table, his commode, and his two chairs loaded on a hand-cart and went off ithout leaving his address, so that when Javert returned in the course of the orning, for the purpose of questioning Marius as to the events of the preceding vening, he found only Ma’am Bougon, who answered: “Moved away!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.3#Ma’am Bougon was convinced that Marius was to some extent an accomplice of he robbers who had been seized the night before. “Who would ever have said it?” he exclaimed to the portresses of the quarter, “a young man like that, who had he air of a girl!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.4#Marius had two reasons for this prompt change of residence. The first was, hat he now had a horror of that house, where he had beheld, so close at hand, nd in its most repulsive and most ferocious development, a social deformity hich is, perhaps, even more terrible than the wicked rich man, the wicked poor an. The second was, that he did not wish to figure in the lawsuit which would nsue in all probability, and be brought in to testify against Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.5#Javert thought that the young man, whose name he had forgotten, was afraid, nd had fled, or perhaps, had not even returned home at the time of the ambush; e made some efforts to find him, however, but without success.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.6#A month passed, then another. Marius was still with Courfeyrac. He had earned from a young licentiate in law, an habitual frequenter of the courts, hat Thénardier was in close confinement. Every Monday, Marius had five francs anded in to the clerk’s office of La Force for Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.7#As Marius had no longer any money, he borrowed the five francs from ourfeyrac. It was the first time in his life that he had ever borrowed money. hese periodical five francs were a double riddle to Courfeyrac who lent and to hénardier who received them. “To whom can they go?” thought Courfeyrac. “Whence an this come to me?” Thénardier asked himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.8#Moreover, Marius was heart-broken. Everything had plunged through a rap-door once more. He no longer saw anything before him; his life was again uried in mystery where he wandered fumblingly. He had for a moment beheld very lose at hand, in that obscurity, the young girl whom he loved, the old man who eemed to be her father, those unknown beings, who were his only interest and is only hope in this world; and, at the very moment when he thought himself on he point of grasping them, a gust had swept all these shadows away. Not a spark f certainty and truth had been emitted even in the most terrible of collisions. o conjecture was possible. He no longer knew even the name that he thought he new. It certainly was not Ursule. And the Lark was a nickname. And what was he o think of the old man? Was he actually in hiding from the police? The hite-haired workman whom Marius had encountered in the vicinity of the nvalides recurred to his mind. It now seemed probable that that workingman and . Leblanc were one and the same person. So he disguised himself? That man had is heroic and his equivocal sides. Why had he not called for help? Why had he led? Was he, or was he not, the father of the young girl? Was he, in short, the an whom Thénardier thought that he recognized? Thénardier might have been istaken. These formed so many insoluble problems. All this, it is true, etracted nothing from the angelic charms of the young girl of the Luxembourg. eart-rending distress; Marius bore a passion in his heart, and night over his yes. He was thrust onward, he was drawn, and he could not stir. All had anished, save love. Of love itself he had lost the instincts and the sudden lluminations. Ordinarily, this flame which burns us lights us also a little, nd casts some useful gleams without. But Marius no longer even heard these mute ounsels of passion. He never said to himself: “What if I were to go to such a lace? What if I were to try such and such a thing?” The girl whom he could no onger call Ursule was evidently somewhere; nothing warned Marius in what irection he should seek her. His whole life was now summed up in two words; bsolute uncertainty within an impenetrable fog. To see her once again; he still spired to this, but he no longer expected it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.9#To crown all, his poverty had returned. He felt that icy breath close to im, on his heels. In the midst of his torments, and long before this, he had iscontinued his work, and nothing is more dangerous than discontinued work; it s a habit which vanishes. A habit which is easy to get rid of, and difficult to ake up again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.10#A certain amount of dreaming is good, like a narcotic in discreet doses. t lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor, which are sometimes severe, nd produces in the spirit a soft and fresh vapor which corrects the over-harsh ontours of pure thought, fills in gaps here and there, binds together and ounds off the angles of the ideas. But too much dreaming sinks and drowns. Woe o the brain-worker who allows himself to fall entirely from thought into everie! He thinks that he can re-ascend with equal ease, and he tells himself hat, after all, it is the same thing. Error!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.11#Thought is the toil of the intelligence, reverie its voluptuousness. To eplace thought with reverie is to confound a poison with a food.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.12#Marius had begun in that way, as the reader will remember. Passion had upervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimæras without bject or bottom. One no longer emerges from one’s self except for the purpose f going off to dream. Idle production. Tumultuous and stagnant gulf. And, in roportion as labor diminishes, needs increase. This is a law. Man, in a state f reverie, is generally prodigal and slack; the unstrung mind cannot hold life ithin close bounds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.13#There is, in that mode of life, good mingled with evil, for if enervation s baleful, generosity is good and healthful. But the poor man who is generous nd noble, and who does not work, is lost. Resources are exhausted, needs crop p.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.14#Fatal declivity down which the most honest and the firmest as well as the ost feeble and most vicious are drawn, and which ends in one of two holds, uicide or crime.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.15#By dint of going outdoors to think, the day comes when one goes out to hrow one’s self in the water.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.16#Excess of reverie breeds men like Escousse and Lebras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.17#Marius was descending this declivity at a slow pace, with his eyes fixed n the girl whom he no longer saw. What we have just written seems strange, and et it is true. The memory of an absent being kindles in the darkness of the eart; the more it has disappeared, the more it beams; the gloomy and despairing oul sees this light on its horizon; the star of the inner night. She—that was arius’ whole thought. He meditated of nothing else; he was confusedly conscious hat his old coat was becoming an impossible coat, and that his new coat was rowing old, that his shirts were wearing out, that his hat was wearing out, hat his boots were giving out, and he said to himself: “If I could but see her nce again before I die!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.18#One sweet idea alone was left to him, that she had loved him, that her lance had told him so, that she did not know his name, but that she did know is soul, and that, wherever she was, however mysterious the place, she still oved him perhaps. Who knows whether she were not thinking of him as he was hinking of her? Sometimes, in those inexplicable hours such as are experienced y every heart that loves, though he had no reasons for anything but sadness and et felt an obscure quiver of joy, he said to himself: “It is her thoughts that re coming to me!” Then he added: “Perhaps my thoughts reach her also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.19#This illusion, at which he shook his head a moment later, was sufficient, evertheless, to throw beams, which at times resembled hope, into his soul. From ime to time, especially at that evening hour which is the most depressing to ven the dreamy, he allowed the purest, the most impersonal, the most ideal of he reveries which filled his brain, to fall upon a notebook which contained othing else. He called this “writing to her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.20#It must not be supposed that his reason was deranged. Quite the contrary. e had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmly towards any fixed goal, ut he was endowed with more clear-sightedness and rectitude than ever. Marius urveyed by a calm and real, although peculiar light, what passed before his yes, even the most indifferent deeds and men; he pronounced a just criticism on verything with a sort of honest dejection and candid disinterestedness. His udgment, which was almost wholly disassociated from hope, held itself aloof and oared on high.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.21#In this state of mind nothing escaped him, nothing deceived him, and every oment he was discovering the foundation of life, of humanity, and of destiny. appy, even in the midst of anguish, is he to whom God has given a soul worthy f love and of unhappiness! He who has not viewed the things of this world and he heart of man under this double light has seen nothing and knows nothing of he true.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.22#The soul which loves and suffers is in a state of sublimity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.23#However, day followed day, and nothing new presented itself. It merely eemed to him, that the sombre space which still remained to be traversed by him as growing shorter with every instant. He thought that he already distinctly erceived the brink of the bottomless abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.24#“What!” he repeated to himself, “shall I not see her again before hen!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.25#When you have ascended the Rue Saint-Jacques, left the barrier on one side nd followed the old inner boulevard for some distance, you reach the Rue de la anté, then the Glacière, and, a little while before arriving at the little iver of the Gobelins, you come to a sort of field which is the only spot in the ong and monotonous chain of the boulevards of Paris, where Ruysdael would be empted to sit down.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.26#There is something indescribable there which exhales grace, a green meadow raversed by tightly stretched lines, from which flutter rags drying in the ind, and an old market-gardener’s house, built in the time of Louis XIII., with ts great roof oddly pierced with dormer windows, dilapidated palisades, a ittle water amid poplar-trees, women, voices, laughter; on the horizon the anthéon, the pole of the Deaf-Mutes, the Val-de-Grâce, black, squat, fantastic, musing, magnificent, and in the background, the severe square crests of the owers of Notre Dame.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.27#As the place is worth looking at, no one goes thither. Hardly one cart or agoner passes in a quarter of an hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.28#It chanced that Marius’ solitary strolls led him to this plot of ground, ear the water. That day, there was a rarity on the boulevard, a passer-by. arius, vaguely impressed with the almost savage beauty of the place, asked this asser-by:—“What is the name of this spot?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.29#The person replied: “It is the Lark’s meadow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.30#And he added: “It was here that Ulbach killed the shepherdess of vry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.31#But after the word “Lark” Marius heard nothing more. These sudden ongealments in the state of reverie, which a single word suffices to evoke, do ccur. The entire thought is abruptly condensed around an idea, and it is no onger capable of perceiving anything else.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.32#The Lark was the appellation which had replaced Ursule in the depths of arius’ melancholy.—“Stop,” said he with a sort of unreasoning stupor peculiar o these mysterious asides, “this is her meadow. I shall know where she lives ow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.33#It was absurd, but irresistible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.1.34#And every day he returned to that meadow of the Lark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.head#CHAPTER II—EMBRYONIC FORMATION OF CRIMES IN THE INCUBATION OF RISONS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.1#Javert’s triumph in the Gorbeau hovel seemed complete, but had not been o.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.2#In the first place, and this constituted the principal anxiety, Javert had ot taken the prisoner prisoner. The assassinated man who flees is more uspicious than the assassin, and it is probable that this personage, who had een so precious a capture for the ruffians, would be no less fine a prize for he authorities.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.3#And then, Montparnasse had escaped Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.4#Another opportunity of laying hands on that “devil’s dandy” must be waited or. Montparnasse had, in fact, encountered Éponine as she stood on the watch nder the trees of the boulevard, and had led her off, preferring to play emorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhannes with the father. It was ell that he did so. He was free. As for Éponine, Javert had caused her to be eized; a mediocre consolation. Éponine had joined Azelma at Les adelonettes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.5#And finally, on the way from the Gorbeau house to La Force, one of the rincipal prisoners, Claquesous, had been lost. It was not known how this had een effected, the police agents and the sergeants “could not understand it at ll.” He had converted himself into vapor, he had slipped through the handcuffs, e had trickled through the crevices of the carriage, the fiacre was cracked, nd he had fled; all that they were able to say was, that on arriving at the rison, there was no Claquesous. Either the fairies or the police had had a hand n it. Had Claquesous melted into the shadows like a snow-flake in water? Had here been unavowed connivance of the police agents? Did this man belong to the ouble enigma of order and disorder? Was he concentric with infraction and epression? Had this sphinx his fore paws in crime and his hind paws in uthority? Javert did not accept such comminations, and would have bristled up gainst such compromises; but his squad included other inspectors besides imself, who were more initiated than he, perhaps, although they were his ubordinates in the secrets of the Prefecture, and Claquesous had been such a illain that he might make a very good agent. It is an excellent thing for uffianism and an admirable thing for the police to be on such intimate juggling erms with the night. These double-edged rascals do exist. However that may be, laquesous had gone astray and was not found again. Javert appeared to be more rritated than amazed at this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.6#As for Marius, “that booby of a lawyer,” who had probably become rightened, and whose name Javert had forgotten, Javert attached very little mportance to him. Moreover, a lawyer can be hunted up at any time. But was he a awyer after all?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.7#The investigation had begun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.8#The magistrate had thought it advisable not to put one of these men of the and of Patron Minette in close confinement, in the hope that he would chatter. his man was Brujon, the long-haired man of the Rue du Petit-Banquier. He had een let loose in the Charlemagne courtyard, and the eyes of the watchers were ixed on him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.9#This name of Brujon is one of the souvenirs of La Force. In that hideous ourtyard, called the court of the Bâtiment-Neuf (New Building), which the dministration called the court Saint-Bernard, and which the robbers called the osse-aux-Lions (The Lion’s Ditch), on that wall covered with scales and eprosy, which rose on the left to a level with the roofs, near an old door of usty iron which led to the ancient chapel of the ducal residence of La Force, hen turned in a dormitory for ruffians, there could still be seen, twelve years go, a sort of fortress roughly carved in the stone with a nail, and beneath it his signature:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.10#BRUJON, 1811.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.11#The Brujon of 1811 was the father of the Brujon of 1832.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.12#The latter, of whom the reader caught but a glimpse at the Gorbeau house, as a very cunning and very adroit young spark, with a bewildered and plaintive ir. It was in consequence of this plaintive air that the magistrate had eleased him, thinking him more useful in the Charlemagne yard than in close onfinement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.13#Robbers do not interrupt their profession because they are in the hands of ustice. They do not let themselves be put out by such a trifle as that. To be n prison for one crime is no reason for not beginning on another crime. They re artists, who have one picture in the salon, and who toil, nonetheless, on a ew work in their studios.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.14#Brujon seemed to be stupefied by prison. He could sometimes be seen tanding by the hour together in front of the sutler’s window in the Charlemagne ard, staring like an idiot at the sordid list of prices which began with: garlic_, 62 _centimes_, and ended with: _cigar_, 5 _centimes_. Or he passed his ime in trembling, chattering his teeth, saying that he had a fever, and nquiring whether one of the eight and twenty beds in the fever ward was acant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.15#All at once, towards the end of February, 1832, it was discovered that rujon, that somnolent fellow, had had three different commissions executed by he errand-men of the establishment, not under his own name, but in the name of hree of his comrades; and they had cost him in all fifty sous, an exorbitant utlay which attracted the attention of the prison corporal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.16#Inquiries were instituted, and on consulting the tariff of commissions osted in the convict’s parlor, it was learned that the fifty sous could be nalyzed as follows: three commissions; one to the Panthéon, ten sous; one to al-de-Grâce, fifteen sous; and one to the Barrière de Grenelle, twenty-five ous. This last was the dearest of the whole tariff. Now, at the Panthéon, at he Val-de-Grâce, and at the Barrière de Grenelle were situated the domiciles of he three very redoubtable prowlers of the barriers, Kruideniers, alias Bizarro, lorieux, an ex-convict, and Barre-Carosse, upon whom the attention of the olice was directed by this incident. It was thought that these men were members f Patron Minette; two of those leaders, Babet and Gueulemer, had been captured. t was supposed that the messages, which had been addressed, not to houses, but o people who were waiting for them in the street, must have contained nformation with regard to some crime that had been plotted. They were in ossession of other indications; they laid hand on the three prowlers, and upposed that they had circumvented some one or other of Brujon’s achinations.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.17#About a week after these measures had been taken, one night, as the uperintendent of the watch, who had been inspecting the lower dormitory in the âtiment-Neuf, was about to drop his chestnut in the box—this was the means dopted to make sure that the watchmen performed their duties punctually; every our a chestnut must be dropped into all the boxes nailed to the doors of the ormitories—a watchman looked through the peep-hole of the dormitory and beheld rujon sitting on his bed and writing something by the light of the hall-lamp. he guardian entered, Brujon was put in a solitary cell for a month, but they ere not able to seize what he had written. The police learned nothing further bout it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.18#What is certain is, that on the following morning, a “postilion” was flung rom the Charlemagne yard into the Lions’ Ditch, over the five-story building hich separated the two court-yards.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.19#What prisoners call a “postilion” is a pallet of bread artistically oulded, which is sent _into Ireland_, that is to say, over the roofs of a rison, from one courtyard to another. Etymology: over England; from one land to nother; _into Ireland_. This little pellet falls in the yard. The man who picks t up opens it and finds in it a note addressed to some prisoner in that yard. f it is a prisoner who finds the treasure, he forwards the note to its estination; if it is a keeper, or one of the prisoners secretly sold who are alled _sheep_ in prisons and _foxes_ in the galleys, the note is taken to the ffice and handed over to the police.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.20#On this occasion, the postilion reached its address, although the person o whom it was addressed was, at that moment, in solitary confinement. This erson was no other than Babet, one of the four heads of Patron Minette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.21#The postilion contained a roll of paper on which only these two lines were ritten:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.22#“Babet. There is an affair in the Rue Plumet. A gate on a garden.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.23#This is what Brujon had written the night before.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.24#In spite of male and female searchers, Babet managed to pass the note on rom La Force to the Salpêtrière, to a “good friend” whom he had and who was hut up there. This woman in turn transmitted the note to another woman of her cquaintance, a certain Magnon, who was strongly suspected by the police, though ot yet arrested. This Magnon, whose name the reader has already seen, had elations with the Thénardier, which will be described in detail later on, and he could, by going to see Éponine, serve as a bridge between the Salpêtrière nd Les Madelonettes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.25#It happened, that at precisely that moment, as proofs were wanting in the nvestigation directed against Thénardier in the matter of his daughters, ponine and Azelma were released. When Éponine came out, Magnon, who was atching the gate of the Madelonettes, handed her Brujon’s note to Babet, harging her to look into the matter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.26#Éponine went to the Rue Plumet, recognized the gate and the garden, bserved the house, spied, lurked, and, a few days later, brought to Magnon, who elivers in the Rue Clocheperce, a biscuit, which Magnon transmitted to Babet’s istress in the Salpêtrière. A biscuit, in the shady symbolism of prisons, ignifies: Nothing to be done.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.27#So that in less than a week from that time, as Brujon and Babet met in the ircle of La Force, the one on his way to the examination, the other on his way rom it:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.28#“Well?” asked Brujon, “the Rue P.?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.29#“Biscuit,” replied Babet. Thus did the fœtus of crime engendered by Brujon n La Force miscarry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.30#This miscarriage had its consequences, however, which were perfectly istinct from Brujon’s programme. The reader will see what they were.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.2.31#Often when we think we are knotting one thread, we are tying quite nother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.head#CHAPTER III—APPARITION TO FATHER MABEUF
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.1#Marius no longer went to see any one, but he sometimes encountered Father abeuf by chance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.2#While Marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may be alled the cellar stairs, and which lead to places without light, where the appy can be heard walking overhead, M. Mabeuf was descending on his side.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.3#The _Flora of Cauteretz_ no longer sold at all. The experiments on indigo ad not been successful in the little garden of Austerlitz, which had a bad xposure. M. Mabeuf could cultivate there only a few plants which love shade and ampness. Nevertheless, he did not become discouraged. He had obtained a corner n the Jardin des Plantes, with a good exposure, to make his trials with indigo at his own expense.” For this purpose he had pawned his copperplates of the Flora_. He had reduced his breakfast to two eggs, and he left one of these for is old servant, to whom he had paid no wages for the last fifteen months. And ften his breakfast was his only meal. He no longer smiled with his infantile mile, he had grown morose and no longer received visitors. Marius did well not o dream of going thither. Sometimes, at the hour when M. Mabeuf was on his way o the Jardin des Plantes, the old man and the young man passed each other on he Boulevard de l’Hôpital. They did not speak, and only exchanged a melancholy ign of the head. A heart-breaking thing it is that there comes a moment when isery looses bonds! Two men who have been friends become two chance assers-by.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.4#Royol the bookseller was dead. M. Mabeuf no longer knew his books, his arden, or his indigo: these were the three forms which happiness, pleasure, and ope had assumed for him. This sufficed him for his living. He said to himself: When I shall have made my balls of blueing, I shall be rich, I will withdraw my opperplates from the pawn-shop, I will put my _Flora_ in vogue again with rickery, plenty of money and advertisements in the newspapers and I will buy, I now well where, a copy of Pierre de Médine’s _Art de Naviguer_, with wood-cuts, dition of 1655.” In the meantime, he toiled all day over his plot of indigo, nd at night he returned home to water his garden, and to read his books. At hat epoch, M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty years of age.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.5#One evening he had a singular apparition.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.6#He had returned home while it was still broad daylight. Mother Plutarque, hose health was declining, was ill and in bed. He had dined on a bone, on which little meat lingered, and a bit of bread that he had found on the kitchen able, and had seated himself on an overturned stone post, which took the place f a bench in his garden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.7#Near this bench there rose, after the fashion in orchard-gardens, a sort of arge chest, of beams and planks, much dilapidated, a rabbit-hutch on the ground loor, a fruit-closet on the first. There was nothing in the hutch, but there ere a few apples in the fruit-closet,—the remains of the winter’s rovision.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.8#M. Mabeuf had set himself to turning over and reading, with the aid of his lasses, two books of which he was passionately fond and in which, a serious hing at his age, he was interested. His natural timidity rendered him ccessible to the acceptance of superstitions in a certain degree. The first of hese books was the famous treatise of President Delancre, _De l’Inconstance des émons_; the other was a quarto by Mutor de la Rubaudière, _Sur les Diables de auvert et les Gobelins de la Bièvre_. This last-mentioned old volume interested im all the more, because his garden had been one of the spots haunted by oblins in former times. The twilight had begun to whiten what was on high and o blacken all below. As he read, over the top of the book which he held in his and, Father Mabeuf was surveying his plants, and among others a magnificent hododendron which was one of his consolations; four days of heat, wind, and sun ithout a drop of rain, had passed; the stalks were bending, the buds drooping, he leaves falling; all this needed water, the rhododendron was particularly ad. Father Mabeuf was one of those persons for whom plants have souls. The old an had toiled all day over his indigo plot, he was worn out with fatigue, but e rose, laid his books on the bench, and walked, all bent over and with ottering footsteps, to the well, but when he had grasped the chain, he could ot even draw it sufficiently to unhook it. Then he turned round and cast a lance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studded with stars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.9#The evening had that serenity which overwhelms the troubles of man beneath n indescribably mournful and eternal joy. The night promised to be as arid as he day had been.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.10#“Stars everywhere!” thought the old man; “not the tiniest cloud! Not a rop of water!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.11#And his head, which had been upraised for a moment, fell back upon his reast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.12#He raised it again, and once more looked at the sky, murmuring:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.13#“A tear of dew! A little pity!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.14#He tried again to unhook the chain of the well, and could not.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.15#At that moment, he heard a voice saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.16#“Father Mabeuf, would you like to have me water your garden for you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.17#At the same time, a noise as of a wild animal passing became audible in he hedge, and he beheld emerging from the shrubbery a sort of tall, slender irl, who drew herself up in front of him and stared boldly at him. She had less he air of a human being than of a form which had just blossomed forth from the wilight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.18#Before Father Mabeuf, who was easily terrified, and who was, as we have aid, quick to take alarm, was able to reply by a single syllable, this being, hose movements had a sort of odd abruptness in the darkness, had unhooked the hain, plunged in and withdrawn the bucket, and filled the watering-pot, and the oodman beheld this apparition, which had bare feet and a tattered petticoat, unning about among the flower-beds distributing life around her. The sound of he watering-pot on the leaves filled Father Mabeuf’s soul with ecstasy. It eemed to him that the rhododendron was happy now.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.19#The first bucketful emptied, the girl drew a second, then a third. She atered the whole garden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.20#There was something about her, as she thus ran about among paths, where er outline appeared perfectly black, waving her angular arms, and with her ichu all in rags, that resembled a bat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.21#When she had finished, Father Mabeuf approached her with tears in his yes, and laid his hand on her brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.22#“God will bless you,” said he, “you are an angel since you take care of he flowers.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.23#“No,” she replied. “I am the devil, but that’s all the same to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.24#The old man exclaimed, without either waiting for or hearing her esponse:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.25#“What a pity that I am so unhappy and so poor, and that I can do nothing or you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.26#“You can do something,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.27#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.28#“Tell me where M. Marius lives.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.29#The old man did not understand. “What Monsieur Marius?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.30#He raised his glassy eyes and seemed to be seeking something that had anished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.31#“A young man who used to come here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.32#In the meantime, M. Mabeuf had searched his memory.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.33#“Ah! yes—” he exclaimed. “I know what you mean. Wait! Monsieur Marius—the aron Marius Pontmercy, parbleu! He lives,—or rather, he no longer lives,—ah ell, I don’t know.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.34#As he spoke, he had bent over to train a branch of rhododendron, and he ontinued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.35#“Hold, I know now. He very often passes along the boulevard, and goes in he direction of the Glacière, Rue Croulebarbe. The meadow of the Lark. Go here. It is not hard to meet him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.36#When M. Mabeuf straightened himself up, there was no longer any one there; he girl had disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.37#He was decidedly terrified.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.38#“Really,” he thought, “if my garden had not been watered, I should think hat she was a spirit.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.39#An hour later, when he was in bed, it came back to him, and as he fell sleep, at that confused moment when thought, like that fabulous bird which hanges itself into a fish in order to cross the sea, little by little assumes he form of a dream in order to traverse slumber, he said to himself in a ewildered way:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.3.40#“In sooth, that greatly resembles what Rubaudière narrates of the goblins. ould it have been a goblin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.head#CHAPTER IV—AN APPARITION TO MARIUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.1#Some days after this visit of a “spirit” to Farmer Mabeuf, one morning,—it as on a Monday, the day when Marius borrowed the hundred-sou piece from ourfeyrac for Thénardier—Marius had put this coin in his pocket, and before arrying it to the clerk’s office, he had gone “to take a little stroll,” in the ope that this would make him work on his return. It was always thus, however. s soon as he rose, he seated himself before a book and a sheet of paper in rder to scribble some translation; his task at that epoch consisted in turning nto French a celebrated quarrel between Germans, the Gans and Savigny ontroversy; he took Savigny, he took Gans, read four lines, tried to write one, ould not, saw a star between him and his paper, and rose from his chair, aying: “I shall go out. That will put me in spirits.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.2#And off he went to the Lark’s meadow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.3#There he beheld more than ever the star, and less than ever Savigny and ans.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.4#He returned home, tried to take up his work again, and did not succeed; here was no means of re-knotting a single one of the threads which were broken n his brain; then he said to himself: “I will not go out to-morrow. It prevents y working.” And he went out every day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.5#He lived in the Lark’s meadow more than in Courfeyrac’s lodgings. That was is real address: Boulevard de la Santé, at the seventh tree from the Rue roulebarbe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.6#That morning he had quitted the seventh tree and had seated himself on the arapet of the River des Gobelins. A cheerful sunlight penetrated the freshly nfolded and luminous leaves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.7#He was dreaming of “Her.” And his meditation turning to a reproach, fell ack upon himself; he reflected dolefully on his idleness, his paralysis of oul, which was gaining on him, and of that night which was growing more dense very moment before him, to such a point that he no longer even saw the sun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.8#Nevertheless, athwart this painful extrication of indistinct ideas which as not even a monologue, so feeble had action become in him, and he had no onger the force to care to despair, athwart this melancholy absorption, ensations from without did reach him. He heard behind him, beneath him, on both anks of the river, the laundresses of the Gobelins beating their linen, and bove his head, the birds chattering and singing in the elm-trees. On the one and, the sound of liberty, the careless happiness of the leisure which has ings; on the other, the sound of toil. What caused him to meditate deeply, and lmost reflect, were two cheerful sounds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.9#All at once, in the midst of his dejected ecstasy, he heard a familiar oice saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.10#“Come! Here he is!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.11#He raised his eyes, and recognized that wretched child who had come to him ne morning, the elder of the Thénardier daughters, Éponine; he knew her name ow. Strange to say, she had grown poorer and prettier, two steps which it had ot seemed within her power to take. She had accomplished a double progress, owards the light and towards distress. She was barefooted and in rags, as on he day when she had so resolutely entered his chamber, only her rags were two onths older now, the holes were larger, the tatters more sordid. It was the ame harsh voice, the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan, the same free, ild, and vacillating glance. She had besides, more than formerly, in her face hat indescribably terrified and lamentable something which sojourn in a prison dds to wretchedness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.12#She had bits of straw and hay in her hair, not like Ophelia through having one mad from the contagion of Hamlet’s madness, but because she had slept in he loft of some stable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.13#And in spite of it all, she was beautiful. What a star art thou, O outh!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.14#In the meantime, she had halted in front of Marius with a trace of joy in er livid countenance, and something which resembled a smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.15#She stood for several moments as though incapable of speech.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.16#“So I have met you at last!” she said at length. “Father Mabeuf was right, t was on this boulevard! How I have hunted for you! If you only knew! Do you now? I have been in the jug. A fortnight! They let me out! seeing that there as nothing against me, and that, moreover, I had not reached years of iscretion. I lack two months of it. Oh! how I have hunted for you! These six eeks! So you don’t live down there any more?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.17#“No,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.18#“Ah! I understand. Because of that affair. Those take-downs are isagreeable. You cleared out. Come now! Why do you wear old hats like this! A oung man like you ought to have fine clothes. Do you know, Monsieur Marius, ather Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius, I don’t know what. It isn’t true that you re a baron? Barons are old fellows, they go to the Luxembourg, in front of the hâteau, where there is the most sun, and they read the _Quotidienne_ for a sou. once carried a letter to a baron of that sort. He was over a hundred years ld. Say, where do you live now?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.19#Marius made no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.20#“Ah!” she went on, “you have a hole in your shirt. I must sew it up for ou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.21#She resumed with an expression which gradually clouded over:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.22#“You don’t seem glad to see me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.23#Marius held his peace; she remained silent for a moment, then xclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.24#“But if I choose, nevertheless, I could force you to look glad!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.25#“What?” demanded Marius. “What do you mean?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.26#“Ah! you used to call me _thou_,” she retorted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.27#“Well, then, what dost thou mean?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.28#She bit her lips; she seemed to hesitate, as though a prey to some sort of nward conflict. At last she appeared to come to a decision.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.29#“So much the worse, I don’t care. You have a melancholy air, I want you to e pleased. Only promise me that you will smile. I want to see you smile and ear you say: ‘Ah, well, that’s good.’ Poor Mr. Marius! you know? You promised e that you would give me anything I like—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.30#“Yes! Only speak!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.31#She looked Marius full in the eye, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.32#“I have the address.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.33#Marius turned pale. All the blood flowed back to his heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.34#“What address?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.35#“The address that you asked me to get!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.36#She added, as though with an effort:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.37#“The address—you know very well!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.38#“Yes!” stammered Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.39#“Of that young lady.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.40#This word uttered, she sighed deeply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.41#Marius sprang from the parapet on which he had been sitting and seized her and distractedly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.42#“Oh! Well! lead me thither! Tell me! Ask of me anything you wish! Where is t?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.43#“Come with me,” she responded. “I don’t know the street or number very ell; it is in quite the other direction from here, but I know the house well, I ill take you to it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.44#She withdrew her hand and went on, in a tone which could have rent the eart of an observer, but which did not even graze Marius in his intoxicated and cstatic state:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.45#“Oh! how glad you are!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.46#A cloud swept across Marius’ brow. He seized Éponine by the arm:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.47#“Swear one thing to me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.48#“Swear!” said she, “what does that mean? Come! You want me to swear?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.49#And she laughed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.50#“Your father! promise me, Éponine! Swear to me that you will not give this ddress to your father!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.51#She turned to him with a stupefied air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.52#“Éponine! How do you know that my name is Éponine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.53#“Promise what I tell you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.54#But she did not seem to hear him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.55#“That’s nice! You have called me Éponine!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.56#Marius grasped both her arms at once.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.57#“But answer me, in the name of Heaven! pay attention to what I am saying o you, swear to me that you will not tell your father this address that you now!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.58#“My father!” said she. “Ah yes, my father! Be at ease. He’s in close onfinement. Besides, what do I care for my father!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.59#“But you do not promise me!” exclaimed Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.60#“Let go of me!” she said, bursting into a laugh, “how you do shake me! es! Yes! I promise that! I swear that to you! What is that to me? I will not ell my father the address. There! Is that right? Is that it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.61#“Nor to any one?” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.62#“Nor to any one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.63#“Now,” resumed Marius, “take me there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.64#“Immediately?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.65#“Immediately.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.66#“Come along. Ah! how pleased he is!” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.67#After a few steps she halted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.68#“You are following me too closely, Monsieur Marius. Let me go on ahead, nd follow me so, without seeming to do it. A nice young man like you must not e seen with a woman like me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.69#No tongue can express all that lay in that word, _woman_, thus pronounced y that child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.70#She proceeded a dozen paces and then halted once more; Marius joined her. he addressed him sideways, and without turning towards him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.71#“By the way, you know that you promised me something?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.72#Marius fumbled in his pocket. All that he owned in the world was the five rancs intended for Thénardier the father. He took them and laid them in ponine’s hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.73#She opened her fingers and let the coin fall to the ground, and gazed at im with a gloomy air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.2.4.74#“I don’t want your money,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.head#BOOK THIRD—THE HOUSE IN THE RUE PLUMET
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.1#About the middle of the last century, a chief justice in the Parliament of aris having a mistress and concealing the fact, for at that period the grand eignors displayed their mistresses, and the bourgeois concealed them, had “a ittle house” built in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, in the deserted Rue Blomet, hich is now called Rue Plumet, not far from the spot which was then designated s _Combat des Animaux_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.2#This house was composed of a single-storied pavilion; two rooms on the round floor, two chambers on the first floor, a kitchen downstairs, a boudoir pstairs, an attic under the roof, the whole preceded by a garden with a large ate opening on the street. This garden was about an acre and a half in extent. his was all that could be seen by passers-by; but behind the pavilion there was narrow courtyard, and at the end of the courtyard a low building consisting of wo rooms and a cellar, a sort of preparation destined to conceal a child and urse in case of need. This building communicated in the rear by a masked door hich opened by a secret spring, with a long, narrow, paved winding corridor, pen to the sky, hemmed in with two lofty walls, which, hidden with wonderful rt, and lost as it were between garden enclosures and cultivated land, all of hose angles and detours it followed, ended in another door, also with a secret ock which opened a quarter of a league away, almost in another quarter, at the olitary extremity of the Rue du Babylone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.3#Through this the chief justice entered, so that even those who were spying n him and following him would merely have observed that the justice betook imself every day in a mysterious way somewhere, and would never have suspected hat to go to the Rue de Babylone was to go to the Rue Blomet. Thanks to clever urchasers of land, the magistrate had been able to make a secret, sewer-like assage on his own property, and consequently, without interference. Later on, e had sold in little parcels, for gardens and market gardens, the lots of round adjoining the corridor, and the proprietors of these lots on both sides hought they had a party wall before their eyes, and did not even suspect the ong, paved ribbon winding between two walls amid their flower-beds and their rchards. Only the birds beheld this curiosity. It is probable that the linnets nd tomtits of the last century gossiped a great deal about the chief ustice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.4#The pavilion, built of stone in the taste of Mansard, wainscoted and urnished in the Watteau style, rocaille on the inside, old-fashioned on the utside, walled in with a triple hedge of flowers, had something discreet, oquettish, and solemn about it, as befits a caprice of love and magistracy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.5#This house and corridor, which have now disappeared, were in existence ifteen years ago. In ’93 a coppersmith had purchased the house with the idea of emolishing it, but had not been able to pay the price; the nation made him ankrupt. So that it was the house which demolished the coppersmith. After that, he house remained uninhabited, and fell slowly to ruin, as does every dwelling o which the presence of man does not communicate life. It had remained fitted ith its old furniture, was always for sale or to let, and the ten or a dozen eople who passed through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellow and llegible bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since 1819.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.6#Towards the end of the Restoration, these same passers-by might have oticed that the bill had disappeared, and even that the shutters on the first loor were open. The house was occupied, in fact. The windows had short urtains, a sign that there was a woman about.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.7#In the month of October, 1829, a man of a certain age had presented himself nd had hired the house just as it stood, including, of course, the back uilding and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone. He had had the secret penings of the two doors to this passage repaired. The house, as we have just entioned, was still very nearly furnished with the justice’s old fitting; the ew tenant had ordered some repairs, had added what was lacking here and there, ad replaced the paving-stones in the yard, bricks in the floors, steps in the tairs, missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows, nd had finally installed himself there with a young girl and an elderly aid-servant, without commotion, rather like a person who is slipping in than ike a man who is entering his own house. The neighbors did not gossip about im, for the reason that there were no neighbors.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.8#This unobtrusive tenant was Jean Valjean, the young girl was Cosette. The ervant was a woman named Toussaint, whom Jean Valjean had saved from the ospital and from wretchedness, and who was elderly, a stammerer, and from the rovinces, three qualities which had decided Jean Valjean to take her with him. e had hired the house under the name of M. Fauchelevent, independent gentleman. n all that has been related heretofore, the reader has, doubtless, been no less rompt than Thénardier to recognize Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.9#Why had Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Petit-Picpus? What had appened?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.10#Nothing had happened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.11#It will be remembered that Jean Valjean was happy in the convent, so happy hat his conscience finally took the alarm. He saw Cosette every day, he felt aternity spring up and develop within him more and more, he brooded over the oul of that child, he said to himself that she was his, that nothing could take er from him, that this would last indefinitely, that she would certainly become nun, being thereto gently incited every day, that thus the convent was enceforth the universe for her as it was for him, that he should grow old here, and that she would grow up there, that she would grow old there, and that e should die there; that, in short, delightful hope, no separation was ossible. On reflecting upon this, he fell into perplexity. He interrogated imself. He asked himself if all that happiness were really his, if it were not omposed of the happiness of another, of the happiness of that child which he, n old man, was confiscating and stealing; if that were not theft? He said to imself, that this child had a right to know life before renouncing it, that to eprive her in advance, and in some sort without consulting her, of all joys, nder the pretext of saving her from all trials, to take advantage of her gnorance of her isolation, in order to make an artificial vocation germinate in er, was to rob a human creature of its nature and to lie to God. And who knows f, when she came to be aware of all this some day, and found herself a nun to er sorrow, Cosette would not come to hate him? A last, almost selfish thought, nd less heroic than the rest, but which was intolerable to him. He resolved to uit the convent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.12#He resolved on this; he recognized with anguish, the fact that it was ecessary. As for objections, there were none. Five years’ sojourn between these our walls and of disappearance had necessarily destroyed or dispersed the lements of fear. He could return tranquilly among men. He had grown old, and ll had undergone a change. Who would recognize him now? And then, to face the orst, there was danger only for himself, and he had no right to condemn Cosette o the cloister for the reason that he had been condemned to the galleys. esides, what is danger in comparison with the right? Finally, nothing prevented is being prudent and taking his precautions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.13#As for Cosette’s education, it was almost finished and complete.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.14#His determination once taken, he awaited an opportunity. It was not long n presenting itself. Old Fauchelevent died.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.15#Jean Valjean demanded an audience with the revered prioress and told her hat, having come into a little inheritance at the death of his brother, which ermitted him henceforth to live without working, he should leave the service of he convent and take his daughter with him; but that, as it was not just that osette, since she had not taken the vows, should have received her education ratuitously, he humbly begged the Reverend Prioress to see fit that he should ffer to the community, as indemnity, for the five years which Cosette had spent here, the sum of five thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.16#It was thus that Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Perpetual doration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.17#On leaving the convent, he took in his own arms the little valise the key o which he still wore on his person, and would permit no porter to touch it. his puzzled Cosette, because of the odor of embalming which proceeded from t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.18#Let us state at once, that this trunk never quitted him more. He always ad it in his chamber. It was the first and only thing sometimes, that he arried off in his moving when he moved about. Cosette laughed at it, and called his valise his _inseparable_, saying: “I am jealous of it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.19#Nevertheless, Jean Valjean did not reappear in the open air without rofound anxiety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.20#He discovered the house in the Rue Plumet, and hid himself from sight here. Henceforth he was in the possession of the name:—Ultime Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.21#At the same time he hired two other apartments in Paris, in order that he ight attract less attention than if he were to remain always in the same uarter, and so that he could, at need, take himself off at the slightest isquietude which should assail him, and in short, so that he might not again be aught unprovided as on the night when he had so miraculously escaped from avert. These two apartments were very pitiable, poor in appearance, and in two uarters which were far remote from each other, the one in the Rue de l’Ouest, he other in the Rue de l’Homme Armé.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.1.22#He went from time to time, now to the Rue de l’Homme Armé, now to the Rue e l’Ouest, to pass a month or six weeks, without taking Toussaint. He had imself served by the porters, and gave himself out as a gentleman from the uburbs, living on his funds, and having a little temporary resting-place in own. This lofty virtue had three domiciles in Paris for the sake of escaping rom the police.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.head#CHAPTER II—JEAN VALJEAN AS A NATIONAL GUARD
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.1#However, properly speaking, he lived in the Rue Plumet, and he had arranged is existence there in the following fashion:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.2#Cosette and the servant occupied the pavilion; she had the big leeping-room with the painted pier-glasses, the boudoir with the gilded illets, the justice’s drawing-room furnished with tapestries and vast rmchairs; she had the garden. Jean Valjean had a canopied bed of antique damask n three colors and a beautiful Persian rug purchased in the Rue du iguier-Saint-Paul at Mother Gaucher’s, put into Cosette’s chamber, and, in rder to redeem the severity of these magnificent old things, he had amalgamated ith this bric-à-brac all the gay and graceful little pieces of furniture uitable to young girls, an étagère, a bookcase filled with gilt-edged books, an nkstand, a blotting-book, paper, a work-table incrusted with mother of pearl, a ilver-gilt dressing-case, a toilet service in Japanese porcelain. Long damask urtains with a red foundation and three colors, like those on the bed, hung at he windows of the first floor. On the ground floor, the curtains were of apestry. All winter long, Cosette’s little house was heated from top to bottom. ean Valjean inhabited the sort of porter’s lodge which was situated at the end f the back courtyard, with a mattress on a folding-bed, a white wood table, two traw chairs, an earthenware water-jug, a few old volumes on a shelf, his eloved valise in one corner, and never any fire. He dined with Cosette, and he ad a loaf of black bread on the table for his own use.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.3#When Toussaint came, he had said to her: “It is the young lady who is the istress of this house.”—“And you, monsieur?” Toussaint replied in amazement.—“I m a much better thing than the master, I am the father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.4#Cosette had been taught housekeeping in the convent, and she regulated heir expenditure, which was very modest. Every day, Jean Valjean put his arm hrough Cosette’s and took her for a walk. He led her to the Luxembourg, to the east frequented walk, and every Sunday he took her to mass at aint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, because that was a long way off. As it was a very oor quarter, he bestowed alms largely there, and the poor people surrounded him n church, which had drawn down upon him Thénardier’s epistle: “To the enevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.” He was fond of aking Cosette to visit the poor and the sick. No stranger ever entered the ouse in the Rue Plumet. Toussaint brought their provisions, and Jean Valjean ent himself for water to a fountain nearby on the boulevard. Their wood and ine were put into a half-subterranean hollow lined with rock-work which lay ear the Rue de Babylone and which had formerly served the chief-justice as a rotto; for at the epoch of follies and “Little Houses” no love was without a rotto.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.5#In the door opening on the Rue de Babylone, there was a box destined for he reception of letters and papers; only, as the three inhabitants of the avilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters, the entire sefulness of that box, formerly the go-between of a love affair, and the onfidant of a love-lorn lawyer, was now limited to the tax-collector’s notices, nd the summons of the guard. For M. Fauchelevent, independent gentleman, elonged to the national guard; he had not been able to escape through the fine eshes of the census of 1831. The municipal information collected at that time ad even reached the convent of the Petit-Picpus, a sort of impenetrable and oly cloud, whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise, and, onsequently, worthy of mounting guard in the eyes of the town-hall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.6#Three or four times a year, Jean Valjean donned his uniform and mounted uard; he did this willingly, however; it was a correct disguise which mixed him ith every one, and yet left him solitary. Jean Valjean had just attained his ixtieth birthday, the age of legal exemption; but he did not appear to be over ifty; moreover, he had no desire to escape his sergeant-major nor to quibble ith Comte de Lobau; he possessed no civil status, he was concealing his name, e was concealing his identity, so he concealed his age, he concealed verything; and, as we have just said, he willingly did his duty as a national uard; the sum of his ambition lay in resembling any other man who paid his axes. This man had for his ideal, within, the angel, without, the ourgeois.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.7#Let us note one detail, however; when Jean Valjean went out with Cosette, e dressed as the reader has already seen, and had the air of a retired officer. hen he went out alone, which was generally at night, he was always dressed in a orkingman’s trousers and blouse, and wore a cap which concealed his face. Was his precaution or humility? Both. Cosette was accustomed to the enigmatical ide of her destiny, and hardly noticed her father’s peculiarities. As for oussaint, she venerated Jean Valjean, and thought everything he did right.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.8#One day, her butcher, who had caught a glimpse of Jean Valjean, said to er: “That’s a queer fish.” She replied: “He’s a saint.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.9#Neither Jean Valjean nor Cosette nor Toussaint ever entered or emerged xcept by the door on the Rue de Babylone. Unless seen through the garden gate t would have been difficult to guess that they lived in the Rue Plumet. That ate was always closed. Jean Valjean had left the garden uncultivated, in order ot to attract attention.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.2.10#In this, possibly, he made a mistake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.head#CHAPTER III—FOLIIS AC FRONDIBUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.1#The garden thus left to itself for more than half a century had become xtraordinary and charming. The passers-by of forty years ago halted to gaze at t, without a suspicion of the secrets which it hid in its fresh and verdant epths. More than one dreamer of that epoch often allowed his thoughts and his yes to penetrate indiscreetly between the bars of that ancient, padlocked gate, wisted, tottering, fastened to two green and moss-covered pillars, and oddly rowned with a pediment of undecipherable arabesque.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.2#There was a stone bench in one corner, one or two mouldy statues, several attices which had lost their nails with time, were rotting on the wall, and here were no walks nor turf; but there was enough grass everywhere. Gardening ad taken its departure, and nature had returned. Weeds abounded, which was a reat piece of luck for a poor corner of land. The festival of gilliflowers was omething splendid. Nothing in this garden obstructed the sacred effort of hings towards life; venerable growth reigned there among them. The trees had ent over towards the nettles, the plant had sprung upward, the branch had nclined, that which crawls on the earth had gone in search of that which xpands in the air, that which floats on the wind had bent over towards that hich trails in the moss; trunks, boughs, leaves, fibres, clusters, tendrils, hoots, spines, thorns, had mingled, crossed, married, confounded themselves in ach other; vegetation in a deep and close embrace, had celebrated and ccomplished there, under the well-pleased eye of the Creator, in that enclosure hree hundred feet square, the holy mystery of fraternity, symbol of the human raternity. This garden was no longer a garden, it was a colossal thicket, that s to say, something as impenetrable as a forest, as peopled as a city, uivering like a nest, sombre like a cathedral, fragrant like a bouquet, olitary as a tomb, living as a throng.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.3#In Floréal34 this enormous thicket, free behind its gate and within its our walls, entered upon the secret labor of germination, quivered in the rising un, almost like an animal which drinks in the breaths of cosmic love, and which eels the sap of April rising and boiling in its veins, and shakes to the wind ts enormous wonderful green locks, sprinkled on the damp earth, on the defaced tatues, on the crumbling steps of the pavilion, and even on the pavement of the eserted street, flowers like stars, dew like pearls, fecundity, beauty, life, oy, perfumes. At midday, a thousand white butterflies took refuge there, and it as a divine spectacle to see that living summer snow whirling about there in lakes amid the shade. There, in those gay shadows of verdure, a throng of nnocent voices spoke sweetly to the soul, and what the twittering forgot to say he humming completed. In the evening, a dreamy vapor exhaled from the garden nd enveloped it; a shroud of mist, a calm and celestial sadness covered it; the ntoxicating perfume of the honeysuckles and convolvulus poured out from every art of it, like an exquisite and subtle poison; the last appeals of the oodpeckers and the wagtails were audible as they dozed among the branches; one elt the sacred intimacy of the birds and the trees; by day the wings rejoice he leaves, by night the leaves protect the wings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.4#In winter the thicket was black, dripping, bristling, shivering, and llowed some glimpse of the house. Instead of flowers on the branches and dew in he flowers, the long silvery tracks of the snails were visible on the cold, hick carpet of yellow leaves; but in any fashion, under any aspect, at all easons, spring, winter, summer, autumn, this tiny enclosure breathed forth elancholy, contemplation, solitude, liberty, the absence of man, the presence f God; and the rusty old gate had the air of saying: “This garden belongs to e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.5#It was of no avail that the pavements of Paris were there on every side, he classic and splendid hotels of the Rue de Varennes a couple of paces away, he dome of the Invalides close at hand, the Chamber of Deputies not far off; he carriages of the Rue de Bourgogne and of the Rue Saint-Dominique rumbled uxuriously, in vain, in the vicinity, in vain did the yellow, brown, white, and ed omnibuses cross each other’s course at the neighboring crossroads; the Rue lumet was the desert; and the death of the former proprietors, the revolution hich had passed over it, the crumbling away of ancient fortunes, absence, orgetfulness, forty years of abandonment and widowhood, had sufficed to restore o this privileged spot ferns, mulleins, hemlock, yarrow, tall weeds, great rimped plants, with large leaves of pale green cloth, lizards, beetles, uneasy nd rapid insects; to cause to spring forth from the depths of the earth and to eappear between those four walls a certain indescribable and savage grandeur; nd for nature, which disconcerts the petty arrangements of man, and which sheds erself always thoroughly where she diffuses herself at all, in the ant as well s in the eagle, to blossom out in a petty little Parisian garden with as much ude force and majesty as in a virgin forest of the New World.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.6#Nothing is small, in fact; any one who is subject to the profound and enetrating influence of nature knows this. Although no absolute satisfaction is iven to philosophy, either to circumscribe the cause or to limit the effect, he contemplator falls into those unfathomable ecstasies caused by these ecompositions of force terminating in unity. Everything toils at verything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.3.7#Algebra is applied to the clouds; the radiation of the star profits the ose; no thinker would venture to affirm that the perfume of the hawthorn is seless to the constellations. Who, then, can calculate the course of a olecule? How do we know that the creation of worlds is not determined by the all of grains of sand? Who knows the reciprocal ebb and flow of the infinitely reat and the infinitely little, the reverberations of causes in the precipices f being, and the avalanches of creation? The tiniest worm is of importance; the reat is little, the little is great; everything is balanced in necessity; larming vision for the mind. There are marvellous relations between beings and hings; in that inexhaustible whole, from the sun to the grub, nothing despises he other; all have need of each other. The light does not bear away terrestrial erfumes into the azure depths, without knowing what it is doing; the night istributes stellar essences to the sleeping flowers. All birds that fly have ound their leg the thread of the infinite. Germination is complicated with the ursting forth of a meteor and with the peck of a swallow cracking its egg, and t places on one level the birth of an earthworm and the advent of Socrates. here the telescope ends, the microscope begins. Which of the two possesses the arger field of vision? Choose. A bit of mould is a pleiad of flowers; a nebula s an ant-hill of stars. The same promiscuousness, and yet more unprecedented, xists between the things of the intelligence and the facts of substance. lements and principles mingle, combine, wed, multiply with each other, to such point that the material and the moral world are brought eventually to the same learness. The phenomenon is perpetually returning upon itself. In the vast osmic exchanges the universal life goes and comes in unknown quantities, olling entirely in the invisible mystery of effluvia, employing everything, not osing a single dream, not a single slumber, sowing an animalcule here, rumbling to bits a planet there, oscillating and winding, making of light a orce and of thought an element, disseminated and invisible, dissolving all, xcept that geometrical point, the _I_; bringing everything back to the oul-atom; expanding everything in God, entangling all activity, from summit to ase, in the obscurity of a dizzy mechanism, attaching the flight of an insect o the movement of the earth, subordinating, who knows? Were it only by the dentity of the law, the evolution of the comet in the firmament to the whirling f the infusoria in the drop of water. A machine made of mind. Enormous gearing, he prime motor of which is the gnat, and whose final wheel is the zodiac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.head#CHAPTER IV—CHANGE OF GATE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.1#It seemed that this garden, created in olden days to conceal wanton ysteries, had been transformed and become fitted to shelter chaste mysteries. here were no longer either arbors, or bowling greens, or tunnels, or grottos; here was a magnificent, dishevelled obscurity falling like a veil over all. aphos had been made over into Eden. It is impossible to say what element of epentance had rendered this retreat wholesome. This flower-girl now offered her lossom to the soul. This coquettish garden, formerly decidedly compromised, had eturned to virginity and modesty. A justice assisted by a gardener, a goodman ho thought that he was a continuation of Lamoignon, and another goodman who hought that he was a continuation of Lenôtre, had turned it about, cut, uffled, decked, moulded it to gallantry; nature had taken possession of it once ore, had filled it with shade, and had arranged it for love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.2#There was, also, in this solitude, a heart which was quite ready. Love had nly to show himself; he had here a temple composed of verdure, grass, moss, the ight of birds, tender shadows, agitated branches, and a soul made of sweetness, f faith, of candor, of hope, of aspiration, and of illusion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.3#Cosette had left the convent when she was still almost a child; she was a ittle more than fourteen, and she was at the “ungrateful age”; we have already aid, that with the exception of her eyes, she was homely rather than pretty; he had no ungraceful feature, but she was awkward, thin, timid and bold at nce, a grown-up little girl, in short.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.4#Her education was finished, that is to say, she has been taught religion, nd even and above all, devotion; then “history,” that is to say the thing that ears that name in convents, geography, grammar, the participles, the kings of rance, a little music, a little drawing, etc.; but in all other respects she as utterly ignorant, which is a great charm and a great peril. The soul of a oung girl should not be left in the dark; later on, mirages that are too abrupt nd too lively are formed there, as in a dark chamber. She should be gently and iscreetly enlightened, rather with the reflection of realities than with their arsh and direct light. A useful and graciously austere half-light which issipates puerile fears and obviates falls. There is nothing but the maternal nstinct, that admirable intuition composed of the memories of the virgin and he experience of the woman, which knows how this half-light is to be created nd of what it should consist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.5#Nothing supplies the place of this instinct. All the nuns in the world are ot worth as much as one mother in the formation of a young girl’s soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.6#Cosette had had no mother. She had only had many mothers, in the lural.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.7#As for Jean Valjean, he was, indeed, all tenderness, all solicitude; but he as only an old man and he knew nothing at all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.8#Now, in this work of education, in this grave matter of preparing a woman or life, what science is required to combat that vast ignorance which is called nnocence!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.9#Nothing prepares a young girl for passions like the convent. The convent urns the thoughts in the direction of the unknown. The heart, thus thrown back pon itself, works downward within itself, since it cannot overflow, and grows eep, since it cannot expand. Hence visions, suppositions, conjectures, outlines f romances, a desire for adventures, fantastic constructions, edifices built holly in the inner obscurity of the mind, sombre and secret abodes where the assions immediately find a lodgement as soon as the open gate permits them to nter. The convent is a compression which, in order to triumph over the human eart, should last during the whole life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.10#On quitting the convent, Cosette could have found nothing more sweet and ore dangerous than the house in the Rue Plumet. It was the continuation of olitude with the beginning of liberty; a garden that was closed, but a nature hat was acrid, rich, voluptuous, and fragrant; the same dreams as in the onvent, but with glimpses of young men; a grating, but one that opened on the treet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.11#Still, when she arrived there, we repeat, she was only a child. Jean aljean gave this neglected garden over to her. “Do what you like with it,” he aid to her. This amused Cosette; she turned over all the clumps and all the tones, she hunted for “beasts”; she played in it, while awaiting the time when he would dream in it; she loved this garden for the insects that she found eneath her feet amid the grass, while awaiting the day when she would love it or the stars that she would see through the boughs above her head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.12#And then, she loved her father, that is to say, Jean Valjean, with all her oul, with an innocent filial passion which made the goodman a beloved and harming companion to her. It will be remembered that M. Madeleine had been in he habit of reading a great deal. Jean Valjean had continued this practice; he ad come to converse well; he possessed the secret riches and the eloquence of a rue and humble mind which has spontaneously cultivated itself. He retained just nough sharpness to season his kindness; his mind was rough and his heart was oft. During their conversations in the Luxembourg, he gave her explanations of verything, drawing on what he had read, and also on what he had suffered. As he listened to him, Cosette’s eyes wandered vaguely about.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.13#This simple man sufficed for Cosette’s thought, the same as the wild arden sufficed for her eyes. When she had had a good chase after the utterflies, she came panting up to him and said: “Ah! How I have run!” He issed her brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.14#Cosette adored the goodman. She was always at his heels. Where Jean aljean was, there happiness was. Jean Valjean lived neither in the pavilion nor he garden; she took greater pleasure in the paved back courtyard, than in the nclosure filled with flowers, and in his little lodge furnished with traw-seated chairs than in the great drawing-room hung with tapestry, against hich stood tufted easy-chairs. Jean Valjean sometimes said to her, smiling at is happiness in being importuned: “Do go to your own quarters! Leave me alone a ittle!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.15#She gave him those charming and tender scoldings which are so graceful hen they come from a daughter to her father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.16#“Father, I am very cold in your rooms; why don’t you have a carpet here nd a stove?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.17#“Dear child, there are so many people who are better than I and who have ot even a roof over their heads.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.18#“Then why is there a fire in my rooms, and everything that is needed?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.19#“Because you are a woman and a child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.20#“Bah! must men be cold and feel uncomfortable?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.21#“Certain men.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.22#“That is good, I shall come here so often that you will be obliged to have fire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.23#And again she said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.24#“Father, why do you eat horrible bread like that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.25#“Because, my daughter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.26#“Well, if you eat it, I will eat it too.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.27#Then, in order to prevent Cosette eating black bread, Jean Valjean ate hite bread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.28#Cosette had but a confused recollection of her childhood. She prayed orning and evening for her mother whom she had never known. The Thénardiers had emained with her as two hideous figures in a dream. She remembered that she had one “one day, at night,” to fetch water in a forest. She thought that it had een very far from Paris. It seemed to her that she had begun to live in an byss, and that it was Jean Valjean who had rescued her from it. Her childhood roduced upon her the effect of a time when there had been nothing around her ut millepeds, spiders, and serpents. When she meditated in the evening, before alling asleep, as she had not a very clear idea that she was Jean Valjean’s aughter, and that he was her father, she fancied that the soul of her mother ad passed into that good man and had come to dwell near her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.29#When he was seated, she leaned her cheek against his white hair, and ropped a silent tear, saying to herself: “Perhaps this man is my mother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.30#Cosette, although this is a strange statement to make, in the profound gnorance of a girl brought up in a convent,—maternity being also absolutely nintelligible to virginity,—had ended by fancying that she had had as little other as possible. She did not even know her mother’s name. Whenever she asked ean Valjean, Jean Valjean remained silent. If she repeated her question, he esponded with a smile. Once she insisted; the smile ended in a tear.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.31#This silence on the part of Jean Valjean covered Fantine with arkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.32#Was it prudence? Was it respect? Was it a fear that he should deliver this ame to the hazards of another memory than his own?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.33#So long as Cosette had been small, Jean Valjean had been willing to talk o her of her mother; when she became a young girl, it was impossible for him to o so. It seemed to him that he no longer dared. Was it because of Cosette? Was t because of Fantine? He felt a certain religious horror at letting that shadow nter Cosette’s thought; and of placing a third in their destiny. The more acred this shade was to him, the more did it seem that it was to be feared. He hought of Fantine, and felt himself overwhelmed with silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.34#Through the darkness, he vaguely perceived something which appeared to ave its finger on its lips. Had all the modesty which had been in Fantine, and hich had violently quitted her during her lifetime, returned to rest upon her fter her death, to watch in indignation over the peace of that dead woman, and n its shyness, to keep her in her grave? Was Jean Valjean unconsciously ubmitting to the pressure? We who believe in death, are not among the number ho will reject this mysterious explanation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.35#Hence the impossibility of uttering, even for Cosette, that name of antine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.36#One day Cosette said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.37#“Father, I saw my mother in a dream last night. She had two big wings. My other must have been almost a saint during her life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.38#“Through martyrdom,” replied Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.39#However, Jean Valjean was happy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.4.40#When Cosette went out with him, she leaned on his arm, proud and happy, in he plenitude of her heart. Jean Valjean felt his heart melt within him with elight, at all these sparks of a tenderness so exclusive, so wholly satisfied ith himself alone. The poor man trembled, inundated with angelic joy; he eclared to himself ecstatically that this would last all their lives; he told imself that he really had not suffered sufficiently to merit so radiant a liss, and he thanked God, in the depths of his soul, for having permitted him o be loved thus, he, a wretch, by that innocent being.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.head#CHAPTER V—THE ROSE PERCEIVES THAT IT IS AN ENGINE OF WAR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.1#One day, Cosette chanced to look at herself in her mirror, and she said to erself: “Really!” It seemed to her almost that she was pretty. This threw her n a singularly troubled state of mind. Up to that moment she had never thought f her face. She saw herself in her mirror, but she did not look at herself. And hen, she had so often been told that she was homely; Jean Valjean alone said ently: “No indeed! no indeed!” At all events, Cosette had always thought erself homely, and had grown up in that belief with the easy resignation of hildhood. And here, all at once, was her mirror saying to her, as Jean Valjean ad said: “No indeed!” That night, she did not sleep. “What if I were pretty!” he thought. “How odd it would be if I were pretty!” And she recalled those of er companions whose beauty had produced a sensation in the convent, and she aid to herself: “What! Am I to be like Mademoiselle So-and-So?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.2#The next morning she looked at herself again, not by accident this time, nd she was assailed with doubts: “Where did I get such an idea?” said she; “no, am ugly.” She had not slept well, that was all, her eyes were sunken and she as pale. She had not felt very joyous on the preceding evening in the belief hat she was beautiful, but it made her very sad not to be able to believe in it ny longer. She did not look at herself again, and for more than a fortnight she ried to dress her hair with her back turned to the mirror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.3#In the evening, after dinner, she generally embroidered in wool or did some onvent needlework in the drawing-room, and Jean Valjean read beside her. Once he raised her eyes from her work, and was rendered quite uneasy by the manner n which her father was gazing at her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.4#On another occasion, she was passing along the street, and it seemed to her hat some one behind her, whom she did not see, said: “A pretty woman! but badly ressed.” “Bah!” she thought, “he does not mean me. I am well dressed and ugly.” he was then wearing a plush hat and her merino gown.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.5#At last, one day when she was in the garden, she heard poor old Toussaint aying: “Do you notice how pretty Cosette is growing, sir?” Cosette did not hear er father’s reply, but Toussaint’s words caused a sort of commotion within her. he fled from the garden, ran up to her room, flew to the looking-glass,—it was hree months since she had looked at herself,—and gave vent to a cry. She had ust dazzled herself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.6#She was beautiful and lovely; she could not help agreeing with Toussaint nd her mirror. Her figure was formed, her skin had grown white, her hair was ustrous, an unaccustomed splendor had been lighted in her blue eyes. The onsciousness of her beauty burst upon her in an instant, like the sudden advent f daylight; other people noticed it also, Toussaint had said so, it was vidently she of whom the passer-by had spoken, there could no longer be any oubt of that; she descended to the garden again, thinking herself a queen, magining that she heard the birds singing, though it was winter, seeing the sky ilded, the sun among the trees, flowers in the thickets, distracted, wild, in nexpressible delight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.7#Jean Valjean, on his side, experienced a deep and undefinable oppression at eart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.8#In fact, he had, for some time past, been contemplating with terror that eauty which seemed to grow more radiant every day on Cosette’s sweet face. The awn that was smiling for all was gloomy for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.9#Cosette had been beautiful for a tolerably long time before she became ware of it herself. But, from the very first day, that unexpected light which as rising slowly and enveloping the whole of the young girl’s person, wounded ean Valjean’s sombre eye. He felt that it was a change in a happy life, a life o happy that he did not dare to move for fear of disarranging something. This an, who had passed through all manner of distresses, who was still all bleeding rom the bruises of fate, who had been almost wicked and who had become almost a aint, who, after having dragged the chain of the galleys, was now dragging the nvisible but heavy chain of indefinite misery, this man whom the law had not eleased from its grasp and who could be seized at any moment and brought back rom the obscurity of his virtue to the broad daylight of public opprobrium, his man accepted all, excused all, pardoned all, and merely asked of rovidence, of man, of the law, of society, of nature, of the world, one thing, hat Cosette might love him!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.10#That Cosette might continue to love him! That God would not prevent the eart of the child from coming to him, and from remaining with him! Beloved by osette, he felt that he was healed, rested, appeased, loaded with benefits, ecompensed, crowned. Beloved by Cosette, it was well with him! He asked nothing ore! Had any one said to him: “Do you want anything better?” he would have nswered: “No.” God might have said to him: “Do you desire heaven?” and he would ave replied: “I should lose by it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.11#Everything which could affect this situation, if only on the surface, made im shudder like the beginning of something new. He had never known very istinctly himself what the beauty of a woman means; but he understood nstinctively, that it was something terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.12#He gazed with terror on this beauty, which was blossoming out ever more riumphant and superb beside him, beneath his very eyes, on the innocent and ormidable brow of that child, from the depths of her homeliness, of his old ge, of his misery, of his reprobation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.13#He said to himself: “How beautiful she is! What is to become of me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.14#There, moreover, lay the difference between his tenderness and the enderness of a mother. What he beheld with anguish, a mother would have gazed pon with joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.15#The first symptoms were not long in making their appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.16#On the very morrow of the day on which she had said to herself: “Decidedly am beautiful!” Cosette began to pay attention to her toilet. She recalled the emark of that passer-by: “Pretty, but badly dressed,” the breath of an oracle hich had passed beside her and had vanished, after depositing in her heart one f the two germs which are destined, later on, to fill the whole life of woman, oquetry. Love is the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.17#With faith in her beauty, the whole feminine soul expanded within her. She onceived a horror for her merinos, and shame for her plush hat. Her father had ever refused her anything. She at once acquired the whole science of the onnet, the gown, the mantle, the boot, the cuff, the stuff which is in fashion, he color which is becoming, that science which makes of the Parisian woman omething so charming, so deep, and so dangerous. The words _heady woman_ were nvented for the Parisienne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.18#In less than a month, little Cosette, in that Thebaid of the Rue de abylone, was not only one of the prettiest, but one of the “best dressed” women n Paris, which means a great deal more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.19#She would have liked to encounter her “passer-by,” to see what he would ay, and to “teach him a lesson!” The truth is, that she was ravishing in every espect, and that she distinguished the difference between a bonnet from Gérard nd one from Herbaut in the most marvellous way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.20#Jean Valjean watched these ravages with anxiety. He who felt that he could ever do anything but crawl, walk at the most, beheld wings sprouting on osette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.21#Moreover, from the mere inspection of Cosette’s toilet, a woman would have ecognized the fact that she had no mother. Certain little proprieties, certain pecial conventionalities, were not observed by Cosette. A mother, for instance, ould have told her that a young girl does not dress in damask.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.22#The first day that Cosette went out in her black damask gown and mantle, nd her white crape bonnet, she took Jean Valjean’s arm, gay, radiant, rosy, roud, dazzling. “Father,” she said, “how do you like me in this guise?” Jean aljean replied in a voice which resembled the bitter voice of an envious man: Charming!” He was the same as usual during their walk. On their return home, he sked Cosette:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.23#“Won’t you put on that other gown and bonnet again,—you know the ones I ean?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.24#This took place in Cosette’s chamber. Cosette turned towards the wardrobe here her cast-off schoolgirl’s clothes were hanging.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.25#“That disguise!” said she. “Father, what do you want me to do with it? Oh o, the idea! I shall never put on those horrors again. With that machine on my ead, I have the air of Madame Mad-dog.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.26#Jean Valjean heaved a deep sigh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.27#From that moment forth, he noticed that Cosette, who had always heretofore sked to remain at home, saying: “Father, I enjoy myself more here with you,” ow was always asking to go out. In fact, what is the use of having a handsome ace and a delicious costume if one does not display them?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.28#He also noticed that Cosette had no longer the same taste for the back arden. Now she preferred the garden, and did not dislike to promenade back and orth in front of the railed fence. Jean Valjean, who was shy, never set foot in he garden. He kept to his back yard, like a dog.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.29#Cosette, in gaining the knowledge that she was beautiful, lost the grace f ignoring it. An exquisite grace, for beauty enhanced by ingenuousness is neffable, and nothing is so adorable as a dazzling and innocent creature who alks along, holding in her hand the key to paradise without being conscious of t. But what she had lost in ingenuous grace, she gained in pensive and serious harm. Her whole person, permeated with the joy of youth, of innocence, and of eauty, breathed forth a splendid melancholy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.5.30#It was at this epoch that Marius, after the lapse of six months, saw her nce more at the Luxembourg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE BATTLE BEGUN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.1#Cosette in her shadow, like Marius in his, was all ready to take fire. estiny, with its mysterious and fatal patience, slowly drew together these two eings, all charged and all languishing with the stormy electricity of passion, hese two souls which were laden with love as two clouds are laden with ightning, and which were bound to overflow and mingle in a look like the clouds n a flash of fire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.2#The glance has been so much abused in love romances that it has finally allen into disrepute. One hardly dares to say, nowadays, that two beings fell n love because they looked at each other. That is the way people do fall in ove, nevertheless, and the only way. The rest is nothing, but the rest comes fterwards. Nothing is more real than these great shocks which two souls convey o each other by the exchange of that spark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.3#At that particular hour when Cosette unconsciously darted that glance which roubled Marius, Marius had no suspicion that he had also launched a look which isturbed Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.4#He caused her the same good and the same evil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.5#She had been in the habit of seeing him for a long time, and she had crutinized him as girls scrutinize and see, while looking elsewhere. Marius till considered Cosette ugly, when she had already begun to think Marius andsome. But as he paid no attention to her, the young man was nothing to er.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.6#Still, she could not refrain from saying to herself that he had beautiful air, beautiful eyes, handsome teeth, a charming tone of voice when she heard im conversing with his comrades, that he held himself badly when he walked, if ou like, but with a grace that was all his own, that he did not appear to be at ll stupid, that his whole person was noble, gentle, simple, proud, and that, in hort, though he seemed to be poor, yet his air was fine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.7#On the day when their eyes met at last, and said to each other those first, bscure, and ineffable things which the glance lisps, Cosette did not mmediately understand. She returned thoughtfully to the house in the Rue de ’Ouest, where Jean Valjean, according to his custom, had come to spend six eeks. The next morning, on waking, she thought of that strange young man, so ong indifferent and icy, who now seemed to pay attention to her, and it did not ppear to her that this attention was the least in the world agreeable to her. he was, on the contrary, somewhat incensed at this handsome and disdainful ndividual. A substratum of war stirred within her. It struck her, and the idea aused her a wholly childish joy, that she was going to take her revenge at ast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.8#Knowing that she was beautiful, she was thoroughly conscious, though in an ndistinct fashion, that she possessed a weapon. Women play with their beauty as hildren do with a knife. They wound themselves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.9#The reader will recall Marius’ hesitations, his palpitations, his terrors. e remained on his bench and did not approach. This vexed Cosette. One day, she aid to Jean Valjean: “Father, let us stroll about a little in that direction.” eeing that Marius did not come to her, she went to him. In such cases, all omen resemble Mahomet. And then, strange to say, the first symptom of true love n a young man is timidity; in a young girl it is boldness. This is surprising, nd yet nothing is more simple. It is the two sexes tending to approach each ther and assuming, each the other’s qualities.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.10#That day, Cosette’s glance drove Marius beside himself, and Marius’ glance et Cosette to trembling. Marius went away confident, and Cosette uneasy. From hat day forth, they adored each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.11#The first thing that Cosette felt was a confused and profound melancholy. t seemed to her that her soul had become black since the day before. She no onger recognized it. The whiteness of soul in young girls, which is composed of oldness and gayety, resembles snow. It melts in love, which is its sun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.12#Cosette did not know what love was. She had never heard the word uttered n its terrestrial sense. On the books of profane music which entered the onvent, _amour_ (love) was replaced by _tambour_ (drum) or _pandour_. This reated enigmas which exercised the imaginations of the _big girls_, such as: Ah, how delightful is the drum! _ or, _Pity is not a pandour_. But Cosette had eft the convent too early to have occupied herself much with the “drum.” herefore, she did not know what name to give to what she now felt. Is any one he less ill because one does not know the name of one’s malady?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.13#She loved with all the more passion because she loved ignorantly. She did ot know whether it was a good thing or a bad thing, useful or dangerous, ternal or temporary, allowable or prohibited; she loved. She would have been reatly astonished, had any one said to her: “You do not sleep? But that is orbidden! You do not eat? Why, that is very bad! You have oppressions and alpitations of the heart? That must not be! You blush and turn pale, when a ertain being clad in black appears at the end of a certain green walk? But that s abominable!” She would not have understood, and she would have replied: “What ault is there of mine in a matter in which I have no power and of which I know othing?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.14#It turned out that the love which presented itself was exactly suited to he state of her soul. It was a sort of admiration at a distance, a mute ontemplation, the deification of a stranger. It was the apparition of youth to outh, the dream of nights become a reality yet remaining a dream, the onged-for phantom realized and made flesh at last, but having as yet, neither ame, nor fault, nor spot, nor exigence, nor defect; in a word, the distant over who lingered in the ideal, a chimæra with a form. Any nearer and more alpable meeting would have alarmed Cosette at this first stage, when she was till half immersed in the exaggerated mists of the cloister. She had all the ears of children and all the fears of nuns combined. The spirit of the convent, ith which she had been permeated for the space of five years, was still in the rocess of slow evaporation from her person, and made everything tremble around er. In this situation he was not a lover, he was not even an admirer, he was a ision. She set herself to adoring Marius as something charming, luminous, and mpossible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.15#As extreme innocence borders on extreme coquetry, she smiled at him with ll frankness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.16#Every day, she looked forward to the hour for their walk with impatience, he found Marius there, she felt herself unspeakably happy, and thought in all incerity that she was expressing her whole thought when she said to Jean aljean:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.17#“What a delicious garden that Luxembourg is!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.18#Marius and Cosette were in the dark as to one another. They did not ddress each other, they did not salute each other, they did not know each ther; they saw each other; and like stars of heaven which are separated by illions of leagues, they lived by gazing at each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.6.19#It was thus that Cosette gradually became a woman and developed, beautiful nd loving, with a consciousness of her beauty, and in ignorance of her love. he was a coquette to boot through her ignorance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.head#CHAPTER VII—TO ONE SADNESS OPPOSE A SADNESS AND A HALF
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.1#All situations have their instincts. Old and eternal Mother Nature warned ean Valjean in a dim way of the presence of Marius. Jean Valjean shuddered to he very bottom of his soul. Jean Valjean saw nothing, knew nothing, and yet he canned with obstinate attention, the darkness in which he walked, as though he elt on one side of him something in process of construction, and on the other, omething which was crumbling away. Marius, also warned, and, in accordance with he deep law of God, by that same Mother Nature, did all he could to keep out of ight of “the father.” Nevertheless, it came to pass that Jean Valjean sometimes spied him. Marius’ manners were no longer in the least natural. He exhibited mbiguous prudence and awkward daring. He no longer came quite close to them as ormerly. He seated himself at a distance and pretended to be reading; why did e pretend that? Formerly he had come in his old coat, now he wore his new one very day; Jean Valjean was not sure that he did not have his hair curled, his yes were very queer, he wore gloves; in short, Jean Valjean cordially detested his young man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.2#Cosette allowed nothing to be divined. Without knowing just what was the atter with her she was convinced that there was something in it, and that it ust be concealed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.3#There was a coincidence between the taste for the toilet which had recently ome to Cosette, and the habit of new clothes developed by that stranger which as very repugnant to Jean Valjean. It might be accidental, no doubt, certainly, ut it was a menacing accident.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.4#He never opened his mouth to Cosette about this stranger. One day, however, e could not refrain from so doing, and, with that vague despair which suddenly asts the lead into the depths of its despair, he said to her: “What a very edantic air that young man has!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.5#Cosette, but a year before only an indifferent little girl, would have eplied: “Why, no, he is charming.” Ten years later, with the love of Marius in er heart, she would have answered: “A pedant, and insufferable to the sight! ou are right!”—At the moment in life and the heart which she had then attained, he contented herself with replying, with supreme calmness: “That young an!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.6#As though she now beheld him for the first time in her life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.7#“How stupid I am!” thought Jean Valjean. “She had not noticed him. It is I ho have pointed him out to her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.8#Oh, simplicity of the old! oh, the depth of children!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.9#It is one of the laws of those fresh years of suffering and trouble, of hose vivacious conflicts between a first love and the first obstacles, that the oung girl does not allow herself to be caught in any trap whatever, and that he young man falls into every one. Jean Valjean had instituted an undeclared ar against Marius, which Marius, with the sublime stupidity of his passion and is age, did not divine. Jean Valjean laid a host of ambushes for him; he hanged his hour, he changed his bench, he forgot his handkerchief, he came lone to the Luxembourg; Marius dashed headlong into all these snares; and to ll the interrogation marks planted by Jean Valjean in his pathway, he ngenuously answered “yes.” But Cosette remained immured in her apparent nconcern and in her imperturbable tranquillity, so that Jean Valjean arrived at he following conclusion: “That ninny is madly in love with Cosette, but Cosette oes not even know that he exists.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.10#Nonetheless did he bear in his heart a mournful tremor. The minute when osette would love might strike at any moment. Does not everything begin with ndifference?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.11#Only once did Cosette make a mistake and alarm him. He rose from his seat o depart, after a stay of three hours, and she said: “What, already?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.12#Jean Valjean had not discontinued his trips to the Luxembourg, as he did ot wish to do anything out of the way, and as, above all things, he feared to rouse Cosette; but during the hours which were so sweet to the lovers, while osette was sending her smile to the intoxicated Marius, who perceived nothing lse now, and who now saw nothing in all the world but an adored and radiant ace, Jean Valjean was fixing on Marius flashing and terrible eyes. He, who had inally come to believe himself incapable of a malevolent feeling, experienced oments when Marius was present, in which he thought he was becoming savage and erocious once more, and he felt the old depths of his soul, which had formerly ontained so much wrath, opening once more and rising up against that young man. t almost seemed to him that unknown craters were forming in his bosom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.13#What! he was there, that creature! What was he there for? He came creeping bout, smelling out, examining, trying! He came, saying: “Hey! Why not?” He came o prowl about his, Jean Valjean’s, life! to prowl about his happiness, with the urpose of seizing it and bearing it away!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.14#Jean Valjean added: “Yes, that’s it! What is he in search of? An dventure! What does he want? A love affair! A love affair! And I? What! I have een first, the most wretched of men, and then the most unhappy, and I have raversed sixty years of life on my knees, I have suffered everything that man an suffer, I have grown old without having been young, I have lived without a amily, without relatives, without friends, without life, without children, I ave left my blood on every stone, on every bramble, on every mile-post, along very wall, I have been gentle, though others have been hard to me, and kind, lthough others have been malicious, I have become an honest man once more, in pite of everything, I have repented of the evil that I have done and have orgiven the evil that has been done to me, and at the moment when I receive my ecompense, at the moment when it is all over, at the moment when I am just ouching the goal, at the moment when I have what I desire, it is well, it is ood, I have paid, I have earned it, all this is to take flight, all this will anish, and I shall lose Cosette, and I shall lose my life, my joy, my soul, ecause it has pleased a great booby to come and lounge at the Luxembourg.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.15#Then his eyes were filled with a sad and extraordinary gleam.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.16#It was no longer a man gazing at a man; it was no longer an enemy urveying an enemy. It was a dog scanning a thief.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.17#The reader knows the rest. Marius pursued his senseless course. One day he ollowed Cosette to the Rue de l’Ouest. Another day he spoke to the porter. The orter, on his side, spoke, and said to Jean Valjean: “Monsieur, who is that urious young man who is asking for you?” On the morrow Jean Valjean bestowed on arius that glance which Marius at last perceived. A week later, Jean Valjean ad taken his departure. He swore to himself that he would never again set foot ither in the Luxembourg or in the Rue de l’Ouest. He returned to the Rue lumet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.18#Cosette did not complain, she said nothing, she asked no questions, she id not seek to learn his reasons; she had already reached the point where she as afraid of being divined, and of betraying herself. Jean Valjean had no xperience of these miseries, the only miseries which are charming and the only nes with which he was not acquainted; the consequence was that he did not nderstand the grave significance of Cosette’s silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.19#He merely noticed that she had grown sad, and he grew gloomy. On his side nd on hers, inexperience had joined issue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.20#Once he made a trial. He asked Cosette:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.21#“Would you like to come to the Luxembourg?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.22#A ray illuminated Cosette’s pale face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.23#“Yes,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.24#They went thither. Three months had elapsed. Marius no longer went there. arius was not there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.25#On the following day, Jean Valjean asked Cosette again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.26#“Would you like to come to the Luxembourg?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.27#She replied, sadly and gently:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.28#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.29#Jean Valjean was hurt by this sadness, and heart-broken at this entleness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.30#What was going on in that mind which was so young and yet already so mpenetrable? What was on its way there within? What was taking place in osette’s soul? Sometimes, instead of going to bed, Jean Valjean remained seated n his pallet, with his head in his hands, and he passed whole nights asking imself: “What has Cosette in her mind?” and in thinking of the things that she ight be thinking about.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.31#Oh! at such moments, what mournful glances did he cast towards that loister, that chaste peak, that abode of angels, that inaccessible glacier of irtue! How he contemplated, with despairing ecstasy, that convent garden, full f ignored flowers and cloistered virgins, where all perfumes and all souls ount straight to heaven! How he adored that Eden forever closed against him, hence he had voluntarily and madly emerged! How he regretted his abnegation and is folly in having brought Cosette back into the world, poor hero of sacrifice, eized and hurled to the earth by his very self-devotion! How he said to imself, “What have I done?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.32#However, nothing of all this was perceptible to Cosette. No ill-temper, no arshness. His face was always serene and kind. Jean Valjean’s manners were more ender and more paternal than ever. If anything could have betrayed his lack of oy, it was his increased suavity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.33#On her side, Cosette languished. She suffered from the absence of Marius s she had rejoiced in his presence, peculiarly, without exactly being conscious f it. When Jean Valjean ceased to take her on their customary strolls, a eminine instinct murmured confusedly, at the bottom of her heart, that she must ot seem to set store on the Luxembourg garden, and that if this proved to be a atter of indifference to her, her father would take her thither once more. But ays, weeks, months, elapsed. Jean Valjean had tacitly accepted Cosette’s tacit onsent. She regretted it. It was too late. So Marius had disappeared; all was ver. The day on which she returned to the Luxembourg, Marius was no longer here. What was to be done? Should she ever find him again? She felt an anguish t her heart, which nothing relieved, and which augmented every day; she no onger knew whether it was winter or summer, whether it was raining or shining, hether the birds were singing, whether it was the season for dahlias or aisies, whether the Luxembourg was more charming than the Tuileries, whether he linen which the laundress brought home was starched too much or not enough, hether Toussaint had done “her marketing” well or ill; and she remained ejected, absorbed, attentive to but a single thought, her eyes vague and taring as when one gazes by night at a black and fathomless spot where an pparition has vanished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.34#However, she did not allow Jean Valjean to perceive anything of this, xcept her pallor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.35#She still wore her sweet face for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.36#This pallor sufficed but too thoroughly to trouble Jean Valjean. Sometimes e asked her:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.37#“What is the matter with you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.38#She replied: “There is nothing the matter with me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.39#And after a silence, when she divined that he was sad also, she would dd:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.40#“And you, father—is there anything wrong with you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.41#“With me? Nothing,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.7.42#These two beings who had loved each other so exclusively, and with so ouching an affection, and who had lived so long for each other now suffered ide by side, each on the other’s account; without acknowledging it to each ther, without anger towards each other, and with a smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE CHAIN-GANG
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.1#Jean Valjean was the more unhappy of the two. Youth, even in its sorrows, lways possesses its own peculiar radiance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.2#At times, Jean Valjean suffered so greatly that he became puerile. It is he property of grief to cause the childish side of man to reappear. He had an nconquerable conviction that Cosette was escaping from him. He would have liked o resist, to retain her, to arouse her enthusiasm by some external and rilliant matter. These ideas, puerile, as we have just said, and at the same ime senile, conveyed to him, by their very childishness, a tolerably just otion of the influence of gold lace on the imaginations of young girls. He once hanced to see a general on horseback, in full uniform, pass along the street, omte Coutard, the commandant of Paris. He envied that gilded man; what appiness it would be, he said to himself, if he could put on that suit which as an incontestable thing; and if Cosette could behold him thus, she would be azzled, and when he had Cosette on his arm and passed the gates of the uileries, the guard would present arms to him, and that would suffice for osette, and would dispel her idea of looking at young men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.3#An unforeseen shock was added to these sad reflections.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.4#In the isolated life which they led, and since they had come to dwell in he Rue Plumet, they had contracted one habit. They sometimes took a pleasure rip to see the sun rise, a mild species of enjoyment which befits those who are ntering life and those who are quitting it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.5#For those who love solitude, a walk in the early morning is equivalent to a troll by night, with the cheerfulness of nature added. The streets are deserted nd the birds are singing. Cosette, a bird herself, liked to rise early. These atutinal excursions were planned on the preceding evening. He proposed, and she greed. It was arranged like a plot, they set out before daybreak, and these rips were so many small delights for Cosette. These innocent eccentricities lease young people.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.6#Jean Valjean’s inclination led him, as we have seen, to the least requented spots, to solitary nooks, to forgotten places. There then existed, in he vicinity of the barriers of Paris, a sort of poor meadows, which were almost onfounded with the city, where grew in summer sickly grain, and which, in utumn, after the harvest had been gathered, presented the appearance, not of aving been reaped, but peeled. Jean Valjean loved to haunt these fields. osette was not bored there. It meant solitude to him and liberty to her. There, he became a little girl once more, she could run and almost play; she took off er hat, laid it on Jean Valjean’s knees, and gathered bunches of flowers. She azed at the butterflies on the flowers, but did not catch them; gentleness and enderness are born with love, and the young girl who cherishes within her reast a trembling and fragile ideal has mercy on the wing of a butterfly. She ove garlands of poppies, which she placed on her head, and which, crossed and enetrated with sunlight, glowing until they flamed, formed for her rosy face a rown of burning embers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.7#Even after their life had grown sad, they kept up their custom of early trolls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.8#One morning in October, therefore, tempted by the serene perfection of the utumn of 1831, they set out, and found themselves at break of day near the arrière du Maine. It was not dawn, it was daybreak; a delightful and stern oment. A few constellations here and there in the deep, pale azure, the earth ll black, the heavens all white, a quiver amid the blades of grass, everywhere he mysterious chill of twilight. A lark, which seemed mingled with the stars, as carolling at a prodigious height, and one would have declared that that hymn f pettiness calmed immensity. In the East, the Val-de-Grâce projected its dark ass on the clear horizon with the sharpness of steel; Venus dazzlingly rilliant was rising behind that dome and had the air of a soul making its scape from a gloomy edifice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.9#All was peace and silence; there was no one on the road; a few stray aborers, of whom they caught barely a glimpse, were on their way to their work long the side-paths.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.10#Jean Valjean was sitting in a cross-walk on some planks deposited at the ate of a timber-yard. His face was turned towards the highway, his back towards he light; he had forgotten the sun which was on the point of rising; he had unk into one of those profound absorptions in which the mind becomes oncentrated, which imprison even the eye, and which are equivalent to four alls. There are meditations which may be called vertical; when one is at the ottom of them, time is required to return to earth. Jean Valjean had plunged nto one of these reveries. He was thinking of Cosette, of the happiness that as possible if nothing came between him and her, of the light with which she illed his life, a light which was but the emanation of her soul. He was almost appy in his reverie. Cosette, who was standing beside him, was gazing at the louds as they turned rosy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.11#All at once Cosette exclaimed: “Father, I should think some one was coming onder.” Jean Valjean raised his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.12#Cosette was right. The causeway which leads to the ancient Barrière du aine is a prolongation, as the reader knows, of the Rue de Sèvres, and is cut t right angles by the inner boulevard. At the elbow of the causeway and the oulevard, at the spot where it branches, they heard a noise which it was ifficult to account for at that hour, and a sort of confused pile made its ppearance. Some shapeless thing which was coming from the boulevard was turning nto the road.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.13#It grew larger, it seemed to move in an orderly manner, though it was ristling and quivering; it seemed to be a vehicle, but its load could not be istinctly made out. There were horses, wheels, shouts; whips were cracking. By egrees the outlines became fixed, although bathed in shadows. It was a vehicle, n fact, which had just turned from the boulevard into the highway, and which as directing its course towards the barrier near which sat Jean Valjean; a econd, of the same aspect, followed, then a third, then a fourth; seven hariots made their appearance in succession, the heads of the horses touching he rear of the wagon in front. Figures were moving on these vehicles, flashes ere visible through the dusk as though there were naked swords there, a lanking became audible which resembled the rattling of chains, and as this omething advanced, the sound of voices waxed louder, and it turned into a errible thing such as emerges from the cave of dreams.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.14#As it drew nearer, it assumed a form, and was outlined behind the trees ith the pallid hue of an apparition; the mass grew white; the day, which was lowly dawning, cast a wan light on this swarming heap which was at once both epulchral and living, the heads of the figures turned into the faces of orpses, and this is what it proved to be:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.15#Seven wagons were driving in a file along the road. The first six were ingularly constructed. They resembled coopers’ drays; they consisted of long adders placed on two wheels and forming barrows at their rear extremities. Each ray, or rather let us say, each ladder, was attached to four horses harnessed andem. On these ladders strange clusters of men were being drawn. In the faint ight, these men were to be divined rather than seen. Twenty-four on each ehicle, twelve on a side, back to back, facing the passers-by, their legs angling in the air,—this was the manner in which these men were travelling, and ehind their backs they had something which clanked, and which was a chain, and n their necks something which shone, and which was an iron collar. Each man had is collar, but the chain was for all; so that if these four and twenty men had ccasion to alight from the dray and walk, they were seized with a sort of nexorable unity, and were obliged to wind over the ground with the chain for a ackbone, somewhat after the fashion of millepeds. In the back and front of each ehicle, two men armed with muskets stood erect, each holding one end of the hain under his foot. The iron necklets were square. The seventh vehicle, a huge ack-sided baggage wagon, without a hood, had four wheels and six horses, and arried a sonorous pile of iron boilers, cast-iron pots, braziers, and chains, mong which were mingled several men who were pinioned and stretched at full ength, and who seemed to be ill. This wagon, all lattice-work, was garnished ith dilapidated hurdles which appeared to have served for former punishments. hese vehicles kept to the middle of the road. On each side marched a double edge of guards of infamous aspect, wearing three-cornered hats, like the oldiers under the Directory, shabby, covered with spots and holes, muffled in niforms of veterans and the trousers of undertakers’ men, half gray, half blue, hich were almost hanging in rags, with red epaulets, yellow shoulder belts, hort sabres, muskets, and cudgels; they were a species of soldier-blackguards. hese myrmidons seemed composed of the abjectness of the beggar and the uthority of the executioner. The one who appeared to be their chief held a ostilion’s whip in his hand. All these details, blurred by the dimness of dawn, ecame more and more clearly outlined as the light increased. At the head and in he rear of the convoy rode mounted gendarmes, serious and with sword in ist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.16#This procession was so long that when the first vehicle reached the arrier, the last was barely debauching from the boulevard. A throng, sprung, it s impossible to say whence, and formed in a twinkling, as is frequently the ase in Paris, pressed forward from both sides of the road and looked on. In the eighboring lanes the shouts of people calling to each other and the wooden hoes of market-gardeners hastening up to gaze were audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.17#The men massed upon the drays allowed themselves to be jolted along in ilence. They were livid with the chill of morning. They all wore linen rousers, and their bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes. The rest of their ostume was a fantasy of wretchedness. Their accoutrements were horribly ncongruous; nothing is more funereal than the harlequin in rags. Battered felt ats, tarpaulin caps, hideous woollen nightcaps, and, side by side with a short louse, a black coat broken at the elbow; many wore women’s headgear, others had askets on their heads; hairy breasts were visible, and through the rent in heir garments tattooed designs could be descried; temples of Love, flaming earts, Cupids; eruptions and unhealthy red blotches could also be seen. Two or hree had a straw rope attached to the cross-bar of the dray, and suspended nder them like a stirrup, which supported their feet. One of them held in his and and raised to his mouth something which had the appearance of a black stone nd which he seemed to be gnawing; it was bread which he was eating. There were o eyes there which were not either dry, dulled, or flaming with an evil light. he escort troop cursed, the men in chains did not utter a syllable; from time o time the sound of a blow became audible as the cudgels descended on houlder-blades or skulls; some of these men were yawning; their rags were errible; their feet hung down, their shoulders oscillated, their heads clashed ogether, their fetters clanked, their eyes glared ferociously, their fists lenched or fell open inertly like the hands of corpses; in the rear of the onvoy ran a band of children screaming with laughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.18#This file of vehicles, whatever its nature was, was mournful. It was vident that to-morrow, that an hour hence, a pouring rain might descend, that t might be followed by another and another, and that their dilapidated garments ould be drenched, that once soaked, these men would not get dry again, that nce chilled, they would not again get warm, that their linen trousers would be lued to their bones by the downpour, that the water would fill their shoes, hat no lashes from the whips would be able to prevent their jaws from hattering, that the chain would continue to bind them by the neck, that their egs would continue to dangle, and it was impossible not to shudder at the sight f these human beings thus bound and passive beneath the cold clouds of autumn, nd delivered over to the rain, to the blast, to all the furies of the air, like rees and stones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.19#Blows from the cudgel were not omitted even in the case of the sick men, ho lay there knotted with ropes and motionless on the seventh wagon, and who ppeared to have been tossed there like sacks filled with misery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.20#Suddenly, the sun made its appearance; the immense light of the Orient urst forth, and one would have said that it had set fire to all those ferocious eads. Their tongues were unloosed; a conflagration of grins, oaths, and songs xploded. The broad horizontal sheet of light severed the file in two parts, lluminating heads and bodies, leaving feet and wheels in the obscurity. houghts made their appearance on these faces; it was a terrible moment; visible emons with their masks removed, fierce souls laid bare. Though lighted up, this ild throng remained in gloom. Some, who were gay, had in their mouths quills hrough which they blew vermin over the crowd, picking out the women; the dawn ccentuated these lamentable profiles with the blackness of its shadows; there as not one of these creatures who was not deformed by reason of wretchedness; nd the whole was so monstrous that one would have said that the sun’s rilliancy had been changed into the glare of the lightning. The wagon-load hich headed the line had struck up a song, and were shouting at the top of heir voices with a haggard joviality, a pot-pourri by Desaugiers, then famous, alled _The Vestal_; the trees shivered mournfully; in the cross-lanes, ountenances of bourgeois listened in an idiotic delight to these coarse strains roned by spectres.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.21#All sorts of distress met in this procession as in chaos; here were to be ound the facial angles of every sort of beast, old men, youths, bald heads, ray beards, cynical monstrosities, sour resignation, savage grins, senseless ttitudes, snouts surmounted by caps, heads like those of young girls with orkscrew curls on the temples, infantile visages, and by reason of that, orrible thin skeleton faces, to which death alone was lacking. On the first art was a negro, who had been a slave, in all probability, and who could make a omparison of his chains. The frightful leveller from below, shame, had passed ver these brows; at that degree of abasement, the last transformations were uffered by all in their extremest depths, and ignorance, converted into ulness, was the equal of intelligence converted into despair. There was no hoice possible between these men who appeared to the eye as the flower of the ud. It was evident that the person who had had the ordering of that unclean rocession had not classified them. These beings had been fettered and coupled ell-mell, in alphabetical disorder, probably, and loaded hap-hazard on those arts. Nevertheless, horrors, when grouped together, always end by evolving a esult; all additions of wretched men give a sum total, each chain exhaled a ommon soul, and each dray-load had its own physiognomy. By the side of the one here they were singing, there was one where they were howling; a third where hey were begging; one could be seen in which they were gnashing their teeth; nother load menaced the spectators, another blasphemed God; the last was as ilent as the tomb. Dante would have thought that he beheld his seven circles of ell on the march. The march of the damned to their tortures, performed in inister wise, not on the formidable and flaming chariot of the Apocalypse, but, hat was more mournful than that, on the gibbet cart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.22#One of the guards, who had a hook on the end of his cudgel, made a retence from time to time, of stirring up this mass of human filth. An old oman in the crowd pointed them out to her little boy five years old, and said o him: “Rascal, let that be a warning to you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.23#As the songs and blasphemies increased, the man who appeared to be the aptain of the escort cracked his whip, and at that signal a fearful dull and lind flogging, which produced the sound of hail, fell upon the seven ray-loads; many roared and foamed at the mouth; which redoubled the delight of he street urchins who had hastened up, a swarm of flies on these wounds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.24#Jean Valjean’s eyes had assumed a frightful expression. They were no onger eyes; they were those deep and glassy objects which replace the glance in he case of certain wretched men, which seem unconscious of reality, and in hich flames the reflection of terrors and of catastrophes. He was not looking t a spectacle, he was seeing a vision. He tried to rise, to flee, to make his scape; he could not move his feet. Sometimes, the things that you see seize pon you and hold you fast. He remained nailed to the spot, petrified, stupid, sking himself, athwart confused and inexpressible anguish, what this sepulchral ersecution signified, and whence had come that pandemonium which was pursuing im. All at once, he raised his hand to his brow, a gesture habitual to those hose memory suddenly returns; he remembered that this was, in fact, the usual tinerary, that it was customary to make this detour in order to avoid all ossibility of encountering royalty on the road to Fontainebleau, and that, five nd thirty years before, he had himself passed through that barrier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.25#Cosette was no less terrified, but in a different way. She did not nderstand; what she beheld did not seem to her to be possible; at length she ried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.26#“Father! What are those men in those carts?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.27#Jean Valjean replied: “Convicts.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.28#“Whither are they going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.29#“To the galleys.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.30#At that moment, the cudgelling, multiplied by a hundred hands, became ealous, blows with the flat of the sword were mingled with it, it was a perfect torm of whips and clubs; the convicts bent before it, a hideous obedience was voked by the torture, and all held their peace, darting glances like chained olves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.31#Cosette trembled in every limb; she resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.32#“Father, are they still men?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.33#“Sometimes,” answered the unhappy man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.34#It was the chain-gang, in fact, which had set out before daybreak from icêtre, and had taken the road to Mans in order to avoid Fontainebleau, where he King then was. This caused the horrible journey to last three or four days onger; but torture may surely be prolonged with the object of sparing the royal ersonage a sight of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.35#Jean Valjean returned home utterly overwhelmed. Such encounters are hocks, and the memory that they leave behind them resembles a thorough shaking p.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.36#Nevertheless, Jean Valjean did not observe that, on his way back to the ue de Babylone with Cosette, the latter was plying him with other questions on he subject of what they had just seen; perhaps he was too much absorbed in his wn dejection to notice her words and reply to them. But when Cosette was eaving him in the evening, to betake herself to bed, he heard her say in a low oice, and as though talking to herself: “It seems to me, that if I were to find ne of those men in my pathway, oh, my God, I should die merely from the sight f him close at hand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.37#Fortunately, chance ordained that on the morrow of that tragic day, there as some official solemnity apropos of I know not what,—fêtes in Paris, a review n the Champ de Mars, jousts on the Seine, theatrical performances in the hamps-Élysées, fireworks at the Arc de l‘Étoile, illuminations everywhere. Jean aljean did violence to his habits, and took Cosette to see these rejoicings, or the purpose of diverting her from the memory of the day before, and of ffacing, beneath the smiling tumult of all Paris, the abominable thing which ad passed before her. The review with which the festival was spiced made the resence of uniforms perfectly natural; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of a ational guard with the vague inward feeling of a man who is betaking himself to helter. However, this trip seemed to attain its object. Cosette, who made it er law to please her father, and to whom, moreover, all spectacles were a ovelty, accepted this diversion with the light and easy good grace of youth, nd did not pout too disdainfully at that flutter of enjoyment called a public ête; so that Jean Valjean was able to believe that he had succeeded, and that o trace of that hideous vision remained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.3.8.38#Some days later, one morning, when the sun was shining brightly, and they ere both on the steps leading to the garden, another infraction of the rules hich Jean Valjean seemed to have imposed upon himself, and to the custom of emaining in her chamber which melancholy had caused Cosette to adopt, Cosette, n a wrapper, was standing erect in that negligent attire of early morning which nvelops young girls in an adorable way and which produces the effect of a cloud rawn over a star; and, with her head bathed in light, rosy after a good sleep, ubmitting to the gentle glances of the tender old man, she was picking a daisy o pieces. Cosette did not know the delightful legend, _I love a little, assionately, etc_.—who was there who could have taught her? She was handling he flower instinctively, innocently, without a suspicion that to pluck a daisy part is to do the same by a heart. If there were a fourth, and smiling Grace alled Melancholy, she would have worn the air of that Grace. Jean Valjean was ascinated by the contemplation of those tiny fingers on that flower, and orgetful of everything in the radiance emitted by that child. A red-breast was arbling in the thicket, on one side. White cloudlets floated across the sky, so ayly, that one would have said that they had just been set at liberty. Cosette ent on attentively tearing the leaves from her flower; she seemed to be hinking about something; but whatever it was, it must be something charming; ll at once she turned her head over her shoulder with the delicate languor of a wan, and said to Jean Valjean: “Father, what are the galleys like?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.head#BOOK FOURTH—SUCCOR FROM BELOW MAY TURN OUT TO BE SUCCOR FROM ON IGH
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.head#CHAPTER I—A WOUND WITHOUT, HEALING WITHIN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.1#Thus their life clouded over by degrees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.2#But one diversion, which had formerly been a happiness, remained to them, hich was to carry bread to those who were hungry, and clothing to those who ere cold. Cosette often accompanied Jean Valjean on these visits to the poor, n which they recovered some remnants of their former free intercourse; and ometimes, when the day had been a good one, and they had assisted many in istress, and cheered and warmed many little children, Cosette was rather merry n the evening. It was at this epoch that they paid their visit to the Jondrette en.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.3#On the day following that visit, Jean Valjean made his appearance in the avilion in the morning, calm as was his wont, but with a large wound on his eft arm which was much inflamed, and very angry, which resembled a burn, and hich he explained in some way or other. This wound resulted in his being etained in the house for a month with fever. He would not call in a doctor. hen Cosette urged him, “Call the dog-doctor,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.4#Cosette dressed the wound morning and evening with so divine an air and uch angelic happiness at being of use to him, that Jean Valjean felt all his ormer joy returning, his fears and anxieties dissipating, and he gazed at osette, saying: “Oh! what a kindly wound! Oh! what a good misfortune!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.5#Cosette on perceiving that her father was ill, had deserted the pavilion nd again taken a fancy to the little lodging and the back courtyard. She passed early all her days beside Jean Valjean and read to him the books which he esired. Generally they were books of travel. Jean Valjean was undergoing a new irth; his happiness was reviving in these ineffable rays; the Luxembourg, the rowling young stranger, Cosette’s coldness,—all these clouds upon his soul were rowing dim. He had reached the point where he said to himself: “I imagined all hat. I am an old fool.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.6#His happiness was so great that the horrible discovery of the Thénardiers ade in the Jondrette hovel, unexpected as it was, had, after a fashion, glided ver him unnoticed. He had succeeded in making his escape; all trace of him was ost—what more did he care for! he only thought of those wretched beings to pity hem. “Here they are in prison, and henceforth they will be incapacitated for oing any harm,” he thought, “but what a lamentable family in distress!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.7#As for the hideous vision of the Barrière du Maine, Cosette had not eferred to it again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.8#Sister Sainte-Mechtilde had taught Cosette music in the convent; Cosette ad the voice of a linnet with a soul, and sometimes, in the evening, in the ounded man’s humble abode, she warbled melancholy songs which delighted Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.9#Spring came; the garden was so delightful at that season of the year, that ean Valjean said to Cosette:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.10#“You never go there; I want you to stroll in it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.11#“As you like, father,” said Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.12#And for the sake of obeying her father, she resumed her walks in the arden, generally alone, for, as we have mentioned, Jean Valjean, who was robably afraid of being seen through the fence, hardly ever went there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.13#Jean Valjean’s wound had created a diversion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.14#When Cosette saw that her father was suffering less, that he was onvalescing, and that he appeared to be happy, she experienced a contentment hich she did not even perceive, so gently and naturally had it come. Then, it as in the month of March, the days were growing longer, the winter was eparting, the winter always bears away with it a portion of our sadness; then ame April, that daybreak of summer, fresh as dawn always is, gay like every hildhood; a little inclined to weep at times like the new-born being that it s. In that month, nature has charming gleams which pass from the sky, from the rees, from the meadows and the flowers into the heart of man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.15#Cosette was still too young to escape the penetrating influence of that pril joy which bore so strong a resemblance to herself. Insensibly, and without er suspecting the fact, the blackness departed from her spirit. In spring, sad ouls grow light, as light falls into cellars at midday. Cosette was no longer ad. However, though this was so, she did not account for it to herself. In the orning, about ten o’clock, after breakfast, when she had succeeded in enticing er father into the garden for a quarter of an hour, and when she was pacing up nd down in the sunlight in front of the steps, supporting his left arm for him, he did not perceive that she laughed every moment and that she was happy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.16#Jean Valjean, intoxicated, beheld her growing fresh and rosy once ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.17#“Oh! What a good wound!” he repeated in a whisper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.18#And he felt grateful to the Thénardiers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.19#His wound once healed, he resumed his solitary twilight strolls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.1.20#It is a mistake to suppose that a person can stroll alone in that fashion n the uninhabited regions of Paris without meeting with some adventure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.head#CHAPTER II—MOTHER PLUTARQUE FINDS NO DIFFICULTY IN EXPLAINING A HENOMENON
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.1#One evening, little Gavroche had had nothing to eat; he remembered that he ad not dined on the preceding day either; this was becoming tiresome. He esolved to make an effort to secure some supper. He strolled out beyond the alpêtrière into deserted regions; that is where windfalls are to be found; here there is no one, one always finds something. He reached a settlement which ppeared to him to be the village of Austerlitz.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.2#In one of his preceding lounges he had noticed there an old garden haunted y an old man and an old woman, and in that garden, a passable apple-tree. eside the apple-tree stood a sort of fruit-house, which was not securely astened, and where one might contrive to get an apple. One apple is a supper; ne apple is life. That which was Adam’s ruin might prove Gavroche’s salvation. he garden abutted on a solitary, unpaved lane, bordered with brushwood while waiting the arrival of houses; the garden was separated from it by a hedge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.3#Gavroche directed his steps towards this garden; he found the lane, he ecognized the apple-tree, he verified the fruit-house, he examined the hedge; a edge means merely one stride. The day was declining, there was not even a cat n the lane, the hour was propitious. Gavroche began the operation of scaling he hedge, then suddenly paused. Some one was talking in the garden. Gavroche eeped through one of the breaks in the hedge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.4#A couple of paces distant, at the foot of the hedge on the other side, xactly at the point where the gap which he was meditating would have been made, here was a sort of recumbent stone which formed a bench, and on this bench was eated the old man of the garden, while the old woman was standing in front of im. The old woman was grumbling. Gavroche, who was not very discreet, istened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.5#“Monsieur Mabeuf!” said the old woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.6#“Mabeuf!” thought Gavroche, “that name is a perfect farce.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.7#The old man who was thus addressed, did not stir. The old woman epeated:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.8#“Monsieur Mabeuf!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.9#The old man, without raising his eyes from the ground, made up his mind to nswer:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.10#“What is it, Mother Plutarque?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.11#“Mother Plutarque!” thought Gavroche, “another farcical name.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.12#Mother Plutarque began again, and the old man was forced to accept the onversation:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.13#“The landlord is not pleased.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.14#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.15#“We owe three quarters rent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.16#“In three months, we shall owe him for four quarters.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.17#“He says that he will turn you out to sleep.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.18#“I will go.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.19#“The green-grocer insists on being paid. She will no longer leave her agots. What will you warm yourself with this winter? We shall have no ood.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.20#“There is the sun.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.21#“The butcher refuses to give credit; he will not let us have any more eat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.22#“That is quite right. I do not digest meat well. It is too heavy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.23#“What shall we have for dinner?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.24#“Bread.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.25#“The baker demands a settlement, and says, ‘no money, no bread.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.26#“That is well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.27#“What will you eat?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.28#“We have apples in the apple-room.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.29#“But, Monsieur, we can’t live like that without money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.30#“I have none.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.31#The old woman went away, the old man remained alone. He fell into thought. avroche became thoughtful also. It was almost dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.32#The first result of Gavroche’s meditation was, that instead of scaling the edge, he crouched down under it. The branches stood apart a little at the foot f the thicket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.33#“Come,” exclaimed Gavroche mentally, “here’s a nook!” and he curled up in t. His back was almost in contact with Father Mabeuf’s bench. He could hear the ctogenarian breathe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.34#Then, by way of dinner, he tried to sleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.35#It was a cat-nap, with one eye open. While he dozed, Gavroche kept on the atch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.36#The twilight pallor of the sky blanched the earth, and the lane formed a ivid line between two rows of dark bushes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.37#All at once, in this whitish band, two figures made their appearance. One as in front, the other some distance in the rear.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.38#“There come two creatures,” muttered Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.39#The first form seemed to be some elderly bourgeois, who was bent and houghtful, dressed more than plainly, and who was walking slowly because of his ge, and strolling about in the open evening air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.40#The second was straight, firm, slender. It regulated its pace by that of he first; but in the voluntary slowness of its gait, suppleness and agility ere discernible. This figure had also something fierce and disquieting about t, the whole shape was that of what was then called _an elegant_; the hat was f good shape, the coat black, well cut, probably of fine cloth, and well fitted n at the waist. The head was held erect with a sort of robust grace, and eneath the hat the pale profile of a young man could be made out in the dim ight. The profile had a rose in its mouth. This second form was well known to avroche; it was Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.41#He could have told nothing about the other, except that he was a espectable old man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.42#Gavroche immediately began to take observations.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.43#One of these two pedestrians evidently had a project connected with the ther. Gavroche was well placed to watch the course of events. The bedroom had urned into a hiding-place at a very opportune moment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.44#Montparnasse on the hunt at such an hour, in such a place, betokened omething threatening. Gavroche felt his gamin’s heart moved with compassion for he old man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.45#What was he to do? Interfere? One weakness coming to the aid of another! t would be merely a laughing matter for Montparnasse. Gavroche did not shut his yes to the fact that the old man, in the first place, and the child in the econd, would make but two mouthfuls for that redoubtable ruffian eighteen years f age.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.46#While Gavroche was deliberating, the attack took place, abruptly and ideously. The attack of the tiger on the wild ass, the attack of the spider on he fly. Montparnasse suddenly tossed away his rose, bounded upon the old man, eized him by the collar, grasped and clung to him, and Gavroche with difficulty estrained a scream. A moment later one of these men was underneath the other, roaning, struggling, with a knee of marble upon his breast. Only, it was not ust what Gavroche had expected. The one who lay on the earth was Montparnasse; he one who was on top was the old man. All this took place a few paces distant rom Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.47#The old man had received the shock, had returned it, and that in such a errible fashion, that in a twinkling, the assailant and the assailed had xchanged rôles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.48#“Here’s a hearty veteran!” thought Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.49#He could not refrain from clapping his hands. But it was applause wasted. t did not reach the combatants, absorbed and deafened as they were, each by the ther, as their breath mingled in the struggle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.50#Silence ensued. Montparnasse ceased his struggles. Gavroche indulged in his aside: “Can he be dead!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.51#The goodman had not uttered a word, nor given vent to a cry. He rose to is feet, and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.52#“Get up.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.53#Montparnasse rose, but the goodman held him fast. Montparnasse’s attitude as the humiliated and furious attitude of the wolf who has been caught by a heep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.54#Gavroche looked on and listened, making an effort to reinforce his eyes ith his ears. He was enjoying himself immensely.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.55#He was repaid for his conscientious anxiety in the character of a pectator. He was able to catch on the wing a dialogue which borrowed from the arkness an indescribably tragic accent. The goodman questioned, Montparnasse eplied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.56#“How old are you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.57#“Nineteen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.58#“You are strong and healthy. Why do you not work?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.59#“It bores me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.60#“What is your trade?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.61#“An idler.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.62#“Speak seriously. Can anything be done for you? What would you like to e?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.63#“A thief.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.64#A pause ensued. The old man seemed absorbed in profound thought. He stood otionless, and did not relax his hold on Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.65#Every moment the vigorous and agile young ruffian indulged in the witchings of a wild beast caught in a snare. He gave a jerk, tried a crook of he knee, twisted his limbs desperately, and made efforts to escape.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.66#The old man did not appear to notice it, and held both his arms with one and, with the sovereign indifference of absolute force.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.67#The old man’s reverie lasted for some time, then, looking steadily at ontparnasse, he addressed to him in a gentle voice, in the midst of the arkness where they stood, a solemn harangue, of which Gavroche did not lose a ingle syllable:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.68#“My child, you are entering, through indolence, on one of the most aborious of lives. Ah! You declare yourself to be an idler! prepare to toil. here is a certain formidable machine, have you seen it? It is the rolling-mill. ou must be on your guard against it, it is crafty and ferocious; if it catches old of the skirt of your coat, you will be drawn in bodily. That machine is aziness. Stop while there is yet time, and save yourself! Otherwise, it is all ver with you; in a short time you will be among the gearing. Once entangled, ope for nothing more. Toil, lazybones! there is no more repose for you! The ron hand of implacable toil has seized you. You do not wish to earn your iving, to have a task, to fulfil a duty! It bores you to be like other men? ell! You will be different. Labor is the law; he who rejects it will find ennui is torment. You do not wish to be a workingman, you will be a slave. Toil lets o of you on one side only to grasp you again on the other. You do not desire to e its friend, you shall be its negro slave. Ah! You would have none of the onest weariness of men, you shall have the sweat of the damned. Where others ing, you will rattle in your throat. You will see afar off, from below, other en at work; it will seem to you that they are resting. The laborer, the arvester, the sailor, the blacksmith, will appear to you in glory like the lessed spirits in paradise. What radiance surrounds the forge! To guide the lough, to bind the sheaves, is joy. The bark at liberty in the wind, what elight! Do you, lazy idler, delve, drag on, roll, march! Drag your halter. You re a beast of burden in the team of hell! Ah! To do nothing is your object. ell, not a week, not a day, not an hour shall you have free from oppression. ou will be able to lift nothing without anguish. Every minute that passes will ake your muscles crack. What is a feather to others will be a rock to you. The implest things will become steep acclivities. Life will become monstrous all bout you. To go, to come, to breathe, will be just so many terrible labors. our lungs will produce on you the effect of weighing a hundred pounds. Whether ou shall walk here rather than there, will become a problem that must be olved. Any one who wants to go out simply gives his door a push, and there he s in the open air. If you wish to go out, you will be obliged to pierce your all. What does every one who wants to step into the street do? He goes ownstairs; you will tear up your sheets, little by little you will make of them rope, then you will climb out of your window, and you will suspend yourself by hat thread over an abyss, and it will be night, amid storm, rain, and the urricane, and if the rope is too short, but one way of descending will remain o you, to fall. To drop hap-hazard into the gulf, from an unknown height, on hat? On what is beneath, on the unknown. Or you will crawl up a chimney-flue, t the risk of burning; or you will creep through a sewer-pipe, at the risk of rowning; I do not speak of the holes that you will be obliged to mask, of the tones which you will have to take up and replace twenty times a day, of the laster that you will have to hide in your straw pallet. A lock presents itself; he bourgeois has in his pocket a key made by a locksmith. If you wish to pass ut, you will be condemned to execute a terrible work of art; you will take a arge sou, you will cut it in two plates; with what tools? You will have to nvent them. That is your business. Then you will hollow out the interior of hese plates, taking great care of the outside, and you will make on the edges a hread, so that they can be adjusted one upon the other like a box and its over. The top and bottom thus screwed together, nothing will be suspected. To he overseers it will be only a sou; to you it will be a box. What will you put n this box? A small bit of steel. A watch-spring, in which you will have cut eeth, and which will form a saw. With this saw, as long as a pin, and concealed n a sou, you will cut the bolt of the lock, you will sever bolts, the padlock f your chain, and the bar at your window, and the fetter on your leg. This asterpiece finished, this prodigy accomplished, all these miracles of art, ddress, skill, and patience executed, what will be your recompense if it ecomes known that you are the author? The dungeon. There is your future. What recipices are idleness and pleasure! Do you know that to do nothing is a elancholy resolution? To live in idleness on the property of society! to be seless, that is to say, pernicious! This leads straight to the depth of retchedness. Woe to the man who desires to be a parasite! He will become ermin! Ah! So it does not please you to work? Ah! You have but one thought, to rink well, to eat well, to sleep well. You will drink water, you will eat black read, you will sleep on a plank with a fetter whose cold touch you will feel on our flesh all night long, riveted to your limbs. You will break those fetters, ou will flee. That is well. You will crawl on your belly through the brushwood, nd you will eat grass like the beasts of the forest. And you will be ecaptured. And then you will pass years in a dungeon, riveted to a wall, roping for your jug that you may drink, gnawing at a horrible loaf of darkness hich dogs would not touch, eating beans that the worms have eaten before you. ou will be a wood-louse in a cellar. Ah! Have pity on yourself, you miserable oung child, who were sucking at nurse less than twenty years ago, and who have, o doubt, a mother still alive! I conjure you, listen to me, I entreat you. You esire fine black cloth, varnished shoes, to have your hair curled and weet-smelling oils on your locks, to please low women, to be handsome. You will e shaven clean, and you will wear a red blouse and wooden shoes. You want rings n your fingers, you will have an iron necklet on your neck. If you glance at a oman, you will receive a blow. And you will enter there at the age of twenty. nd you will come out at fifty! You will enter young, rosy, fresh, with rilliant eyes, and all your white teeth, and your handsome, youthful hair; you ill come out broken, bent, wrinkled, toothless, horrible, with white locks! Ah! y poor child, you are on the wrong road; idleness is counselling you badly; the ardest of all work is thieving. Believe me, do not undertake that painful rofession of an idle man. It is not comfortable to become a rascal. It is less isagreeable to be an honest man. Now go, and ponder on what I have said to you. y the way, what did you want of me? My purse? Here it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.69#And the old man, releasing Montparnasse, put his purse in the latter’s and; Montparnasse weighed it for a moment, after which he allowed it to slide ently into the back pocket of his coat, with the same mechanical precaution as hough he had stolen it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.70#All this having been said and done, the goodman turned his back and ranquilly resumed his stroll.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.71#“The blockhead!” muttered Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.72#Who was this goodman? The reader has, no doubt, already divined.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.73#Montparnasse watched him with amazement, as he disappeared in the dusk. his contemplation was fatal to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.74#While the old man was walking away, Gavroche drew near.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.75#Gavroche had assured himself, with a sidelong glance, that Father Mabeuf as still sitting on his bench, probably sound asleep. Then the gamin emerged rom his thicket, and began to crawl after Montparnasse in the dark, as the atter stood there motionless. In this manner he came up to Montparnasse without eing seen or heard, gently insinuated his hand into the back pocket of that rock-coat of fine black cloth, seized the purse, withdrew his hand, and having ecourse once more to his crawling, he slipped away like an adder through the hadows. Montparnasse, who had no reason to be on his guard, and who was engaged n thought for the first time in his life, perceived nothing. When Gavroche had nce more attained the point where Father Mabeuf was, he flung the purse over he hedge, and fled as fast as his legs would carry him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.76#The purse fell on Father Mabeuf’s foot. This commotion roused him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.77#He bent over and picked up the purse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.78#He did not understand in the least, and opened it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.79#The purse had two compartments; in one of them there was some small hange; in the other lay six napoleons.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.80#M. Mabeuf, in great alarm, referred the matter to his housekeeper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.4.2.81#“That has fallen from heaven,” said Mother Plutarque.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.head#BOOK FIFTH—THE END OF WHICH DOES NOT RESEMBLE THE BEGINNING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.head#CHAPTER I—SOLITUDE AND THE BARRACKS COMBINED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.1#Cosette’s grief, which had been so poignant and lively four or five months reviously, had, without her being conscious of the fact, entered upon its onvalescence. Nature, spring, youth, love for her father, the gayety of the irds and flowers, caused something almost resembling forgetfulness to filter radually, drop by drop, into that soul, which was so virgin and so young. Was he fire wholly extinct there? Or was it merely that layers of ashes had formed? he truth is, that she hardly felt the painful and burning spot any longer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.2#One day she suddenly thought of Marius: “Why!” said she, “I no longer think f him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.3#That same week, she noticed a very handsome officer of lancers, with a asp-like waist, a delicious uniform, the cheeks of a young girl, a sword under is arm, waxed moustaches, and a glazed schapka, passing the gate. Moreover, he ad light hair, prominent blue eyes, a round face, was vain, insolent and ood-looking; quite the reverse of Marius. He had a cigar in his mouth. Cosette hought that this officer doubtless belonged to the regiment in barracks in the ue de Babylone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.4#On the following day, she saw him pass again. She took note of the our.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.5#From that time forth, was it chance? she saw him pass nearly every day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.6#The officer’s comrades perceived that there was, in that “badly kept” arden, behind that malicious rococo fence, a very pretty creature, who was lmost always there when the handsome lieutenant,—who is not unknown to the eader, and whose name was Théodule Gillenormand,—passed by.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.7#“See here!” they said to him, “there’s a little creature there who is aking eyes at you, look.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.8#“Have I the time,” replied the lancer, “to look at all the girls who look t me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.9#This was at the precise moment when Marius was descending heavily towards gony, and was saying: “If I could but see her before I die!”—Had his wish been ealized, had he beheld Cosette at that moment gazing at the lancer, he would ot have been able to utter a word, and he would have expired with grief.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.10#Whose fault was it? No one’s.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.11#Marius possessed one of those temperaments which bury themselves in sorrow nd there abide; Cosette was one of those persons who plunge into sorrow and merge from it again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.12#Cosette was, moreover, passing through that dangerous period, the fatal hase of feminine reverie abandoned to itself, in which the isolated heart of a oung girl resembles the tendrils of the vine which cling, as chance directs, to he capital of a marble column or to the post of a wine-shop: A rapid and ecisive moment, critical for every orphan, be she rich or poor, for wealth does ot prevent a bad choice; misalliances are made in very high circles, real isalliance is that of souls; and as many an unknown young man, without name, ithout birth, without fortune, is a marble column which bears up a temple of rand sentiments and grand ideas, so such and such a man of the world satisfied nd opulent, who has polished boots and varnished words, if looked at not utside, but inside, a thing which is reserved for his wife, is nothing more han a block obscurely haunted by violent, unclean, and vinous passions; the ost of a drinking-shop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.13#What did Cosette’s soul contain? Passion calmed or lulled to sleep; omething limpid, brilliant, troubled to a certain depth, and gloomy lower down. he image of the handsome officer was reflected in the surface. Did a souvenir inger in the depths?—Quite at the bottom?—Possibly. Cosette did not know.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.1.14#A singular incident supervened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.head#CHAPTER II—COSETTE’S APPREHENSIONS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.1#During the first fortnight in April, Jean Valjean took a journey. This, as he reader knows, happened from time to time, at very long intervals. He emained absent a day or two days at the utmost. Where did he go? No one knew, ot even Cosette. Once only, on the occasion of one of these departures, she had ccompanied him in a hackney-coach as far as a little blind-alley at the corner f which she read: _Impasse de la Planchette_. There he alighted, and the coach ook Cosette back to the Rue de Babylone. It was usually when money was lacking n the house that Jean Valjean took these little trips.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.2#So Jean Valjean was absent. He had said: “I shall return in three ays.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.3#That evening, Cosette was alone in the drawing-room. In order to get rid of er ennui, she had opened her piano-organ, and had begun to sing, accompanying erself the while, the chorus from _Euryanthe_: “Hunters astray in the wood!” hich is probably the most beautiful thing in all the sphere of music. When she ad finished, she remained wrapped in thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.4#All at once, it seemed to her that she heard the sound of footsteps in the arden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.5#It could not be her father, he was absent; it could not be Toussaint, she as in bed, and it was ten o’clock at night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.6#She stepped to the shutter of the drawing-room, which was closed, and laid er ear against it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.7#It seemed to her that it was the tread of a man, and that he was walking ery softly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.8#She mounted rapidly to the first floor, to her own chamber, opened a small icket in her shutter, and peeped into the garden. The moon was at the full. verything could be seen as plainly as by day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.9#There was no one there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.10#She opened the window. The garden was absolutely calm, and all that was isible was that the street was deserted as usual.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.11#Cosette thought that she had been mistaken. She thought that she had heard noise. It was a hallucination produced by the melancholy and magnificent horus of Weber, which lays open before the mind terrified depths, which rembles before the gaze like a dizzy forest, and in which one hears the rackling of dead branches beneath the uneasy tread of the huntsmen of whom one atches a glimpse through the twilight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.12#She thought no more about it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.13#Moreover, Cosette was not very timid by nature. There flowed in her veins ome of the blood of the bohemian and the adventuress who runs barefoot. It will e remembered that she was more of a lark than a dove. There was a foundation of ildness and bravery in her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.14#On the following day, at an earlier hour, towards nightfall, she was trolling in the garden. In the midst of the confused thoughts which occupied er, she fancied that she caught for an instant a sound similar to that of the receding evening, as though some one were walking beneath the trees in the usk, and not very far from her; but she told herself that nothing so closely esembles a step on the grass as the friction of two branches which have moved rom side to side, and she paid no heed to it. Besides, she could see othing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.15#She emerged from “the thicket”; she had still to cross a small lawn to egain the steps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.16#The moon, which had just risen behind her, cast Cosette’s shadow in front f her upon this lawn, as she came out from the shrubbery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.17#Cosette halted in alarm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.18#Beside her shadow, the moon outlined distinctly upon the turf another hadow, which was particularly startling and terrible, a shadow which had a ound hat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.19#It was the shadow of a man, who must have been standing on the border of he clump of shrubbery, a few paces in the rear of Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.20#She stood for a moment without the power to speak, or cry, or call, or tir, or turn her head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.21#Then she summoned up all her courage, and turned round resolutely.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.22#There was no one there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.23#She glanced on the ground. The figure had disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.24#She re-entered the thicket, searched the corners boldly, went as far as he gate, and found nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.25#She felt herself absolutely chilled with terror. Was this another allucination? What! Two days in succession! One hallucination might pass, but wo hallucinations? The disquieting point about it was, that the shadow had ssuredly not been a phantom. Phantoms do not wear round hats.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.26#On the following day Jean Valjean returned. Cosette told him what she hought she had heard and seen. She wanted to be reassured and to see her father hrug his shoulders and say to her: “You are a little goose.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.27#Jean Valjean grew anxious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.28#“It cannot be anything,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.29#He left her under some pretext, and went into the garden, and she saw him xamining the gate with great attention.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.30#During the night she woke up; this time she was sure, and she distinctly eard some one walking close to the flight of steps beneath her window. She ran o her little wicket and opened it. In point of fact, there was a man in the arden, with a large club in his hand. Just as she was about to scream, the moon ighted up the man’s profile. It was her father. She returned to her bed, saying o herself: “He is very uneasy!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.31#Jean Valjean passed that night and the two succeeding nights in the arden. Cosette saw him through the hole in her shutter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.32#On the third night, the moon was on the wane, and had begun to rise later; t one o’clock in the morning, possibly, she heard a loud burst of laughter and er father’s voice calling her:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.33#“Cosette!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.34#She jumped out of bed, threw on her dressing-gown, and opened her indow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.35#Her father was standing on the grass-plot below.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.36#“I have waked you for the purpose of reassuring you,” said he; “look, here is your shadow with the round hat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.37#And he pointed out to her on the turf a shadow cast by the moon, and which id indeed, bear considerable resemblance to the spectre of a man wearing a ound hat. It was the shadow produced by a chimney-pipe of sheet iron, with a ood, which rose above a neighboring roof.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.38#Cosette joined in his laughter, all her lugubrious suppositions were llayed, and the next morning, as she was at breakfast with her father, she made erry over the sinister garden haunted by the shadows of iron chimney-pots.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.39#Jean Valjean became quite tranquil once more; as for Cosette, she did not ay much attention to the question whether the chimney-pot was really in the irection of the shadow which she had seen, or thought she had seen, and whether he moon had been in the same spot in the sky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.40#She did not question herself as to the peculiarity of a chimney-pot which s afraid of being caught in the act, and which retires when some one looks at ts shadow, for the shadow had taken the alarm when Cosette had turned round, nd Cosette had thought herself very sure of this. Cosette’s serenity was fully estored. The proof appeared to her to be complete, and it quite vanished from er mind, whether there could possibly be any one walking in the garden during he evening or at night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.2.41#A few days later, however, a fresh incident occurred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.head#CHAPTER III—ENRICHED WITH COMMENTARIES BY TOUSSAINT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.1#In the garden, near the railing on the street, there was a stone bench, creened from the eyes of the curious by a plantation of yoke-elms, but which ould, in case of necessity, be reached by an arm from the outside, past the rees and the gate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.2#One evening during that same month of April, Jean Valjean had gone out; osette had seated herself on this bench after sundown. The breeze was blowing riskly in the trees, Cosette was meditating; an objectless sadness was taking ossession of her little by little, that invincible sadness evoked by the vening, and which arises, perhaps, who knows, from the mystery of the tomb hich is ajar at that hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.3#Perhaps Fantine was within that shadow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.4#Cosette rose, slowly made the tour of the garden, walking on the grass renched in dew, and saying to herself, through the species of melancholy omnambulism in which she was plunged: “Really, one needs wooden shoes for the arden at this hour. One takes cold.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.5#She returned to the bench.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.6#As she was about to resume her seat there, she observed on the spot which he had quitted, a tolerably large stone which had, evidently, not been there a oment before.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.7#Cosette gazed at the stone, asking herself what it meant. All at once the dea occurred to her that the stone had not reached the bench all by itself, hat some one had placed it there, that an arm had been thrust through the ailing, and this idea appeared to alarm her. This time, the fear was genuine; he stone was there. No doubt was possible; she did not touch it, fled without lancing behind her, took refuge in the house, and immediately closed with hutter, bolt, and bar the door-like window opening on the flight of steps. She nquired of Toussaint:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.8#“Has my father returned yet?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.9#“Not yet, Mademoiselle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.10#[We have already noted once for all the fact that Toussaint stuttered. May e be permitted to dispense with it for the future. The musical notation of an nfirmity is repugnant to us.]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.11#Jean Valjean, a thoughtful man, and given to nocturnal strolls, often eturned quite late at night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.12#“Toussaint,” went on Cosette, “are you careful to thoroughly barricade the hutters opening on the garden, at least with bars, in the evening, and to put he little iron things in the little rings that close them?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.13#“Oh! be easy on that score, Miss.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.14#Toussaint did not fail in her duty, and Cosette was well aware of the act, but she could not refrain from adding:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.15#“It is so solitary here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.16#“So far as that is concerned,” said Toussaint, “it is true. We might be ssassinated before we had time to say _ouf!_ And Monsieur does not sleep in the ouse, to boot. But fear nothing, Miss, I fasten the shutters up like prisons. one women! That is enough to make one shudder, I believe you! Just imagine, hat if you were to see men enter your chamber at night and say: ‘Hold your ongue!’ and begin to cut your throat. It’s not the dying so much; you die, for ne must die, and that’s all right; it’s the abomination of feeling those people ouch you. And then, their knives; they can’t be able to cut well with them! Ah, ood gracious!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.17#“Be quiet,” said Cosette. “Fasten everything thoroughly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.18#Cosette, terrified by the melodrama improvised by Toussaint, and possibly, lso, by the recollection of the apparitions of the past week, which recurred to er memory, dared not even say to her: “Go and look at the stone which has been laced on the bench!” for fear of opening the garden gate and allowing “the men” o enter. She saw that all the doors and windows were carefully fastened, made oussaint go all over the house from garret to cellar, locked herself up in her wn chamber, bolted her door, looked under her couch, went to bed and slept adly. All night long she saw that big stone, as large as a mountain and full of averns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.19#At sunrise,—the property of the rising sun is to make us laugh at all our errors of the past night, and our laughter is in direct proportion to our error which they have caused,—at sunrise Cosette, when she woke, viewed her right as a nightmare, and said to herself: “What have I been thinking of? It is ike the footsteps that I thought I heard a week or two ago in the garden at ight! It is like the shadow of the chimney-pot! Am I becoming a coward?” The un, which was glowing through the crevices in her shutters, and turning the amask curtains crimson, reassured her to such an extent that everything anished from her thoughts, even the stone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.20#“There was no more a stone on the bench than there was a man in a round at in the garden; I dreamed about the stone, as I did all the rest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.21#She dressed herself, descended to the garden, ran to the bench, and broke ut in a cold perspiration. The stone was there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.22#But this lasted only for a moment. That which is terror by night is uriosity by day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.23#“Bah!” said she, “come, let us see what it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.24#She lifted the stone, which was tolerably large. Beneath it was something hich resembled a letter. It was a white envelope. Cosette seized it. There was o address on one side, no seal on the other. Yet the envelope, though unsealed, as not empty. Papers could be seen inside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.25#Cosette examined it. It was no longer alarm, it was no longer curiosity; t was a beginning of anxiety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.26#Cosette drew from the envelope its contents, a little notebook of paper, ach page of which was numbered and bore a few lines in a very fine and rather retty handwriting, as Cosette thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.27#Cosette looked for a name; there was none. To whom was this addressed? To er, probably, since a hand had deposited the packet on her bench. From whom did t come? An irresistible fascination took possession of her; she tried to turn way her eyes from the leaflets which were trembling in her hand, she gazed at he sky, the street, the acacias all bathed in light, the pigeons fluttering ver a neighboring roof, and then her glance suddenly fell upon the manuscript, nd she said to herself that she must know what it contained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.3.28#This is what she read.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.head#CHAPTER IV—A HEART BENEATH A STONE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.1#The reduction of the universe to a single being, the expansion of a single eing even to God, that is love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.2#Love is the salutation of the angels to the stars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.3#How sad is the soul, when it is sad through love!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.4#What a void in the absence of the being who, by herself alone fills the orld! Oh! how true it is that the beloved being becomes God. One could omprehend that God might be jealous of this had not God the Father of all vidently made creation for the soul, and the soul for love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.5#The glimpse of a smile beneath a white crape bonnet with a lilac curtain is ufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace of dreams.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.6#God is behind everything, but everything hides God. Things are black, reatures are opaque. To love a being is to render that being transparent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.7#Certain thoughts are prayers. There are moments when, whatever the attitude f the body may be, the soul is on its knees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.8#Parted lovers beguile absence by a thousand chimerical devices, which ossess, however, a reality of their own. They are prevented from seeing each ther, they cannot write to each other; they discover a multitude of mysterious eans to correspond. They send each other the song of the birds, the perfume of he flowers, the smiles of children, the light of the sun, the sighings of the reeze, the rays of stars, all creation. And why not? All the works of God are ade to serve love. Love is sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its essages.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.9#Oh Spring! Thou art a letter that I write to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.10#The future belongs to hearts even more than it does to minds. Love, that s the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity. In the infinite, the nexhaustible is requisite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.11#Love participates of the soul itself. It is of the same nature. Like it, t is the divine spark; like it, it is incorruptible, indivisible, imperishable. t is a point of fire that exists within us, which is immortal and infinite, hich nothing can confine, and which nothing can extinguish. We feel it burning ven to the very marrow of our bones, and we see it beaming in the very depths f heaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.12#Oh Love! Adorations! voluptuousness of two minds which understand each ther, of two hearts which exchange with each other, of two glances which enetrate each other! You will come to me, will you not, bliss! strolls by twos n the solitudes! Blessed and radiant days! I have sometimes dreamed that from ime to time hours detached themselves from the lives of the angels and came ere below to traverse the destinies of men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.13#God can add nothing to the happiness of those who love, except to give hem endless duration. After a life of love, an eternity of love is, in fact, an ugmentation; but to increase in intensity even the ineffable felicity which ove bestows on the soul even in this world, is impossible, even to God. God is he plenitude of heaven; love is the plenitude of man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.14#You look at a star for two reasons, because it is luminous, and because it s impenetrable. You have beside you a sweeter radiance and a greater mystery, oman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.15#All of us, whoever we may be, have our respirable beings. We lack air and e stifle. Then we die. To die for lack of love is horrible. Suffocation of the oul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.16#When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelic unity, he secret of life has been discovered so far as they are concerned; they are no onger anything more than the two boundaries of the same destiny; they are no onger anything but the two wings of the same spirit. Love, soar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.17#On the day when a woman as she passes before you emits light as she walks, ou are lost, you love. But one thing remains for you to do: to think of her so ntently that she is constrained to think of you.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.18#What love commences can be finished by God alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.19#True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a andkerchief found, and eternity is required for its devotion and its hopes. It s composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitely little.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.20#If you are a stone, be adamant; if you are a plant, be the sensitive lant; if you are a man, be love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.21#Nothing suffices for love. We have happiness, we desire paradise; we ossess paradise, we desire heaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.22#Oh ye who love each other, all this is contained in love. Understand how o find it there. Love has contemplation as well as heaven, and more than eaven, it has voluptuousness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.23#“Does she still come to the Luxembourg?” “No, sir.” “This is the church here she attends mass, is it not?” “She no longer comes here.” “Does she still ive in this house?” “She has moved away.” “Where has she gone to dwell?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.24#“She did not say.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.25#What a melancholy thing not to know the address of one’s soul!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.26#Love has its childishness, other passions have their pettinesses. Shame on he passions which belittle man! Honor to the one which makes a child of im!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.27#There is one strange thing, do you know it? I dwell in the night. There is being who carried off my sky when she went away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.28#Oh! would that we were lying side by side in the same grave, hand in hand, nd from time to time, in the darkness, gently caressing a finger,—that would uffice for my eternity!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.29#Ye who suffer because ye love, love yet more. To die of love, is to live n it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.30#Love. A sombre and starry transfiguration is mingled with this torture. here is ecstasy in agony.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.31#Oh joy of the birds! It is because they have nests that they sing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.32#Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.33#Deep hearts, sage minds, take life as God has made it; it is a long trial, n incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny. This destiny, the true ne, begins for a man with the first step inside the tomb. Then something ppears to him, and he begins to distinguish the definitive. The definitive, editate upon that word. The living perceive the infinite; the definitive ermits itself to be seen only by the dead. In the meanwhile, love and suffer, ope and contemplate. Woe, alas! to him who shall have loved only bodies, forms, ppearances! Death will deprive him of all. Try to love souls, you will find hem again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.34#I encountered in the street, a very poor young man who was in love. His at was old, his coat was worn, his elbows were in holes; water trickled through is shoes, and the stars through his soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.35#What a grand thing it is to be loved! What a far grander thing it is to ove! The heart becomes heroic, by dint of passion. It is no longer composed of nything but what is pure; it no longer rests on anything that is not elevated nd great. An unworthy thought can no more germinate in it, than a nettle on a lacier. The serene and lofty soul, inaccessible to vulgar passions and motions, dominating the clouds and the shades of this world, its follies, its ies, its hatreds, its vanities, its miseries, inhabits the blue of heaven, and o longer feels anything but profound and subterranean shocks of destiny, as the rests of mountains feel the shocks of earthquake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.4.36#If there did not exist some one who loved, the sun would become xtinct.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.head#CHAPTER V—COSETTE AFTER THE LETTER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.1#As Cosette read, she gradually fell into thought. At the very moment when he raised her eyes from the last line of the note-book, the handsome officer assed triumphantly in front of the gate,—it was his hour; Cosette thought him ideous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.2#She resumed her contemplation of the book. It was written in the most harming of chirography, thought Cosette; in the same hand, but with divers nks, sometimes very black, again whitish, as when ink has been added to the nkstand, and consequently on different days. It was, then, a mind which had nfolded itself there, sigh by sigh, irregularly, without order, without choice, ithout object, hap-hazard. Cosette had never read anything like it. This anuscript, in which she already perceived more light than obscurity, produced pon her the effect of a half-open sanctuary. Each one of these mysterious lines hone before her eyes and inundated her heart with a strange radiance. The ducation which she had received had always talked to her of the soul, and never f love, very much as one might talk of the firebrand and not of the flame. This anuscript of fifteen pages suddenly and sweetly revealed to her all of love, orrow, destiny, life, eternity, the beginning, the end. It was as if a hand had pened and suddenly flung upon her a handful of rays of light. In these few ines she felt a passionate, ardent, generous, honest nature, a sacred will, an mmense sorrow, and an immense despair, a suffering heart, an ecstasy fully xpanded. What was this manuscript? A letter. A letter without name, without ddress, without date, without signature, pressing and disinterested, an enigma omposed of truths, a message of love made to be brought by an angel and read by virgin, an appointment made beyond the bounds of earth, the love-letter of a hantom to a shade. It was an absent one, tranquil and dejected, who seemed eady to take refuge in death and who sent to the absent love, his lady, the ecret of fate, the key of life, love. This had been written with one foot in he grave and one finger in heaven. These lines, which had fallen one by one on he paper, were what might be called drops of soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.3#Now, from whom could these pages come? Who could have penned them?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.4#Cosette did not hesitate a moment. One man only.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.5#He!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.6#Day had dawned once more in her spirit; all had reappeared. She felt an nheard-of joy, and a profound anguish. It was he! he who had written! he was here! it was he whose arm had been thrust through that railing! While she was orgetful of him, he had found her again! But had she forgotten him? No, never! he was foolish to have thought so for a single moment. She had always loved im, always adored him. The fire had been smothered, and had smouldered for a ime, but she saw all plainly now; it had but made headway, and now it had burst orth afresh, and had inflamed her whole being. This note-book was like a spark hich had fallen from that other soul into hers. She felt the conflagration tarting up once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.7#She imbued herself thoroughly with every word of the manuscript: “Oh yes!” aid she, “how perfectly I recognize all that! That is what I had already read n his eyes.” As she was finishing it for the third time, Lieutenant Théodule assed the gate once more, and rattled his spurs upon the pavement. Cosette was orced to raise her eyes. She thought him insipid, silly, stupid, useless, oppish, displeasing, impertinent, and extremely ugly. The officer thought it is duty to smile at her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.8#She turned away as in shame and indignation. She would gladly have thrown omething at his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.9#She fled, re-entered the house, and shut herself up in her chamber to eruse the manuscript once more, to learn it by heart, and to dream. When she ad thoroughly mastered it she kissed it and put it in her bosom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.10#All was over, Cosette had fallen back into deep, seraphic love. The abyss f Eden had yawned once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.11#All day long, Cosette remained in a sort of bewilderment. She scarcely hought, her ideas were in the state of a tangled skein in her brain, she could ot manage to conjecture anything, she hoped through a tremor, what? vague hings. She dared make herself no promises, and she did not wish to refuse erself anything. Flashes of pallor passed over her countenance, and shivers ran hrough her frame. It seemed to her, at intervals, that she was entering the and of chimæras; she said to herself: “Is this reality?” Then she felt of the ear paper within her bosom under her gown, she pressed it to her heart, she elt its angles against her flesh; and if Jean Valjean had seen her at the oment, he would have shuddered in the presence of that luminous and unknown oy, which overflowed from beneath her eyelids.—“Oh yes!” she thought, “it is ertainly he! This comes from him, and is for me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.12#And she told herself that an intervention of the angels, a celestial hance, had given him back to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.5.13#Oh transfiguration of love! Oh dreams! That celestial chance, that ntervention of the angels, was a pellet of bread tossed by one thief to another hief, from the Charlemagne Courtyard to the Lion’s Ditch, over the roofs of La orce.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.head#CHAPTER VI—OLD PEOPLE ARE MADE TO GO OUT OPPORTUNELY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.1#When evening came, Jean Valjean went out; Cosette dressed herself. She rranged her hair in the most becoming manner, and she put on a dress whose odice had received one snip of the scissors too much, and which, through this lope, permitted a view of the beginning of her throat, and was, as young girls ay, “a trifle indecent.” It was not in the least indecent, but it was prettier han usual. She made her toilet thus without knowing why she did so.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.2#Did she mean to go out? No.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.3#Was she expecting a visitor? No.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.4#At dusk, she went down to the garden. Toussaint was busy in her kitchen, hich opened on the back yard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.5#She began to stroll about under the trees, thrusting aside the branches rom time to time with her hand, because there were some which hung very ow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.6#In this manner she reached the bench.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.7#The stone was still there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.8#She sat down, and gently laid her white hand on this stone as though she ished to caress and thank it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.9#All at once, she experienced that indefinable impression which one ndergoes when there is some one standing behind one, even when she does not see he person.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.10#She turned her head and rose to her feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.11#It was he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.12#His head was bare. He appeared to have grown thin and pale. His black lothes were hardly discernible. The twilight threw a wan light on his fine row, and covered his eyes in shadows. Beneath a veil of incomparable sweetness, e had something about him that suggested death and night. His face was lluminated by the light of the dying day, and by the thought of a soul that is aking flight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.13#He seemed to be not yet a ghost, and he was no longer a man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.14#He had flung away his hat in the thicket, a few paces distant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.15#Cosette, though ready to swoon, uttered no cry. She retreated slowly, for he felt herself attracted. He did not stir. By virtue of something ineffable nd melancholy which enveloped him, she felt the look in his eyes which she ould not see.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.16#Cosette, in her retreat, encountered a tree and leaned against it. Had it ot been for this tree, she would have fallen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.17#Then she heard his voice, that voice which she had really never heard, arely rising above the rustle of the leaves, and murmuring:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.18#“Pardon me, here I am. My heart is full. I could not live on as I was iving, and I have come. Have you read what I placed there on the bench? Do you ecognize me at all? Have no fear of me. It is a long time, you remember the ay, since you looked at me at the Luxembourg, near the Gladiator. And the day hen you passed before me? It was on the 16th of June and the 2d of July. It is early a year ago. I have not seen you for a long time. I inquired of the woman ho let the chairs, and she told me that she no longer saw you. You lived in the ue de l’Ouest, on the third floor, in the front apartments of a new house,—you ee that I know! I followed you. What else was there for me to do? And then you isappeared. I thought I saw you pass once, while I was reading the newspapers nder the arcade of the Odéon. I ran after you. But no. It was a person who had bonnet like yours. At night I came hither. Do not be afraid, no one sees me. I ome to gaze upon your windows near at hand. I walk very softly, so that you may ot hear, for you might be alarmed. The other evening I was behind you, you urned round, I fled. Once, I heard you singing. I was happy. Did it affect you ecause I heard you singing through the shutters? That could not hurt you. No, t is not so? You see, you are my angel! Let me come sometimes; I think that I m going to die. If you only knew! I adore you. Forgive me, I speak to you, but do not know what I am saying; I may have displeased you; have I displeased ou?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.19#“Oh! my mother!” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.20#And she sank down as though on the point of death.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.21#He grasped her, she fell, he took her in his arms, he pressed her close, ithout knowing what he was doing. He supported her, though he was tottering imself. It was as though his brain were full of smoke; lightnings darted etween his lips; his ideas vanished; it seemed to him that he was accomplishing ome religious act, and that he was committing a profanation. Moreover, he had ot the least passion for this lovely woman whose force he felt against his reast. He was beside himself with love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.22#She took his hand and laid it on her heart. He felt the paper there, he tammered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.23#“You love me, then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.24#She replied in a voice so low that it was no longer anything more than a arely audible breath:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.25#“Hush! Thou knowest it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.26#And she hid her blushing face on the breast of the superb and intoxicated oung man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.27#He fell upon the bench, and she beside him. They had no words more. The tars were beginning to gleam. How did it come to pass that their lips met? How omes it to pass that the birds sing, that snow melts, that the rose unfolds, hat May expands, that the dawn grows white behind the black trees on the hivering crest of the hills?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.28#A kiss, and that was all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.29#Both started, and gazed into the darkness with sparkling eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.30#They felt neither the cool night, nor the cold stone, nor the damp earth, or the wet grass; they looked at each other, and their hearts were full of houghts. They had clasped hands unconsciously.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.31#She did not ask him, she did not even wonder, how he had entered there, nd how he had made his way into the garden. It seemed so simple to her that he hould be there!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.32#From time to time, Marius’ knee touched Cosette’s knee, and both hivered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.33#At intervals, Cosette stammered a word. Her soul fluttered on her lips ike a drop of dew on a flower.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.34#Little by little they began to talk to each other. Effusion followed ilence, which is fulness. The night was serene and splendid overhead. These two eings, pure as spirits, told each other everything, their dreams, their ntoxications, their ecstasies, their chimæras, their weaknesses, how they had dored each other from afar, how they had longed for each other, their despair hen they had ceased to see each other. They confided to each other in an ideal ntimacy, which nothing could augment, their most secret and most mysterious houghts. They related to each other, with candid faith in their illusions, all hat love, youth, and the remains of childhood which still lingered about them, uggested to their minds. Their two hearts poured themselves out into each other n such wise, that at the expiration of a quarter of an hour, it was the young an who had the young girl’s soul, and the young girl who had the young man’s oul. Each became permeated with the other, they were enchanted with each other, hey dazzled each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.35#When they had finished, when they had told each other everything, she laid er head on his shoulder and asked him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.36#“What is your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.37#“My name is Marius,” said he. “And yours?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.5.6.38#“My name is Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.head#BOOK SIXTH—LITTLE GAVROCHE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE MALICIOUS PLAYFULNESS OF THE WIND
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.1#Since 1823, when the tavern of Montfermeil was on the way to shipwreck and as being gradually engulfed, not in the abyss of a bankruptcy, but in the esspool of petty debts, the Thénardier pair had had two other children; both ales. That made five; two girls and three boys.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.2#Madame Thénardier had got rid of the last two, while they were still young nd very small, with remarkable luck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.3#_Got rid of_ is the word. There was but a mere fragment of nature in that oman. A phenomenon, by the way, of which there is more than one example extant. ike the Maréchale de La Mothe-Houdancourt, the Thénardier was a mother to her aughters only. There her maternity ended. Her hatred of the human race began ith her own sons. In the direction of her sons her evil disposition was ncompromising, and her heart had a lugubrious wall in that quarter. As the eader has seen, she detested the eldest; she cursed the other two. Why? ecause. The most terrible of motives, the most unanswerable of retorts—Because. I have no need of a litter of squalling brats,” said this mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.4#Let us explain how the Thénardiers had succeeded in getting rid of their ast two children; and even in drawing profit from the operation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.5#The woman Magnon, who was mentioned a few pages further back, was the same ne who had succeeded in making old Gillenormand support the two children which he had had. She lived on the Quai des Célestins, at the corner of this ancient treet of the Petit-Musc which afforded her the opportunity of changing her evil epute into good odor. The reader will remember the great epidemic of croup hich ravaged the river districts of the Seine in Paris thirty-five years ago, nd of which science took advantage to make experiments on a grand scale as to he efficacy of inhalations of alum, so beneficially replaced at the present day y the external tincture of iodine. During this epidemic, the Magnon lost both er boys, who were still very young, one in the morning, the other in the vening of the same day. This was a blow. These children were precious to their other; they represented eighty francs a month. These eighty francs were unctually paid in the name of M. Gillenormand, by collector of his rents, M. arge, a retired tip-staff, in the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile. The children dead, the ncome was at an end. The Magnon sought an expedient. In that dark free-masonry f evil of which she formed a part, everything is known, all secrets are kept, nd all lend mutual aid. Magnon needed two children; the Thénardiers had two. he same sex, the same age. A good arrangement for the one, a good investment or the other. The little Thénardiers became little Magnons. Magnon quitted the uai des Célestins and went to live in the Rue Clocheperce. In Paris, the dentity which binds an individual to himself is broken between one street and nother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.6#The registry office being in no way warned, raised no objections, and the ubstitution was effected in the most simple manner in the world. Only, the hénardier exacted for this loan of her children, ten francs a month, which agnon promised to pay, and which she actually did pay. It is unnecessary to add hat M. Gillenormand continued to perform his compact. He came to see the hildren every six months. He did not perceive the change. “Monsieur,” Magnon aid to him, “how much they resemble you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.7#Thénardier, to whom avatars were easy, seized this occasion to become ondrette. His two daughters and Gavroche had hardly had time to discover that hey had two little brothers. When a certain degree of misery is reached, one is verpowered with a sort of spectral indifference, and one regards human beings s though they were spectres. Your nearest relations are often no more for you han vague shadowy forms, barely outlined against a nebulous background of life nd easily confounded again with the invisible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.8#On the evening of the day when she had handed over her two little ones to agnon, with express intention of renouncing them forever, the Thénardier had elt, or had appeared to feel, a scruple. She said to her husband: “But this is bandoning our children!” Thénardier, masterful and phlegmatic, cauterized the cruple with this saying: “Jean Jacques Rousseau did even better!” From cruples, the mother proceeded to uneasiness: “But what if the police were to nnoy us? Tell me, Monsieur Thénardier, is what we have done permissible?” hénardier replied: “Everything is permissible. No one will see anything but rue blue in it. Besides, no one has any interest in looking closely after hildren who have not a sou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.9#Magnon was a sort of fashionable woman in the sphere of crime. She was areful about her toilet. She shared her lodgings, which were furnished in an ffected and wretched style, with a clever gallicized English thief. This nglish woman, who had become a naturalized Parisienne, recommended by very ealthy relations, intimately connected with the medals in the Library and ademoiselle Mar’s diamonds, became celebrated later on in judicial accounts. he was called _Mamselle Miss_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.10#The two little creatures who had fallen to Magnon had no reason to omplain of their lot. Recommended by the eighty francs, they were well cared or, as is everything from which profit is derived; they were neither badly lothed, nor badly fed; they were treated almost like “little gentlemen,”—better y their false mother than by their real one. Magnon played the lady, and talked o thieves’ slang in their presence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.11#Thus passed several years. Thénardier augured well from the fact. One day, e chanced to say to Magnon as she handed him his monthly stipend of ten francs: The father must give them some education.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.12#All at once, these two poor children, who had up to that time been rotected tolerably well, even by their evil fate, were abruptly hurled into ife and forced to begin it for themselves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.13#A wholesale arrest of malefactors, like that in the Jondrette garret, ecessarily complicated by investigations and subsequent incarcerations, is a eritable disaster for that hideous and occult counter-society which pursues its xistence beneath public society; an adventure of this description entails all orts of catastrophes in that sombre world. The Thénardier catastrophe involved he catastrophe of Magnon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.14#One day, a short time after Magnon had handed to Éponine the note relating o the Rue Plumet, a sudden raid was made by the police in the Rue Clocheperce; agnon was seized, as was also Mamselle Miss; and all the inhabitants of the ouse, which was of a suspicious character, were gathered into the net. While his was going on, the two little boys were playing in the back yard, and saw othing of the raid. When they tried to enter the house again, they found the oor fastened and the house empty. A cobbler opposite called them to him, and elivered to them a paper which “their mother” had left for them. On this paper here was an address: _M. Barge, collector of rents, Rue du Roi-de-Sicile, No_. . The proprietor of the stall said to them: “You cannot live here any longer. o there. It is nearby. The first street on the left. Ask your way from this aper.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.15#The children set out, the elder leading the younger, and holding in his and the paper which was to guide them. It was cold, and his benumbed little ingers could not close very firmly, and they did not keep a very good hold on he paper. At the corner of the Rue Clocheperce, a gust of wind tore it from im, and as night was falling, the child was not able to find it again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.1.16#They began to wander aimlessly through the streets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.head#CHAPTER II—IN WHICH LITTLE GAVROCHE EXTRACTS PROFIT FROM NAPOLEON THE REAT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.1#Spring in Paris is often traversed by harsh and piercing breezes which do ot precisely chill but freeze one; these north winds which sadden the most eautiful days produce exactly the effect of those puffs of cold air which enter warm room through the cracks of a badly fitting door or window. It seems as hough the gloomy door of winter had remained ajar, and as though the wind were ouring through it. In the spring of 1832, the epoch when the first great pidemic of this century broke out in Europe, these north gales were more harsh nd piercing than ever. It was a door even more glacial than that of winter hich was ajar. It was the door of the sepulchre. In these winds one felt the reath of the cholera.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.2#From a meteorological point of view, these cold winds possessed this eculiarity, that they did not preclude a strong electric tension. Frequent torms, accompanied by thunder and lightning, burst forth at this epoch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.3#One evening, when these gales were blowing rudely, to such a degree that anuary seemed to have returned and that the bourgeois had resumed their cloaks, ittle Gavroche, who was always shivering gayly under his rags, was standing as hough in ecstasy before a wig-maker’s shop in the vicinity of the rme-Saint-Gervais. He was adorned with a woman’s woollen shawl, picked up no ne knows where, and which he had converted into a neck comforter. Little avroche appeared to be engaged in intent admiration of a wax bride, in a ow-necked dress, and crowned with orange-flowers, who was revolving in the indow, and displaying her smile to passers-by, between two argand lamps; but in eality, he was taking an observation of the shop, in order to discover whether e could not “prig” from the shop-front a cake of soap, which he would then roceed to sell for a sou to a “hair-dresser” in the suburbs. He had often anaged to breakfast off of such a roll. He called his species of work, for hich he possessed special aptitude, “shaving barbers.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.4#While contemplating the bride, and eyeing the cake of soap, he muttered etween his teeth: “Tuesday. It was not Tuesday. Was it Tuesday? Perhaps it was uesday. Yes, it was Tuesday.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.5#No one has ever discovered to what this monologue referred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.6#Yes, perchance, this monologue had some connection with the last occasion n which he had dined, three days before, for it was now Friday.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.7#The barber in his shop, which was warmed by a good stove, was shaving a ustomer and casting a glance from time to time at the enemy, that freezing and mpudent street urchin both of whose hands were in his pockets, but whose mind as evidently unsheathed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.8#While Gavroche was scrutinizing the shop-window and the cakes of windsor oap, two children of unequal stature, very neatly dressed, and still smaller han himself, one apparently about seven years of age, the other five, timidly urned the handle and entered the shop, with a request for something or other, lms possibly, in a plaintive murmur which resembled a groan rather than a rayer. They both spoke at once, and their words were unintelligible because obs broke the voice of the younger, and the teeth of the elder were chattering ith cold. The barber wheeled round with a furious look, and without abandoning is razor, thrust back the elder with his left hand and the younger with his nee, and slammed his door, saying: “The idea of coming in and freezing verybody for nothing!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.9#The two children resumed their march in tears. In the meantime, a cloud had isen; it had begun to rain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.10#Little Gavroche ran after them and accosted them:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.11#“What’s the matter with you, brats?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.12#“We don’t know where we are to sleep,” replied the elder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.13#“Is that all?” said Gavroche. “A great matter, truly. The idea of bawling bout that. They must be greenies!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.14#And adopting, in addition to his superiority, which was rather bantering, n accent of tender authority and gentle patronage:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.15#“Come along with me, young ‘uns!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.16#“Yes, sir,” said the elder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.17#And the two children followed him as they would have followed an rchbishop. They had stopped crying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.18#Gavroche led them up the Rue Saint-Antoine in the direction of the astille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.19#As Gavroche walked along, he cast an indignant backward glance at the arber’s shop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.20#“That fellow has no heart, the whiting,"35 he muttered. “He’s an nglishman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.21#A woman who caught sight of these three marching in a file, with Gavroche t their head, burst into noisy laughter. This laugh was wanting in respect owards the group.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.22#“Good day, Mamselle Omnibus,” said Gavroche to her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.23#An instant later, the wig-maker occurred to his mind once more, and he dded:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.24#“I am making a mistake in the beast; he’s not a whiting, he’s a serpent. arber, I’ll go and fetch a locksmith, and I’ll have a bell hung to your ail.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.25#This wig-maker had rendered him aggressive. As he strode over a gutter, he postrophized a bearded portress who was worthy to meet Faust on the Brocken, nd who had a broom in her hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.26#“Madam,” said he, “so you are going out with your horse?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.27#And thereupon, he spattered the polished boots of a pedestrian.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.28#“You scamp!” shouted the furious pedestrian.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.29#Gavroche elevated his nose above his shawl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.30#“Is Monsieur complaining?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.31#“Of you!” ejaculated the man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.32#“The office is closed,” said Gavroche, “I do not receive any more omplaints.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.33#In the meanwhile, as he went on up the street, he perceived a beggar-girl, hirteen or fourteen years old, and clad in so short a gown that her knees were isible, lying thoroughly chilled under a porte-cochère. The little girl was etting to be too old for such a thing. Growth does play these tricks. The etticoat becomes short at the moment when nudity becomes indecent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.34#“Poor girl!” said Gavroche. “She hasn’t even trousers. Hold on, take his.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.35#And unwinding all the comfortable woollen which he had around his neck, he lung it on the thin and purple shoulders of the beggar-girl, where the scarf ecame a shawl once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.36#The child stared at him in astonishment, and received the shawl in ilence. When a certain stage of distress has been reached in his misery, the oor man no longer groans over evil, no longer returns thanks for good.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.37#That done: “Brrr!” said Gavroche, who was shivering more than Saint artin, for the latter retained one-half of his cloak.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.38#At this _brrr!_ the downpour of rain, redoubled in its spite, became urious. The wicked skies punish good deeds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.39#“Ah, come now!” exclaimed Gavroche, “what’s the meaning of this? It’s e-raining! Good Heavens, if it goes on like this, I shall stop my ubscription.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.40#And he set out on the march once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.41#“It’s all right,” he resumed, casting a glance at the beggar-girl, as she oiled up under the shawl, “she’s got a famous peel.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.42#And looking up at the clouds he exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.43#“Caught!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.44#The two children followed close on his heels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.45#As they were passing one of these heavy grated lattices, which indicate a aker’s shop, for bread is put behind bars like gold, Gavroche turned ound:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.46#“Ah, by the way, brats, have we dined?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.47#“Monsieur,” replied the elder, “we have had nothing to eat since this orning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.48#“So you have neither father nor mother?” resumed Gavroche ajestically.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.49#“Excuse us, sir, we have a papa and a mamma, but we don’t know where they re.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.50#“Sometimes that’s better than knowing where they are,” said Gavroche, who as a thinker.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.51#“We have been wandering about these two hours,” continued the elder, “we ave hunted for things at the corners of the streets, but we have found othing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.52#“I know,” ejaculated Gavroche, “it’s the dogs who eat everything.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.53#He went on, after a pause:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.54#“Ah! we have lost our authors. We don’t know what we have done with them. his should not be, gamins. It’s stupid to let old people stray off like that. ome now! we must have a snooze all the same.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.55#However, he asked them no questions. What was more simple than that they hould have no dwelling place!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.56#The elder of the two children, who had almost entirely recovered the rompt heedlessness of childhood, uttered this exclamation:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.57#“It’s queer, all the same. Mamma told us that she would take us to get a lessed spray on Palm Sunday.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.58#“Bosh,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.59#“Mamma,” resumed the elder, “is a lady who lives with Mamselle Miss.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.60#“Tanflûte!” retorted Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.61#Meanwhile he had halted, and for the last two minutes he had been feeling nd fumbling in all sorts of nooks which his rags contained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.62#At last he tossed his head with an air intended to be merely satisfied, ut which was triumphant, in reality.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.63#“Let us be calm, young ‘uns. Here’s supper for three.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.64#And from one of his pockets he drew forth a sou.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.65#Without allowing the two urchins time for amazement, he pushed both of hem before him into the baker’s shop, and flung his sou on the counter, rying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.66#“Boy! five centimes’ worth of bread.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.67#The baker, who was the proprietor in person, took up a loaf and a nife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.68#“In three pieces, my boy!” went on Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.69#And he added with dignity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.70#“There are three of us.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.71#And seeing that the baker, after scrutinizing the three customers, had aken down a black loaf, he thrust his finger far up his nose with an inhalation s imperious as though he had had a pinch of the great Frederick’s snuff on the ip of his thumb, and hurled this indignant apostrophe full in the baker’s ace:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.72#“Keksekça?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.73#Those of our readers who might be tempted to espy in this interpellation f Gavroche’s to the baker a Russian or a Polish word, or one of those savage ries which the Yoways and the Botocudos hurl at each other from bank to bank of river, athwart the solitudes, are warned that it is a word which they [our eaders] utter every day, and which takes the place of the phrase: “Qu’est-ce ue c’est que cela?” The baker understood perfectly, and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.74#“Well! It’s bread, and very good bread of the second quality.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.75#“You mean _larton brutal_ [black bread]!” retorted Gavroche, calmly and oldly disdainful. “White bread, boy! white bread [_larton savonné_]! I’m tanding treat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.76#The baker could not repress a smile, and as he cut the white bread he urveyed them in a compassionate way which shocked Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.77#“Come, now, baker’s boy!” said he, “what are you taking our measure like hat for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.78#All three of them placed end to end would have hardly made a measure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.79#When the bread was cut, the baker threw the sou into his drawer, and avroche said to the two children:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.80#“Grub away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.81#The little boys stared at him in surprise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.82#Gavroche began to laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.83#“Ah! hullo, that’s so! they don’t understand yet, they’re too small.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.84#And he repeated:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.85#“Eat away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.86#At the same time, he held out a piece of bread to each of them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.87#And thinking that the elder, who seemed to him the more worthy of his onversation, deserved some special encouragement and ought to be relieved from ll hesitation to satisfy his appetite, he added, as he handed him the largest hare:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.88#“Ram that into your muzzle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.89#One piece was smaller than the others; he kept this for himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.90#The poor children, including Gavroche, were famished. As they tore their read apart in big mouthfuls, they blocked up the shop of the baker, who, now hat they had paid their money, looked angrily at them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.91#“Let’s go into the street again,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.92#They set off once more in the direction of the Bastille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.93#From time to time, as they passed the lighted shop-windows, the smallest alted to look at the time on a leaden watch which was suspended from his neck y a cord.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.94#“Well, he is a very green ‘un,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.95#Then, becoming thoughtful, he muttered between his teeth:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.96#“All the same, if I had charge of the babes I’d lock ‘em up better than hat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.97#Just as they were finishing their morsel of bread, and had reached the ngle of that gloomy Rue des Ballets, at the other end of which the low and hreatening wicket of La Force was visible:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.98#“Hullo, is that you, Gavroche?” said some one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.99#“Hullo, is that you, Montparnasse?” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.100#A man had just accosted the street urchin, and the man was no other than ontparnasse in disguise, with blue spectacles, but recognizable to avroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.101#“The bow-wows!” went on Gavroche, “you’ve got a hide the color of a inseed plaster, and blue specs like a doctor. You’re putting on style, ‘pon my ord!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.102#“Hush!” ejaculated Montparnasse, “not so loud.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.103#And he drew Gavroche hastily out of range of the lighted shops.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.104#The two little ones followed mechanically, holding each other by the and.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.105#When they were ensconced under the arch of a porte-cochère, sheltered rom the rain and from all eyes:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.106#“Do you know where I’m going?” demanded Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.107#“To the Abbey of Ascend-with-Regret,"36 replied Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.108#“Joker!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.109#And Montparnasse went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.110#“I’m going to find Babet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.111#“Ah!” exclaimed Gavroche, “so her name is Babet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.112#Montparnasse lowered his voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.113#“Not she, he.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.114#“Ah! Babet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.115#“Yes, Babet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.116#“I thought he was buckled.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.117#“He has undone the buckle,” replied Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.118#And he rapidly related to the gamin how, on the morning of that very day, abet, having been transferred to La Conciergerie, had made his escape, by urning to the left instead of to the right in “the police office.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.119#Gavroche expressed his admiration for this skill.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.120#“What a dentist!” he cried.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.121#Montparnasse added a few details as to Babet’s flight, and ended ith:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.122#“Oh! That’s not all.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.123#Gavroche, as he listened, had seized a cane that Montparnasse held in his and, and mechanically pulled at the upper part, and the blade of a dagger made ts appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.124#“Ah!” he exclaimed, pushing the dagger back in haste, “you have brought long your gendarme disguised as a bourgeois.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.125#Montparnasse winked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.126#“The deuce!” resumed Gavroche, “so you’re going to have a bout with the obbies?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.127#“You can’t tell,” replied Montparnasse with an indifferent air. “It’s lways a good thing to have a pin about one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.128#Gavroche persisted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.129#“What are you up to to-night?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.130#Again Montparnasse took a grave tone, and said, mouthing every syllable: Things.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.131#And abruptly changing the conversation:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.132#“By the way!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.133#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.134#“Something happened t’other day. Fancy. I meet a bourgeois. He makes me a resent of a sermon and his purse. I put it in my pocket. A minute later, I feel n my pocket. There’s nothing there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.135#“Except the sermon,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.136#“But you,” went on Montparnasse, “where are you bound for now?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.137#Gavroche pointed to his two protégés, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.138#“I’m going to put these infants to bed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.139#“Whereabouts is the bed?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.140#“At my house.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.141#“Where’s your house?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.142#“At my house.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.143#“So you have a lodging?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.144#“Yes, I have.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.145#“And where is your lodging?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.146#“In the elephant,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.147#Montparnasse, though not naturally inclined to astonishment, could not estrain an exclamation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.148#“In the elephant!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.149#“Well, yes, in the elephant!” retorted Gavroche. “Kekçaa?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.150#This is another word of the language which no one writes, and which every ne speaks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.151#Kekçaa signifies: _Qu’est que c’est que cela a? _ [What’s the matter with hat?]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.152#The urchin’s profound remark recalled Montparnasse to calmness and good ense. He appeared to return to better sentiments with regard to Gavroche’s odging.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.153#“Of course,” said he, “yes, the elephant. Is it comfortable there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.154#“Very,” said Gavroche. “It’s really bully there. There ain’t any raughts, as there are under the bridges.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.155#“How do you get in?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.156#“Oh, I get in.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.157#“So there is a hole?” demanded Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.158#“Parbleu! I should say so. But you mustn’t tell. It’s between the fore egs. The bobbies haven’t seen it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.159#“And you climb up? Yes, I understand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.160#“A turn of the hand, cric, crac, and it’s all over, no one there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.161#After a pause, Gavroche added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.162#“I shall have a ladder for these children.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.163#Montparnasse burst out laughing:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.164#“Where the devil did you pick up those young ‘uns?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.165#Gavroche replied with great simplicity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.166#“They are some brats that a wig-maker made me a present of.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.167#Meanwhile, Montparnasse had fallen to thinking:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.168#“You recognized me very readily,” he muttered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.169#He took from his pocket two small objects which were nothing more than wo quills wrapped in cotton, and thrust one up each of his nostrils. This gave im a different nose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.170#“That changes you,” remarked Gavroche, “you are less homely so, you ought o keep them on all the time.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.171#Montparnasse was a handsome fellow, but Gavroche was a tease.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.172#“Seriously,” demanded Montparnasse, “how do you like me so?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.173#The sound of his voice was different also. In a twinkling, Montparnasse ad become unrecognizable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.174#“Oh! Do play Porrichinelle for us!” exclaimed Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.175#The two children, who had not been listening up to this point, being ccupied themselves in thrusting their fingers up their noses, drew near at this ame, and stared at Montparnasse with dawning joy and admiration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.176#Unfortunately, Montparnasse was troubled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.177#He laid his hand on Gavroche’s shoulder, and said to him, emphasizing his ords: “Listen to what I tell you, boy! if I were on the square with my dog, my nife, and my wife, and if you were to squander ten sous on me, I wouldn’t efuse to work, but this isn’t Shrove Tuesday.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.178#This odd phrase produced a singular effect on the gamin. He wheeled round astily, darted his little sparkling eyes about him with profound attention, and erceived a police sergeant standing with his back to them a few paces off. avroche allowed an: “Ah! good!” to escape him, but immediately suppressed it, nd shaking Montparnasse’s hand:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.179#“Well, good evening,” said he, “I’m going off to my elephant with my rats. Supposing that you should need me some night, you can come and hunt me up here. I lodge on the entresol. There is no porter. You will inquire for onsieur Gavroche.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.180#“Very good,” said Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.181#And they parted, Montparnasse betaking himself in the direction of the rève, and Gavroche towards the Bastille. The little one of five, dragged along y his brother who was dragged by Gavroche, turned his head back several times o watch “Porrichinelle” as he went.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.182#The ambiguous phrase by means of which Montparnasse had warned Gavroche f the presence of the policeman, contained no other talisman than the assonance dig_ repeated five or six times in different forms. This syllable, _dig_, ttered alone or artistically mingled with the words of a phrase, means: “Take are, we can no longer talk freely.” There was besides, in Montparnasse’s entence, a literary beauty which was lost upon Gavroche, that is _mon dogue, ma ague et ma digue_, a slang expression of the Temple, which signifies my dog, my nife, and my wife, greatly in vogue among clowns and the red-tails in the great entury when Molière wrote and Callot drew.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.183#Twenty years ago, there was still to be seen in the southwest corner of he Place de la Bastille, near the basin of the canal, excavated in the ancient itch of the fortress-prison, a singular monument, which has already been ffaced from the memories of Parisians, and which deserved to leave some trace, or it was the idea of a “member of the Institute, the General-in-chief of the rmy of Egypt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.184#We say monument, although it was only a rough model. But this model tself, a marvellous sketch, the grandiose skeleton of an idea of Napoleon’s, hich successive gusts of wind have carried away and thrown, on each occasion, till further from us, had become historical and had acquired a certain efiniteness which contrasted with its provisional aspect. It was an elephant orty feet high, constructed of timber and masonry, bearing on its back a tower hich resembled a house, formerly painted green by some dauber, and now painted lack by heaven, the wind, and time. In this deserted and unprotected corner of he place, the broad brow of the colossus, his trunk, his tusks, his tower, his normous crupper, his four feet, like columns produced, at night, under the tarry heavens, a surprising and terrible form. It was a sort of symbol of opular force. It was sombre, mysterious, and immense. It was some mighty, isible phantom, one knew not what, standing erect beside the invisible spectre f the Bastille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.185#Few strangers visited this edifice, no passer-by looked at it. It was alling into ruins; every season the plaster which detached itself from its ides formed hideous wounds upon it. “The ædiles,” as the expression ran in legant dialect, had forgotten it ever since 1814. There it stood in its corner, elancholy, sick, crumbling, surrounded by a rotten palisade, soiled continually y drunken coachmen; cracks meandered athwart its belly, a lath projected from ts tail, tall grass flourished between its legs; and, as the level of the place ad been rising all around it for a space of thirty years, by that slow and ontinuous movement which insensibly elevates the soil of large towns, it stood n a hollow, and it looked as though the ground were giving way beneath it. It as unclean, despised, repulsive, and superb, ugly in the eyes of the bourgeois, elancholy in the eyes of the thinker. There was something about it of the dirt hich is on the point of being swept out, and something of the majesty which is n the point of being decapitated. As we have said, at night, its aspect hanged. Night is the real element of everything that is dark. As soon as wilight descended, the old elephant became transfigured; he assumed a tranquil nd redoubtable appearance in the formidable serenity of the shadows. Being of he past, he belonged to night; and obscurity was in keeping with his randeur.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.186#This rough, squat, heavy, hard, austere, almost misshapen, but assuredly ajestic monument, stamped with a sort of magnificent and savage gravity, has isappeared, and left to reign in peace, a sort of gigantic stove, ornamented ith its pipe, which has replaced the sombre fortress with its nine towers, very uch as the bourgeoisie replaces the feudal classes. It is quite natural that a tove should be the symbol of an epoch in which a pot contains power. This epoch ill pass away, people have already begun to understand that, if there can be orce in a boiler, there can be no force except in the brain; in other words, hat which leads and drags on the world, is not locomotives, but ideas. Harness ocomotives to ideas,—that is well done; but do not mistake the horse for the ider.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.187#At all events, to return to the Place de la Bastille, the architect of his elephant succeeded in making a grand thing out of plaster; the architect of he stove has succeeded in making a pretty thing out of bronze.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.188#This stove-pipe, which has been baptized by a sonorous name, and called he column of July, this monument of a revolution that miscarried, was still nveloped in 1832, in an immense shirt of woodwork, which we regret, for our art, and by a vast plank enclosure, which completed the task of isolating the lephant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.189#It was towards this corner of the place, dimly lighted by the reflection f a distant street lamp, that the gamin guided his two “brats.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.190#The reader must permit us to interrupt ourselves here and to remind him hat we are dealing with simple reality, and that twenty years ago, the ribunals were called upon to judge, under the charge of vagabondage, and utilation of a public monument, a child who had been caught asleep in this very lephant of the Bastille. This fact noted, we proceed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.191#On arriving in the vicinity of the colossus, Gavroche comprehended the ffect which the infinitely great might produce on the infinitely small, and aid:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.192#“Don’t be scared, infants.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.193#Then he entered through a gap in the fence into the elephant’s enclosure nd helped the young ones to clamber through the breach. The two children, omewhat frightened, followed Gavroche without uttering a word, and confided hemselves to this little Providence in rags which had given them bread and had romised them a shelter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.194#There, extended along the fence, lay a ladder which by day served the aborers in the neighboring timber-yard. Gavroche raised it with remarkable igor, and placed it against one of the elephant’s forelegs. Near the point here the ladder ended, a sort of black hole in the belly of the colossus could e distinguished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.195#Gavroche pointed out the ladder and the hole to his guests, and said to hem:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.196#“Climb up and go in.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.197#The two little boys exchanged terrified glances.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.198#“You’re afraid, brats!” exclaimed Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.199#And he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.200#“You shall see!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.201#He clasped the rough leg of the elephant, and in a twinkling, without eigning to make use of the ladder, he had reached the aperture. He entered it s an adder slips through a crevice, and disappeared within, and an instant ater, the two children saw his head, which looked pale, appear vaguely, on the dge of the shadowy hole, like a wan and whitish spectre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.202#“Well!” he exclaimed, “climb up, young ‘uns! You’ll see how snug it is ere! Come up, you!” he said to the elder, “I’ll lend you a hand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.203#The little fellows nudged each other, the gamin frightened and inspired hem with confidence at one and the same time, and then, it was raining very ard. The elder one undertook the risk. The younger, on seeing his brother limbing up, and himself left alone between the paws of this huge beast, felt reatly inclined to cry, but he did not dare.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.204#The elder lad climbed, with uncertain steps, up the rungs of the ladder; avroche, in the meanwhile, encouraging him with exclamations like a encing-master to his pupils, or a muleteer to his mules.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.205#“Don’t be afraid!—That’s it!—Come on!—Put your feet there!—Give us your and here!—Boldly!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.206#And when the child was within reach, he seized him suddenly and igorously by the arm, and pulled him towards him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.207#“Nabbed!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.208#The brat had passed through the crack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.209#“Now,” said Gavroche, “wait for me. Be so good as to take a seat, onsieur.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.210#And making his way out of the hole as he had entered it, he slipped down he elephant’s leg with the agility of a monkey, landed on his feet in the rass, grasped the child of five round the body, and planted him fairly in the iddle of the ladder, then he began to climb up behind him, shouting to the lder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.211#“I’m going to boost him, do you tug.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.212#And in another instant, the small lad was pushed, dragged, pulled, hrust, stuffed into the hole, before he had time to recover himself, and avroche, entering behind him, and repulsing the ladder with a kick which sent t flat on the grass, began to clap his hands and to cry:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.213#“Here we are! Long live General Lafayette!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.214#This explosion over, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.215#“Now, young ‘uns, you are in my house.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.216#Gavroche was at home, in fact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.217#Oh, unforeseen utility of the useless! Charity of great things! Goodness f giants! This huge monument, which had embodied an idea of the Emperor’s, had ecome the box of a street urchin. The brat had been accepted and sheltered by he colossus. The bourgeois decked out in their Sunday finery who passed the lephant of the Bastille, were fond of saying as they scanned it disdainfully ith their prominent eyes: “What’s the good of that?” It served to save from the old, the frost, the hail, and rain, to shelter from the winds of winter, to reserve from slumber in the mud which produces fever, and from slumber in the now which produces death, a little being who had no father, no mother, no read, no clothes, no refuge. It served to receive the innocent whom society epulsed. It served to diminish public crime. It was a lair open to one against hom all doors were shut. It seemed as though the miserable old mastodon, nvaded by vermin and oblivion, covered with warts, with mould, and ulcers, ottering, worm-eaten, abandoned, condemned, a sort of mendicant colossus, sking alms in vain with a benevolent look in the midst of the crossroads, had aken pity on that other mendicant, the poor pygmy, who roamed without shoes to is feet, without a roof over his head, blowing on his fingers, clad in rags, ed on rejected scraps. That was what the elephant of the Bastille was good for. his idea of Napoleon, disdained by men, had been taken back by God. That which ad been merely illustrious, had become august. In order to realize his thought, he Emperor should have had porphyry, brass, iron, gold, marble; the old ollection of planks, beams and plaster sufficed for God. The Emperor had had he dream of a genius; in that Titanic elephant, armed, prodigious, with trunk plifted, bearing its tower and scattering on all sides its merry and vivifying aters, he wished to incarnate the people. God had done a grander thing with it, e had lodged a child there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.218#The hole through which Gavroche had entered was a breach which was hardly isible from the outside, being concealed, as we have stated, beneath the lephant’s belly, and so narrow that it was only cats and homeless children who ould pass through it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.219#“Let’s begin,” said Gavroche, “by telling the porter that we are not at ome.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.220#And plunging into the darkness with the assurance of a person who is well cquainted with his apartments, he took a plank and stopped up the aperture.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.221#Again Gavroche plunged into the obscurity. The children heard the rackling of the match thrust into the phosphoric bottle. The chemical match was ot yet in existence; at that epoch the Fumade steel represented progress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.222#A sudden light made them blink; Gavroche had just managed to ignite one f those bits of cord dipped in resin which are called _cellar rats_. The cellar rat_, which emitted more smoke than light, rendered the interior of the lephant confusedly visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.223#Gavroche’s two guests glanced about them, and the sensation which they xperienced was something like that which one would feel if shut up in the great un of Heidelberg, or, better still, like what Jonah must have felt in the iblical belly of the whale. An entire and gigantic skeleton appeared enveloping hem. Above, a long brown beam, whence started at regular distances, massive, rching ribs, represented the vertebral column with its sides, stalactites of laster depended from them like entrails, and vast spiders’ webs stretching from ide to side, formed dirty diaphragms. Here and there, in the corners, were isible large blackish spots which had the appearance of being alive, and which hanged places rapidly with an abrupt and frightened movement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.224#Fragments which had fallen from the elephant’s back into his belly had illed up the cavity, so that it was possible to walk upon it as on a floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.225#The smaller child nestled up against his brother, and whispered to im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.226#“It’s black.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.227#This remark drew an exclamation from Gavroche. The petrified air of the wo brats rendered some shock necessary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.228#“What’s that you are gabbling about there?” he exclaimed. “Are you coffing at me? Are you turning up your noses? Do you want the Tuileries? Are ou brutes? Come, say! I warn you that I don’t belong to the regiment of impletons. Ah, come now, are you brats from the Pope’s establishment?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.229#A little roughness is good in cases of fear. It is reassuring. The two hildren drew close to Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.230#Gavroche, paternally touched by this confidence, passed from grave to entle, and addressing the smaller:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.231#“Stupid,” said he, accenting the insulting word, with a caressing ntonation, “it’s outside that it is black. Outside it’s raining, here it does ot rain; outside it’s cold, here there’s not an atom of wind; outside there are eaps of people, here there’s no one; outside there ain’t even the moon, here here’s my candle, confound it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.232#The two children began to look upon the apartment with less terror; but avroche allowed them no more time for contemplation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.233#“Quick,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.234#And he pushed them towards what we are very glad to be able to call the nd of the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.235#There stood his bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.236#Gavroche’s bed was complete; that is to say, it had a mattress, a lanket, and an alcove with curtains.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.237#The mattress was a straw mat, the blanket a rather large strip of gray oollen stuff, very warm and almost new. This is what the alcove consisted f:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.238#Three rather long poles, thrust into and consolidated, with the rubbish hich formed the floor, that is to say, the belly of the elephant, two in front nd one behind, and united by a rope at their summits, so as to form a pyramidal undle. This cluster supported a trellis-work of brass wire which was simply laced upon it, but artistically applied, and held by fastenings of iron wire, o that it enveloped all three holes. A row of very heavy stones kept this etwork down to the floor so that nothing could pass under it. This grating was othing else than a piece of the brass screens with which aviaries are covered n menageries. Gavroche’s bed stood as in a cage, behind this net. The whole esembled an Esquimaux tent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.239#This trellis-work took the place of curtains.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.240#Gavroche moved aside the stones which fastened the net down in front, and he two folds of the net which lapped over each other fell apart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.241#“Down on all fours, brats!” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.242#He made his guests enter the cage with great precaution, then he crawled n after them, pulled the stones together, and closed the opening hermetically gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.243#All three had stretched out on the mat. Gavroche still had the _cellar at_ in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.244#“Now,” said he, “go to sleep! I’m going to suppress the candelabra.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.245#“Monsieur,” the elder of the brothers asked Gavroche, pointing to the etting, “what’s that for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.246#“That,” answered Gavroche gravely, “is for the rats. Go to sleep!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.247#Nevertheless, he felt obliged to add a few words of instruction for the enefit of these young creatures, and he continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.248#“It’s a thing from the Jardin des Plantes. It’s used for fierce animals. here’s a whole shopful of them there. All you’ve got to do is to climb over a all, crawl through a window, and pass through a door. You can get as much as ou want.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.249#As he spoke, he wrapped the younger one up bodily in a fold of the lanket, and the little one murmured:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.250#“Oh! how good that is! It’s warm!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.251#Gavroche cast a pleased eye on the blanket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.252#“That’s from the Jardin des Plantes, too,” said he. “I took that from the onkeys.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.253#And, pointing out to the eldest the mat on which he was lying, a very hick and admirably made mat, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.254#“That belonged to the giraffe.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.255#After a pause he went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.256#“The beasts had all these things. I took them away from them. It didn’t rouble them. I told them: ‘It’s for the elephant.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.257#He paused, and then resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.258#“You crawl over the walls and you don’t care a straw for the government. o there now!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.259#The two children gazed with timid and stupefied respect on this intrepid nd ingenious being, a vagabond like themselves, isolated like themselves, frail ike themselves, who had something admirable and all-powerful about him, who eemed supernatural to them, and whose physiognomy was composed of all the rimaces of an old mountebank, mingled with the most ingenuous and charming miles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.260#“Monsieur,” ventured the elder timidly, “you are not afraid of the olice, then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.261#Gavroche contented himself with replying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.262#“Brat! Nobody says ‘police,’ they say ‘bobbies.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.263#The smaller had his eyes wide open, but he said nothing. As he was on the dge of the mat, the elder being in the middle, Gavroche tucked the blanket ound him as a mother might have done, and heightened the mat under his head ith old rags, in such a way as to form a pillow for the child. Then he turned o the elder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.264#“Hey! We’re jolly comfortable here, ain’t we?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.265#“Ah, yes!” replied the elder, gazing at Gavroche with the expression of a aved angel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.266#The two poor little children who had been soaked through, began to grow arm once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.267#“Ah, by the way,” continued Gavroche, “what were you bawling about?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.268#And pointing out the little one to his brother:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.269#“A mite like that, I’ve nothing to say about, but the idea of a big ellow like you crying! It’s idiotic; you looked like a calf.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.270#“Gracious,” replied the child, “we have no lodging.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.271#“Bother!” retorted Gavroche, “you don’t say ‘lodgings,’ you say crib.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.272#“And then, we were afraid of being alone like that at night.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.273#“You don’t say ‘night,’ you say ‘darkmans.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.274#“Thank you, sir,” said the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.275#“Listen,” went on Gavroche, “you must never bawl again over anything. ’ll take care of you. You shall see what fun we’ll have. In summer, we’ll go to he Glacière with Navet, one of my pals, we’ll bathe in the Gare, we’ll run tark naked in front of the rafts on the bridge at Austerlitz,—that makes the aundresses raging. They scream, they get mad, and if you only knew how idiculous they are! We’ll go and see the man-skeleton. And then I’ll take you o the play. I’ll take you to see Frédérick Lemaître. I have tickets, I know ome of the actors, I even played in a piece once. There were a lot of us ellers, and we ran under a cloth, and that made the sea. I’ll get you an ngagement at my theatre. We’ll go to see the savages. They ain’t real, those avages ain’t. They wear pink tights that go all in wrinkles, and you can see here their elbows have been darned with white. Then, we’ll go to the Opera. e’ll get in with the hired applauders. The Opera claque is well managed. I ouldn’t associate with the claque on the boulevard. At the Opera, just fancy! ome of them pay twenty sous, but they’re ninnies. They’re called dishclouts. nd then we’ll go to see the guillotine work. I’ll show you the executioner. He ives in the Rue des Marais. Monsieur Sanson. He has a letter-box at his door. h! we’ll have famous fun!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.276#At that moment a drop of wax fell on Gavroche’s finger, and recalled him o the realities of life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.277#“The deuce!” said he, “there’s the wick giving out. Attention! I can’t pend more than a sou a month on my lighting. When a body goes to bed, he must leep. We haven’t the time to read M. Paul de Kock’s romances. And besides, the ight might pass through the cracks of the porte-cochère, and all the bobbies eed to do is to see it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.278#“And then,” remarked the elder timidly,—he alone dared talk to Gavroche, nd reply to him, “a spark might fall in the straw, and we must look out and not urn the house down.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.279#“People don’t say ‘burn the house down,’” remarked Gavroche, “they say blaze the crib.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.280#The storm increased in violence, and the heavy downpour beat upon the ack of the colossus amid claps of thunder. “You’re taken in, rain!” said avroche. “It amuses me to hear the decanter run down the legs of the house. inter is a stupid; it wastes its merchandise, it loses its labor, it can’t wet s, and that makes it kick up a row, old water-carrier that it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.281#This allusion to the thunder, all the consequences of which Gavroche, in is character of a philosopher of the nineteenth century, accepted, was followed y a broad flash of lightning, so dazzling that a hint of it entered the belly f the elephant through the crack. Almost at the same instant, the thunder umbled with great fury. The two little creatures uttered a shriek, and started p so eagerly that the network came near being displaced, but Gavroche turned is bold face to them, and took advantage of the clap of thunder to burst into a augh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.282#“Calm down, children. Don’t topple over the edifice. That’s fine, irst-class thunder; all right. That’s no slouch of a streak of lightning. Bravo or the good God! Deuce take it! It’s almost as good as it is at the mbigu.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.283#That said, he restored order in the netting, pushed the two children ently down on the bed, pressed their knees, in order to stretch them out at ull length, and exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.284#“Since the good God is lighting his candle, I can blow out mine. Now, abes, now, my young humans, you must shut your peepers. It’s very bad not to leep. It’ll make you swallow the strainer, or, as they say, in fashionable ociety, stink in the gullet. Wrap yourself up well in the hide! I’m going to ut out the light. Are you ready?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.285#“Yes,” murmured the elder, “I’m all right. I seem to have feathers under y head.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.286#“People don’t say ‘head,’” cried Gavroche, “they say ‘nut’.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.287#The two children nestled close to each other, Gavroche finished arranging hem on the mat, drew the blanket up to their very ears, then repeated, for the hird time, his injunction in the hieratical tongue:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.288#“Shut your peepers!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.289#And he snuffed out his tiny light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.290#Hardly had the light been extinguished, when a peculiar trembling began o affect the netting under which the three children lay.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.291#It consisted of a multitude of dull scratches which produced a metallic ound, as if claws and teeth were gnawing at the copper wire. This was ccompanied by all sorts of little piercing cries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.292#The little five-year-old boy, on hearing this hubbub overhead, and hilled with terror, jogged his brother’s elbow; but the elder brother had lready shut his peepers, as Gavroche had ordered. Then the little one, who ould no longer control his terror, questioned Gavroche, but in a very low tone, nd with bated breath:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.293#“Sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.294#“Hey?” said Gavroche, who had just closed his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.295#“What is that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.296#“It’s the rats,” replied Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.297#And he laid his head down on the mat again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.298#The rats, in fact, who swarmed by thousands in the carcass of the lephant, and who were the living black spots which we have already mentioned, ad been held in awe by the flame of the candle, so long as it had been lighted; ut as soon as the cavern, which was the same as their city, had returned to arkness, scenting what the good story-teller Perrault calls “fresh meat,” they ad hurled themselves in throngs on Gavroche’s tent, had climbed to the top of t, and had begun to bite the meshes as though seeking to pierce this ew-fangled trap.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.299#Still the little one could not sleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.300#“Sir?” he began again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.301#“Hey?” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.302#“What are rats?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.303#“They are mice.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.304#This explanation reassured the child a little. He had seen white mice in he course of his life, and he was not afraid of them. Nevertheless, he lifted p his voice once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.305#“Sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.306#“Hey?” said Gavroche again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.307#“Why don’t you have a cat?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.308#“I did have one,” replied Gavroche, “I brought one here, but they ate er.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.309#This second explanation undid the work of the first, and the little ellow began to tremble again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.310#The dialogue between him and Gavroche began again for the fourth ime:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.311#“Monsieur?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.312#“Hey?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.313#“Who was it that was eaten?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.314#“The cat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.315#“And who ate the cat?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.316#“The rats.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.317#“The mice?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.318#“Yes, the rats.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.319#The child, in consternation, dismayed at the thought of mice which ate ats, pursued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.320#“Sir, would those mice eat us?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.321#“Wouldn’t they just!” ejaculated Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.322#The child’s terror had reached its climax. But Gavroche added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.323#“Don’t be afraid. They can’t get in. And besides, I’m here! Here, catch old of my hand. Hold your tongue and shut your peepers!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.324#At the same time Gavroche grasped the little fellow’s hand across his rother. The child pressed the hand close to him, and felt reassured. Courage nd strength have these mysterious ways of communicating themselves. Silence eigned round them once more, the sound of their voices had frightened off the ats; at the expiration of a few minutes, they came raging back, but in vain, he three little fellows were fast asleep and heard nothing more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.325#The hours of the night fled away. Darkness covered the vast Place de la astille. A wintry gale, which mingled with the rain, blew in gusts, the patrol earched all the doorways, alleys, enclosures, and obscure nooks, and in their earch for nocturnal vagabonds they passed in silence before the elephant; the onster, erect, motionless, staring open-eyed into the shadows, had the ppearance of dreaming happily over his good deed; and sheltered from heaven and rom men the three poor sleeping children.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.326#In order to understand what is about to follow, the reader must remember, hat, at that epoch, the Bastille guard-house was situated at the other end of he square, and that what took place in the vicinity of the elephant could either be seen nor heard by the sentinel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.327#Towards the end of that hour which immediately precedes the dawn, a man urned from the Rue Saint-Antoine at a run, made the circuit of the enclosure of he column of July, and glided between the palings until he was underneath the elly of the elephant. If any light had illuminated that man, it might have been ivined from the thorough manner in which he was soaked that he had passed the ight in the rain. Arrived beneath the elephant, he uttered a peculiar cry, hich did not belong to any human tongue, and which a paroquet alone could have mitated. Twice he repeated this cry, of whose orthography the following barely onveys an idea:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.328#“Kirikikiou!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.329#At the second cry, a clear, young, merry voice responded from the belly f the elephant:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.330#“Yes!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.331#Almost immediately, the plank which closed the hole was drawn aside, and ave passage to a child who descended the elephant’s leg, and fell briskly near he man. It was Gavroche. The man was Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.332#As for his cry of _Kirikikiou_,—that was, doubtless, what the child had eant, when he said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.333#“You will ask for Monsieur Gavroche.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.334#On hearing it, he had waked with a start, had crawled out of his alcove,” pushing apart the netting a little, and carefully drawing it together gain, then he had opened the trap, and descended.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.335#The man and the child recognized each other silently amid the gloom: ontparnasse confined himself to the remark:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.336#“We need you. Come, lend us a hand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.337#The lad asked for no further enlightenment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.338#“I’m with you,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.339#And both took their way towards the Rue Saint-Antoine, whence ontparnasse had emerged, winding rapidly through the long file of arket-gardeners’ carts which descend towards the markets at that hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.2.340#The market-gardeners, crouching, half-asleep, in their wagons, amid the alads and vegetables, enveloped to their very eyes in their mufflers on account f the beating rain, did not even glance at these strange pedestrians.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE VICISSITUDES OF FLIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.1#This is what had taken place that same night at the La Force:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.2#An escape had been planned between Babet, Brujon, Guelemer, and Thénardier, lthough Thénardier was in close confinement. Babet had arranged the matter for is own benefit, on the same day, as the reader has seen from Montparnasse’s ccount to Gavroche. Montparnasse was to help them from outside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.3#Brujon, after having passed a month in the punishment cell, had had time, n the first place, to weave a rope, in the second, to mature a plan. In former imes, those severe places where the discipline of the prison delivers the onvict into his own hands, were composed of four stone walls, a stone ceiling, flagged pavement, a camp bed, a grated window, and a door lined with iron, and ere called _dungeons_; but the dungeon was judged to be too terrible; nowadays hey are composed of an iron door, a grated window, a camp bed, a flagged avement, four stone walls, and a stone ceiling, and are called _chambers of unishment_. A little light penetrates towards midday. The inconvenient point bout these chambers which, as the reader sees, are not dungeons, is that they llow the persons who should be at work to think.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.4#So Brujon meditated, and he emerged from the chamber of punishment with a ope. As he had the name of being very dangerous in the Charlemagne courtyard, e was placed in the New Building. The first thing he found in the New Building as Guelemer, the second was a nail; Guelemer, that is to say, crime; a nail, hat is to say, liberty. Brujon, of whom it is high time that the reader should ave a complete idea, was, with an appearance of delicate health and a rofoundly premeditated languor, a polished, intelligent sprig, and a thief, who ad a caressing glance, and an atrocious smile. His glance resulted from his ill, and his smile from his nature. His first studies in his art had been irected to roofs. He had made great progress in the industry of the men who ear off lead, who plunder the roofs and despoil the gutters by the process alled _double pickings_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.5#The circumstance which put the finishing touch on the moment peculiarly avorable for an attempt at escape, was that the roofers were re-laying and e-jointing, at that very moment, a portion of the slates on the prison. The aint-Bernard courtyard was no longer absolutely isolated from the Charlemagne nd the Saint-Louis courts. Up above there were scaffoldings and ladders; in ther words, bridges and stairs in the direction of liberty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.6#The New Building, which was the most cracked and decrepit thing to be seen nywhere in the world, was the weak point in the prison. The walls were eaten by altpetre to such an extent that the authorities had been obliged to line the aults of the dormitories with a sheathing of wood, because stones were in the abit of becoming detached and falling on the prisoners in their beds. In spite f this antiquity, the authorities committed the error of confining in the New uilding the most troublesome prisoners, of placing there “the hard cases,” as hey say in prison parlance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.7#The New Building contained four dormitories, one above the other, and a top tory which was called the Bel-Air (Fine-Air). A large chimney-flue, probably rom some ancient kitchen of the Dukes de la Force, started from the ground loor, traversed all four stories, cut the dormitories, where it figured as a lattened pillar, into two portions, and finally pierced the roof.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.8#Guelemer and Brujon were in the same dormitory. They had been placed, by ay of precaution, on the lower story. Chance ordained that the heads of their eds should rest against the chimney.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.9#Thénardier was directly over their heads in the top story known as ine-Air. The pedestrian who halts on the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine, after assing the barracks of the firemen, in front of the porte-cochère of the athing establishment, beholds a yard full of flowers and shrubs in wooden oxes, at the extremity of which spreads out a little white rotunda with two ings, brightened up with green shutters, the bucolic dream of Jean Jacques.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.10#Not more than ten years ago, there rose above that rotunda an enormous lack, hideous, bare wall by which it was backed up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.11#This was the outer wall of La Force.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.12#This wall, beside that rotunda, was Milton viewed through Berquin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.13#Lofty as it was, this wall was overtopped by a still blacker roof, which ould be seen beyond. This was the roof of the New Building. There one could escry four dormer-windows, guarded with bars; they were the windows of the ine-Air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.14#A chimney pierced the roof; this was the chimney which traversed the ormitories.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.15#The Bel-Air, that top story of the New Building, was a sort of large hall, ith a Mansard roof, guarded with triple gratings and double doors of sheet ron, which were studded with enormous bolts. When one entered from the north nd, one had on one’s left the four dormer-windows, on one’s right, facing the indows, at regular intervals, four square, tolerably vast cages, separated by arrow passages, built of masonry to about the height of the elbow, and the est, up to the roof, of iron bars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.16#Thénardier had been in solitary confinement in one of these cages since he night of the 3d of February. No one was ever able to discover how, and by hat connivance, he succeeded in procuring, and secreting a bottle of wine, nvented, so it is said, by Desrues, with which a narcotic is mixed, and which he band of the _Endormeurs_, or _Sleep-compellers_, rendered famous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.17#There are, in many prisons, treacherous employees, half-jailers, alf-thieves, who assist in escapes, who sell to the police an unfaithful ervice, and who turn a penny whenever they can.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.18#On that same night, then, when Little Gavroche picked up the two lost hildren, Brujon and Guelemer, who knew that Babet, who had escaped that orning, was waiting for them in the street as well as Montparnasse, rose oftly, and with the nail which Brujon had found, began to pierce the chimney gainst which their beds stood. The rubbish fell on Brujon’s bed, so that they ere not heard. Showers mingled with thunder shook the doors on their hinges, nd created in the prison a terrible and opportune uproar. Those of the risoners who woke, pretended to fall asleep again, and left Guelemer and Brujon o their own devices. Brujon was adroit; Guelemer was vigorous. Before any sound ad reached the watcher, who was sleeping in the grated cell which opened into he dormitory, the wall had been pierced, the chimney scaled, the iron grating hich barred the upper orifice of the flue forced, and the two redoubtable uffians were on the roof. The wind and rain redoubled, the roof was lippery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.19#“What a good night to leg it!” said Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.20#An abyss six feet broad and eighty feet deep separated them from the urrounding wall. At the bottom of this abyss, they could see the musket of a entinel gleaming through the gloom. They fastened one end of the rope which rujon had spun in his dungeon to the stumps of the iron bars which they had ust wrenched off, flung the other over the outer wall, crossed the abyss at one ound, clung to the coping of the wall, got astride of it, let themselves slip, ne after the other, along the rope, upon a little roof which touches the ath-house, pulled their rope after them, jumped down into the courtyard of the ath-house, traversed it, pushed open the porter’s wicket, beside which hung his ope, pulled this, opened the porte-cochère, and found themselves in the treet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.21#Three-quarters of an hour had not elapsed since they had risen in bed in he dark, nail in hand, and their project in their heads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.22#A few moments later they had joined Babet and Montparnasse, who were rowling about the neighborhood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.23#They had broken their rope in pulling it after them, and a bit of it emained attached to the chimney on the roof. They had sustained no other amage, however, than that of scratching nearly all the skin off their ands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.24#That night, Thénardier was warned, without any one being able to explain ow, and was not asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.25#Towards one o’clock in the morning, the night being very dark, he saw two hadows pass along the roof, in the rain and squalls, in front of the ormer-window which was opposite his cage. One halted at the window, long enough o dart in a glance. This was Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.26#Thénardier recognized him, and understood. This was enough.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.27#Thénardier, rated as a burglar, and detained as a measure of precaution nder the charge of organizing a nocturnal ambush, with armed force, was kept in ight. The sentry, who was relieved every two hours, marched up and down in ront of his cage with loaded musket. The Fine-Air was lighted by a skylight. he prisoner had on his feet fetters weighing fifty pounds. Every day, at four ’clock in the afternoon, a jailer, escorted by two dogs,—this was still in ogue at that time,—entered his cage, deposited beside his bed a loaf of black read weighing two pounds, a jug of water, a bowl filled with rather thin ouillon, in which swam a few Mayagan beans, inspected his irons and tapped the ars. This man and his dogs made two visits during the night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.28#Thénardier had obtained permission to keep a sort of iron bolt which he sed to spike his bread into a crack in the wall, “in order to preserve it from he rats,” as he said. As Thénardier was kept in sight, no objection had been ade to this spike. Still, it was remembered afterwards, that one of the jailers ad said: “It would be better to let him have only a wooden spike.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.29#At two o’clock in the morning, the sentinel, who was an old soldier, was elieved, and replaced by a conscript. A few moments later, the man with the ogs paid his visit, and went off without noticing anything, except, possibly, he excessive youth and “the rustic air” of the “raw recruit.” Two hours fterwards, at four o’clock, when they came to relieve the conscript, he was ound asleep on the floor, lying like a log near Thénardier’s cage. As for hénardier, he was no longer there. There was a hole in the ceiling of his cage, nd, above it, another hole in the roof. One of the planks of his bed had been renched off, and probably carried away with him, as it was not found. They also eized in his cell a half-empty bottle which contained the remains of the tupefying wine with which the soldier had been drugged. The soldier’s bayonet ad disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.30#At the moment when this discovery was made, it was assumed that Thénardier as out of reach. The truth is, that he was no longer in the New Building, but hat he was still in great danger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.31#Thénardier, on reaching the roof of the New Building, had found the emains of Brujon’s rope hanging to the bars of the upper trap of the chimney, ut, as this broken fragment was much too short, he had not been able to escape y the outer wall, as Brujon and Guelemer had done.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.32#When one turns from the Rue des Ballets into the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile, one lmost immediately encounters a repulsive ruin. There stood on that spot, in the ast century, a house of which only the back wall now remains, a regular wall of asonry, which rises to the height of the third story between the adjoining uildings. This ruin can be recognized by two large square windows which are till to be seen there; the middle one, that nearest the right gable, is barred ith a worm-eaten beam adjusted like a prop. Through these windows there was ormerly visible a lofty and lugubrious wall, which was a fragment of the outer all of La Force.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.33#The empty space on the street left by the demolished house is half-filled y a fence of rotten boards, shored up by five stone posts. In this recess lies oncealed a little shanty which leans against the portion of the ruin which has emained standing. The fence has a gate, which, a few years ago, was fastened nly by a latch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.34#It was the crest of this ruin that Thénardier had succeeded in reaching, a ittle after one o’clock in the morning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.35#How had he got there? That is what no one has ever been able to explain or nderstand. The lightning must, at the same time, have hindered and helped him. ad he made use of the ladders and scaffoldings of the slaters to get from roof o roof, from enclosure to enclosure, from compartment to compartment, to the uildings of the Charlemagne court, then to the buildings of the Saint-Louis ourt, to the outer wall, and thence to the hut on the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile? But n that itinerary there existed breaks which seemed to render it an mpossibility. Had he placed the plank from his bed like a bridge from the roof f the Fine-Air to the outer wall, and crawled flat, on his belly on the coping f the outer wall the whole distance round the prison as far as the hut? But the uter wall of La Force formed a crenellated and unequal line; it mounted and escended, it dropped at the firemen’s barracks, it rose towards the bath-house, t was cut in twain by buildings, it was not even of the same height on the otel Lamoignon as on the Rue Pavée; everywhere occurred falls and right angles; nd then, the sentinels must have espied the dark form of the fugitive; hence, he route taken by Thénardier still remains rather inexplicable. In two manners, light was impossible. Had Thénardier, spurred on by that thirst for liberty hich changes precipices into ditches, iron bars into wattles of osier, a egless man into an athlete, a gouty man into a bird, stupidity into instinct, nstinct into intelligence, and intelligence into genius, had Thénardier nvented a third mode? No one has ever found out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.36#The marvels of escape cannot always be accounted for. The man who makes is escape, we repeat, is inspired; there is something of the star and of the ightning in the mysterious gleam of flight; the effort towards deliverance is o less surprising than the flight towards the sublime, and one says of the scaped thief: “How did he contrive to scale that wall?” in the same way that ne says of Corneille: “Where did he find _the means of dying?_”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.37#At all events, dripping with perspiration, drenched with rain, with his lothes hanging in ribbons, his hands flayed, his elbows bleeding, his knees orn, Thénardier had reached what children, in their figurative language, call the edge_ of the wall of the ruin, there he had stretched himself out at full ength, and there his strength had failed him. A steep escarpment three stories igh separated him from the pavement of the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.38#The rope which he had was too short.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.39#There he waited, pale, exhausted, desperate with all the despair which he ad undergone, still hidden by the night, but telling himself that the day was n the point of dawning, alarmed at the idea of hearing the neighboring clock of aint-Paul strike four within a few minutes, an hour when the sentinel was elieved and when the latter would be found asleep under the pierced roof, taring in horror at a terrible depth, at the light of the street lanterns, the et, black pavement, that pavement longed for yet frightful, which meant death, nd which meant liberty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.40#He asked himself whether his three accomplices in flight had succeeded, if hey had heard him, and if they would come to his assistance. He listened. With he exception of the patrol, no one had passed through the street since he had een there. Nearly the whole of the descent of the market-gardeners from ontreuil, from Charonne, from Vincennes, and from Bercy to the markets was ccomplished through the Rue Saint-Antoine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.41#Four o’clock struck. Thénardier shuddered. A few moments later, that errified and confused uproar which follows the discovery of an escape broke orth in the prison. The sound of doors opening and shutting, the creaking of ratings on their hinges, a tumult in the guard-house, the hoarse shouts of the urnkeys, the shock of musket-butts on the pavement of the courts, reached his ars. Lights ascended and descended past the grated windows of the dormitories, torch ran along the ridge-pole of the top story of the New Building, the iremen belonging in the barracks on the right had been summoned. Their helmets, hich the torch lighted up in the rain, went and came along the roofs. At the ame time, Thénardier perceived in the direction of the Bastille a wan whiteness ighting up the edge of the sky in doleful wise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.42#He was on top of a wall ten inches wide, stretched out under the heavy ains, with two gulfs to right and left, unable to stir, subject to the iddiness of a possible fall, and to the horror of a certain arrest, and his houghts, like the pendulum of a clock, swung from one of these ideas to the ther: “Dead if I fall, caught if I stay.” In the midst of this anguish, he uddenly saw, the street being still dark, a man who was gliding along the walls nd coming from the Rue Pavée, halt in the recess above which Thénardier was, as t were, suspended. Here this man was joined by a second, who walked with the ame caution, then by a third, then by a fourth. When these men were re-united, ne of them lifted the latch of the gate in the fence, and all four entered the nclosure in which the shanty stood. They halted directly under Thénardier. hese men had evidently chosen this vacant space in order that they might onsult without being seen by the passers-by or by the sentinel who guards the icket of La Force a few paces distant. It must be added, that the rain kept his sentinel blocked in his box. Thénardier, not being able to distinguish heir visages, lent an ear to their words with the desperate attention of a retch who feels himself lost.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.43#Thénardier saw something resembling a gleam of hope flash before his yes,—these men conversed in slang.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.44#The first said in a low but distinct voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.45#“Let’s cut. What are we up to here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.46#The second replied: “It’s raining hard enough to put out the very devil’s ire. And the bobbies will be along instanter. There’s a soldier on guard onder. We shall get nabbed here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.47#These two words, _icigo_ and _icicaille_, both of which mean _ici_, and hich belong, the first to the slang of the barriers, the second to the slang of he Temple, were flashes of light for Thénardier. By the _icigo_ he recognized rujon, who was a prowler of the barriers, by the _icicaille_ he knew Babet, ho, among his other trades, had been an old-clothes broker at the Temple.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.48#The antique slang of the great century is no longer spoken except in the emple, and Babet was really the only person who spoke it in all its purity. Had t not been for the _icicaille_, Thénardier would not have recognized him, for e had entirely changed his voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.49#In the meanwhile, the third man had intervened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.50#“There’s no hurry yet, let’s wait a bit. How do we know that he doesn’t tand in need of us?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.51#By this, which was nothing but French, Thénardier recognized Montparnasse, ho made it a point in his elegance to understand all slangs and to speak none f them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.52#As for the fourth, he held his peace, but his huge shoulders betrayed him. hénardier did not hesitate. It was Guelemer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.53#Brujon replied almost impetuously but still in a low tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.54#“What are you jabbering about? The tavern-keeper hasn’t managed to cut his tick. He don’t tumble to the racket, that he don’t! You have to be a pretty nowing cove to tear up your shirt, cut up your sheet to make a rope, punch oles in doors, get up false papers, make false keys, file your irons, hang out our cord, hide yourself, and disguise yourself! The old fellow hasn’t managed o play it, he doesn’t understand how to work the business.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.55#Babet added, still in that classical slang which was spoken by Poulailler nd Cartouche, and which is to the bold, new, highly colored and risky argot sed by Brujon what the language of Racine is to the language of André henier:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.56#“Your tavern-keeper must have been nabbed in the act. You have to be nowing. He’s only a greenhorn. He must have let himself be taken in by a bobby, erhaps even by a sheep who played it on him as his pal. Listen, Montparnasse, o you hear those shouts in the prison? You have seen all those lights. He’s ecaptured, there! He’ll get off with twenty years. I ain’t afraid, I ain’t a oward, but there ain’t anything more to do, or otherwise they’d lead us a ance. Don’t get mad, come with us, let’s go drink a bottle of old wine ogether.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.57#“One doesn’t desert one’s friends in a scrape,” grumbled Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.58#“I tell you he’s nabbed!” retorted Brujon. “At the present moment, the nn-keeper ain’t worth a ha’penny. We can’t do nothing for him. Let’s be off. very minute I think a bobby has got me in his fist.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.59#Montparnasse no longer offered more than a feeble resistance; the fact is, hat these four men, with the fidelity of ruffians who never abandon each other, ad prowled all night long about La Force, great as was their peril, in the hope f seeing Thénardier make his appearance on the top of some wall. But the night, hich was really growing too fine,—for the downpour was such as to render all he streets deserted,—the cold which was overpowering them, their soaked arments, their hole-ridden shoes, the alarming noise which had just burst forth n the prison, the hours which had elapsed, the patrol which they had ncountered, the hope which was vanishing, all urged them to beat a retreat. ontparnasse himself, who was, perhaps, almost Thénardier’s son-in-law, yielded. moment more, and they would be gone. Thénardier was panting on his wall like he shipwrecked sufferers of the _Méduse_ on their raft when they beheld the essel which had appeared in sight vanish on the horizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.60#He dared not call to them; a cry might be heard and ruin everything. An dea occurred to him, a last idea, a flash of inspiration; he drew from his ocket the end of Brujon’s rope, which he had detached from the chimney of the ew Building, and flung it into the space enclosed by the fence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.61#This rope fell at their feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.62#“A widow,"37 said Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.63#“My tortouse!”38 said Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.64#“The tavern-keeper is there,” said Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.65#They raised their eyes. Thénardier thrust out his head a very little.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.66#“Quick!” said Montparnasse, “have you the other end of the rope, rujon?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.67#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.68#“Knot the two pieces together, we’ll fling him the rope, he can fasten it o the wall, and he’ll have enough of it to get down with.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.69#Thénardier ran the risk, and spoke:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.70#“I am paralyzed with cold.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.71#“We’ll warm you up.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.72#“I can’t budge.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.73#“Let yourself slide, we’ll catch you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.74#“My hands are benumbed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.75#“Only fasten the rope to the wall.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.76#“I can’t.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.77#“Then one of us must climb up,” said Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.78#“Three stories!” ejaculated Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.79#An ancient plaster flue, which had served for a stove that had been used n the shanty in former times, ran along the wall and mounted almost to the very pot where they could see Thénardier. This flue, then much damaged and full of racks, has since fallen, but the marks of it are still visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.80#It was very narrow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.81#“One might get up by the help of that,” said Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.82#“By that flue?” exclaimed Babet, “a grown-up cove, never! it would take a rat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.83#“A brat must be got,” resumed Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.84#“Where are we to find a young ‘un?” said Guelemer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.85#“Wait,” said Montparnasse. “I’ve got the very article.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.86#He opened the gate of the fence very softly, made sure that no one was assing along the street, stepped out cautiously, shut the gate behind him, and et off at a run in the direction of the Bastille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.87#Seven or eight minutes elapsed, eight thousand centuries to Thénardier; abet, Brujon, and Guelemer did not open their lips; at last the gate opened nce more, and Montparnasse appeared, breathless, and followed by Gavroche. The ain still rendered the street completely deserted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.88#Little Gavroche entered the enclosure and gazed at the forms of these uffians with a tranquil air. The water was dripping from his hair. Guelemer ddressed him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.89#“Are you a man, young ‘un?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.90#Gavroche shrugged his shoulders, and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.91#“A young ‘un like me’s a man, and men like you are babes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.92#“The brat’s tongue’s well hung!” exclaimed Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.93#“The Paris brat ain’t made of straw,” added Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.94#“What do you want?” asked Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.95#Montparnasse answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.96#“Climb up that flue.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.97#“With this rope,” said Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.98#“And fasten it,” continued Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.99#“To the top of the wall,” went on Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.100#“To the cross-bar of the window,” added Brujon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.101#“And then?” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.102#“There!” said Guelemer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.103#The gamin examined the rope, the flue, the wall, the windows, and made hat indescribable and disdainful noise with his lips which signifies:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.104#“Is that all!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.105#“There’s a man up there whom you are to save,” resumed Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.106#“Will you?” began Brujon again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.107#“Greenhorn!” replied the lad, as though the question appeared a most nprecedented one to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.108#And he took off his shoes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.109#Guelemer seized Gavroche by one arm, set him on the roof of the shanty, hose worm-eaten planks bent beneath the urchin’s weight, and handed him the ope which Brujon had knotted together during Montparnasse’s absence. The gamin irected his steps towards the flue, which it was easy to enter, thanks to a arge crack which touched the roof. At the moment when he was on the point of scending, Thénardier, who saw life and safety approaching, bent over the edge f the wall; the first light of dawn struck white upon his brow dripping with weat, upon his livid cheek-bones, his sharp and savage nose, his bristling gray eard, and Gavroche recognized him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.110#“Hullo! it’s my father! Oh, that won’t hinder.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.111#And taking the rope in his teeth, he resolutely began the ascent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.112#He reached the summit of the hut, bestrode the old wall as though it had een a horse, and knotted the rope firmly to the upper cross-bar of the indow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.113#A moment later, Thénardier was in the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.114#As soon as he touched the pavement, as soon as he found himself out of anger, he was no longer either weary, or chilled or trembling; the terrible hings from which he had escaped vanished like smoke, all that strange and erocious mind awoke once more, and stood erect and free, ready to march nward.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.115#These were this man’s first words:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.116#“Now, whom are we to eat?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.117#It is useless to explain the sense of this frightfully transparent emark, which signifies both to kill, to assassinate, and to plunder. _To eat_, rue sense: _to devour_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.118#“Let’s get well into a corner,” said Brujon. “Let’s settle it in three ords, and part at once. There was an affair that promised well in the Rue lumet, a deserted street, an isolated house, an old rotten gate on a garden, nd lone women.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.119#“Well! why not?” demanded Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.120#“Your girl, Éponine, went to see about the matter,” replied Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.121#“And she brought a biscuit to Magnon,” added Guelemer. “Nothing to be ade there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.122#“The girl’s no fool,” said Thénardier. “Still, it must be seen to.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.123#“Yes, yes,” said Brujon, “it must be looked up.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.124#In the meanwhile, none of the men seemed to see Gavroche, who, during his colloquy, had seated himself on one of the fence-posts; he waited a few oments, thinking that perhaps his father would turn towards him, then he put on is shoes again, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.125#“Is that all? You don’t want any more, my men? Now you’re out of your crape. I’m off. I must go and get my brats out of bed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.126#And off he went.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.127#The five men emerged, one after another, from the enclosure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.128#When Gavroche had disappeared at the corner of the Rue des Ballets, Babet ook Thénardier aside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.129#“Did you take a good look at that young ‘un?” he asked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.130#“What young ‘un?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.131#“The one who climbed the wall and carried you the rope.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.132#“Not particularly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.133#“Well, I don’t know, but it strikes me that it was your son.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.6.3.134#“Bah!” said Thénardier, “do you think so?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.head#BOOK SEVENTH—SLANG
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.head#CHAPTER I—ORIGIN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.1#_Pigritia_ is a terrible word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.2#It engenders a whole world, _la pègre_, for which read _theft_, and a hell, la pègrenne_, for which read _hunger_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.3#Thus, idleness is the mother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.4#She has a son, theft, and a daughter, hunger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.5#Where are we at this moment? In the land of slang.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.6#What is slang? It is at one and the same time, a nation and a dialect; it s theft in its two kinds; people and language.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.7#When, four and thirty years ago, the narrator of this grave and sombre istory introduced into a work written with the same aim as this39 a thief who alked argot, there arose amazement and clamor.—“What! How! Argot! Why, argot is orrible! It is the language of prisons, galleys, convicts, of everything that s most abominable in society!” etc., etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.8#We have never understood this sort of objections.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.9#Since that time, two powerful romancers, one of whom is a profound observer f the human heart, the other an intrepid friend of the people, Balzac and ugène Sue, having represented their ruffians as talking their natural language, s the author of _The Last Day of a Condemned Man_ did in 1828, the same bjections have been raised. People repeated: “What do authors mean by that evolting dialect? Slang is odious! Slang makes one shudder!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.10#Who denies that? Of course it does.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.11#When it is a question of probing a wound, a gulf, a society, since when as it been considered wrong to go too far? to go to the bottom? We have always hought that it was sometimes a courageous act, and, at least, a simple and seful deed, worthy of the sympathetic attention which duty accepted and ulfilled merits. Why should one not explore everything, and study everything? hy should one halt on the way? The halt is a matter depending on the ounding-line, and not on the leadsman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.12#Certainly, too, it is neither an attractive nor an easy task to undertake n investigation into the lowest depths of the social order, where terra firma omes to an end and where mud begins, to rummage in those vague, murky waves, to ollow up, to seize and to fling, still quivering, upon the pavement that abject ialect which is dripping with filth when thus brought to the light, that ustulous vocabulary each word of which seems an unclean ring from a monster of he mire and the shadows. Nothing is more lugubrious than the contemplation thus n its nudity, in the broad light of thought, of the horrible swarming of slang. t seems, in fact, to be a sort of horrible beast made for the night which has ust been torn from its cesspool. One thinks one beholds a frightful, living, nd bristling thicket which quivers, rustles, wavers, returns to shadow, hreatens and glares. One word resembles a claw, another an extinguished and leeding eye, such and such a phrase seems to move like the claw of a crab. All his is alive with the hideous vitality of things which have been organized out f disorganization.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.13#Now, when has horror ever excluded study? Since when has malady banished edicine? Can one imagine a naturalist refusing to study the viper, the bat, the corpion, the centipede, the tarantula, and one who would cast them back into heir darkness, saying: “Oh! how ugly that is!” The thinker who should turn side from slang would resemble a surgeon who should avert his face from an lcer or a wart. He would be like a philologist refusing to examine a fact in anguage, a philosopher hesitating to scrutinize a fact in humanity. For, it ust be stated to those who are ignorant of the case, that argot is both a iterary phenomenon and a social result. What is slang, properly speaking? It is he language of wretchedness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.14#We may be stopped; the fact may be put to us in general terms, which is ne way of attenuating it; we may be told, that all trades, professions, it may e added, all the accidents of the social hierarchy and all forms of ntelligence, have their own slang. The merchant who says: “Montpellier not ctive, Marseilles fine quality,” the broker on ‘change who says: “Assets at end f current month,” the gambler who says: _“Tiers et tout, refait de pique,”_ the heriff of the Norman Isles who says: “The holder in fee reverting to his landed state cannot claim the fruits of that estate during the hereditary seizure of he real estate by the mortgagor,” the playwright who says: “The piece was issed,” the comedian who says: “I’ve made a hit,” the philosopher who says: Phenomenal triplicity,” the huntsman who says: _“Voileci allais, Voileci uyant,”_ the phrenologist who says: “Amativeness, combativeness, ecretiveness,” the infantry soldier who says: “My shooting-iron,” the avalry-man who says: “My turkey-cock,” the fencing-master who says: “Tierce, uarte, break,” the printer who says: “My shooting-stick and galley,”—all, rinter, fencing-master, cavalry dragoon, infantry-man, phrenologist, huntsman, hilosopher, comedian, playwright, sheriff, gambler, stock-broker, and merchant, peak slang. The painter who says: “My grinder,” the notary who says: “My kip-the-Gutter,” the hairdresser who says: “My mealyback,” the cobbler who ays: “My cub,” talks slang. Strictly speaking, if one absolutely insists on the oint, all the different fashions of saying the right and the left, the sailor’s port_ and _starboard_, the scene-shifter’s _court-side_, and _garden-side_, the eadle’s _Gospel-side_ and _Epistle-side_, are slang. There is the slang of the ffected lady as well as of the _précieuses_. The Hotel Rambouillet nearly djoins the Cour des Miracles. There is a slang of duchesses, witness this hrase contained in a love-letter from a very great lady and a very pretty woman f the Restoration: “You will find in this gossip a fultitude of reasons why I hould libertize."40 Diplomatic ciphers are slang; the pontifical chancellery by sing 26 for Rome, _grkztntgzyal_ for despatch, and _abfxustgrnogrkzu tu XI_. or the Duc de Modena, speaks slang. The physicians of the Middle Ages who, for arrot, radish, and turnip, said _Opoponach, perfroschinum, reptitalmus, racatholicum, angelorum, postmegorum_, talked slang. The sugar-manufacturer who ays: “Loaf, clarified, lumps, bastard, common, burnt,”—this honest manufacturer alks slang. A certain school of criticism twenty years ago, which used to say: Half of the works of Shakespeare consists of plays upon words and puns,”—talked lang. The poet, and the artist who, with profound understanding, would esignate M. de Montmorency as “a bourgeois,” if he were not a judge of verses nd statues, speak slang. The classic Academician who calls flowers “Flora,” ruits, “Pomona,” the sea, “Neptune,” love, “fires,” beauty, “charms,” a horse, a courser,” the white or tricolored cockade, “the rose of Bellona,” the hree-cornered hat, “Mars’ triangle,”—that classical Academician talks slang. lgebra, medicine, botany, have each their slang. The tongue which is employed n board ship, that wonderful language of the sea, which is so complete and so icturesque, which was spoken by Jean Bart, Duquesne, Suffren, and Duperré, hich mingles with the whistling of the rigging, the sound of the peaking-trumpets, the shock of the boarding-irons, the roll of the sea, the ind, the gale, the cannon, is wholly a heroic and dazzling slang, which is to he fierce slang of the thieves what the lion is to the jackal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.15#No doubt. But say what we will, this manner of understanding the word slang_ is an extension which every one will not admit. For our part, we reserve o the word its ancient and precise, circumscribed and determined significance, nd we restrict slang to slang. The veritable slang and the slang that is re-eminently slang, if the two words can be coupled thus, the slang immemorial hich was a kingdom, is nothing else, we repeat, than the homely, uneasy, rafty, treacherous, venomous, cruel, equivocal, vile, profound, fatal tongue of retchedness. There exists, at the extremity of all abasement and all isfortunes, a last misery which revolts and makes up its mind to enter into onflict with the whole mass of fortunate facts and reigning rights; a fearful onflict, where, now cunning, now violent, unhealthy and ferocious at one and he same time, it attacks the social order with pin-pricks through vice, and ith club-blows through crime. To meet the needs of this conflict, wretchedness as invented a language of combat, which is slang.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.16#To keep afloat and to rescue from oblivion, to hold above the gulf, were t but a fragment of some language which man has spoken and which would, therwise, be lost, that is to say, one of the elements, good or bad, of which ivilization is composed, or by which it is complicated, to extend the records f social observation; is to serve civilization itself. This service Plautus endered, consciously or unconsciously, by making two Carthaginian soldiers talk hœnician; that service Molière rendered, by making so many of his characters alk Levantine and all sorts of dialects. Here objections spring up afresh. hœnician, very good! Levantine, quite right! Even dialect, let that pass! They re tongues which have belonged to nations or provinces; but slang! What is the se of preserving slang? What is the good of assisting slang “to survive”?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.17#To this we reply in one word, only. Assuredly, if the tongue which a ation or a province has spoken is worthy of interest, the language which has een spoken by a misery is still more worthy of attention and study.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.18#It is the language which has been spoken, in France, for example, for more han four centuries, not only by a misery, but by every possible human isery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.19#And then, we insist upon it, the study of social deformities and nfirmities, and the task of pointing them out with a view to remedy, is not a usiness in which choice is permitted. The historian of manners and ideas has no ess austere a mission than the historian of events. The latter has the surface f civilization, the conflicts of crowns, the births of princes, the marriages f kings, battles, assemblages, great public men, revolutions in the daylight, verything on the exterior; the other historian has the interior, the depths, he people who toil, suffer, wait, the oppressed woman, the agonizing child, the ecret war between man and man, obscure ferocities, prejudices, plotted niquities, the subterranean, the indistinct tremors of multitudes, the ie-of-hunger, the counter-blows of the law, the secret evolution of souls, the o-bare-foot, the bare-armed, the disinherited, the orphans, the unhappy, and he infamous, all the forms which roam through the darkness. He must descend ith his heart full of charity, and severity at the same time, as a brother and s a judge, to those impenetrable casemates where crawl, pell-mell, those who leed and those who deal the blow, those who weep and those who curse, those who ast and those who devour, those who endure evil and those who inflict it. Have hese historians of hearts and souls duties at all inferior to the historians of xternal facts? Does any one think that Alighieri has any fewer things to say han Machiavelli? Is the under side of civilization any less important than the pper side merely because it is deeper and more sombre? Do we really know the ountain well when we are not acquainted with the cavern?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.20#Let us say, moreover, parenthetically, that from a few words of what recedes a marked separation might be inferred between the two classes of istorians which does not exist in our mind. No one is a good historian of the atent, visible, striking, and public life of peoples, if he is not, at the same ime, in a certain measure, the historian of their deep and hidden life; and no ne is a good historian of the interior unless he understands how, at need, to e the historian of the exterior also. The history of manners and ideas ermeates the history of events, and this is true reciprocally. They constitute wo different orders of facts which correspond to each other, which are always nterlaced, and which often bring forth results. All the lineaments which rovidence traces on the surface of a nation have their parallels, sombre but istinct, in their depths, and all convulsions of the depths produce ebullitions n the surface. True history being a mixture of all things, the true historian ingles in everything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.21#Man is not a circle with a single centre; he is an ellipse with a double ocus. Facts form one of these, and ideas the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.22#Slang is nothing but a dressing-room where the tongue having some bad ction to perform, disguises itself. There it clothes itself in word-masks, in etaphor-rags. In this guise it becomes horrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.23#One finds it difficult to recognize. Is it really the French tongue, the reat human tongue? Behold it ready to step upon the stage and to retort upon rime, and prepared for all the employments of the repertory of evil. It no onger walks, it hobbles; it limps on the crutch of the Court of Miracles, a rutch metamorphosable into a club; it is called vagrancy; every sort of pectre, its dressers, have painted its face, it crawls and rears, the double ait of the reptile. Henceforth, it is apt at all rôles, it is made suspicious y the counterfeiter, covered with verdigris by the forger, blacked by the soot f the incendiary; and the murderer applies its rouge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.24#When one listens, by the side of honest men, at the portals of society, ne overhears the dialogues of those who are on the outside. One distinguishes uestions and replies. One perceives, without understanding it, a hideous urmur, sounding almost like human accents, but more nearly resembling a howl han an articulate word. It is slang. The words are misshapen and stamped with n indescribable and fantastic bestiality. One thinks one hears hydras alking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.25#It is unintelligible in the dark. It gnashes and whispers, completing the loom with mystery. It is black in misfortune, it is blacker still in crime; hese two blacknesses amalgamated, compose slang. Obscurity in the atmosphere, bscurity in acts, obscurity in voices. Terrible, toad-like tongue which goes nd comes, leaps, crawls, slobbers, and stirs about in monstrous wise in that mmense gray fog composed of rain and night, of hunger, of vice, of falsehood, f injustice, of nudity, of suffocation, and of winter, the high noonday of the iserable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.26#Let us have compassion on the chastised. Alas! Who are we ourselves? Who m I who now address you? Who are you who are listening to me? And are you very ure that we have done nothing before we were born? The earth is not devoid of esemblance to a jail. Who knows whether man is not a recaptured offender gainst divine justice? Look closely at life. It is so made, that everywhere we eel the sense of punishment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.27#Are you what is called a happy man? Well! you are sad every day. Each day as its own great grief or its little care. Yesterday you were trembling for a ealth that is dear to you, to-day you fear for your own; to-morrow it will be nxiety about money, the day after to-morrow the diatribe of a slanderer, the ay after that, the misfortune of some friend; then the prevailing weather, then omething that has been broken or lost, then a pleasure with which your onscience and your vertebral column reproach you; again, the course of public ffairs. This without reckoning in the pains of the heart. And so it goes on. ne cloud is dispelled, another forms. There is hardly one day out of a hundred hich is wholly joyous and sunny. And you belong to that small class who are appy! As for the rest of mankind, stagnating night rests upon them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.28#Thoughtful minds make but little use of the phrase: the fortunate and the nfortunate. In this world, evidently the vestibule of another, there are no ortunate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.29#The real human division is this: the luminous and the shady. To diminish he number of the shady, to augment the number of the luminous,—that is the bject. That is why we cry: Education! science! To teach reading, means to light he fire; every syllable spelled out sparkles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.30#However, he who says light does not, necessarily, say joy. People suffer n the light; excess burns. The flame is the enemy of the wing. To burn without easing to fly,—therein lies the marvel of genius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.1.31#When you shall have learned to know, and to love, you will still suffer. he day is born in tears. The luminous weep, if only over those in darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.head#CHAPTER II—ROOTS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.1#Slang is the tongue of those who sit in darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.2#Thought is moved in its most sombre depths, social philosophy is bidden to ts most poignant meditations, in the presence of that enigmatic dialect at once o blighted and rebellious. Therein lies chastisement made visible. Every yllable has an air of being marked. The words of the vulgar tongue appear herein wrinkled and shrivelled, as it were, beneath the hot iron of the xecutioner. Some seem to be still smoking. Such and such a phrase produces upon ou the effect of the shoulder of a thief branded with the fleur-de-lys, which as suddenly been laid bare. Ideas almost refuse to be expressed in these ubstantives which are fugitives from justice. Metaphor is sometimes so hameless, that one feels that it has worn the iron neck-fetter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.3#Moreover, in spite of all this, and because of all this, this strange ialect has by rights, its own compartment in that great impartial case of igeon-holes where there is room for the rusty farthing as well as for the gold edal, and which is called literature. Slang, whether the public admit the fact r not has its syntax and its poetry. It is a language. Yes, by the deformity of ertain terms, we recognize the fact that it was chewed by Mandrin, and by the plendor of certain metonymies, we feel that Villon spoke it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.4#That exquisite and celebrated verse—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.5#Mais où sont les neiges d’antan? But where are the snows of years gone y?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.6#is a verse of slang. _Antan—ante annum_—is a word of Thunes slang, which ignified the past year, and by extension, _formerly_. Thirty-five years ago, at he epoch of the departure of the great chain-gang, there could be read in one f the cells at Bicêtre, this maxim engraved with a nail on the wall by a king f Thunes condemned to the galleys: _Les dabs d’antan trimaient siempre pour la ierre du Coësre_. This means _Kings in days gone by always went and had hemselves anointed_. In the opinion of that king, anointment meant the alleys.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.7#The word _décarade_, which expresses the departure of heavy vehicles at a allop, is attributed to Villon, and it is worthy of him. This word, which trikes fire with all four of its feet, sums up in a masterly onomatopœia the hole of La Fontaine’s admirable verse:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.8#Six forts chevaux tiraient un coche. Six stout horses drew a coach.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.9#From a purely literary point of view, few studies would prove more curious nd fruitful than the study of slang. It is a whole language within a language, sort of sickly excrescence, an unhealthy graft which has produced a egetation, a parasite which has its roots in the old Gallic trunk, and whose inister foliage crawls all over one side of the language. This is what may be alled the first, the vulgar aspect of slang. But, for those who study the ongue as it should be studied, that is to say, as geologists study the earth, lang appears like a veritable alluvial deposit. According as one digs a longer r shorter distance into it, one finds in slang, below the old popular French, rovençal, Spanish, Italian, Levantine, that language of the Mediterranean orts, English and German, the Romance language in its three varieties, French, talian, and Romance Romance, Latin, and finally Basque and Celtic. A profound nd unique formation. A subterranean edifice erected in common by all the iserable. Each accursed race has deposited its layer, each suffering has ropped its stone there, each heart has contributed its pebble. A throng of vil, base, or irritated souls, who have traversed life and have vanished into ternity, linger there almost entirely visible still beneath the form of some onstrous word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.10#Do you want Spanish? The old Gothic slang abounded in it. Here is boffete_, a box on the ear, which is derived from _bofeton; vantane_, window later on _vanterne_), which comes from _vantana; gat_, cat, which comes from gato; acite_, oil, which comes from _aceyte_. Do you want Italian? Here is spade_, sword, which comes from _spada; carvel_, boat, which comes from caravella_. Do you want English? Here is _bichot_, which comes from _bishop; aille_, spy, which comes from _rascal, rascalion; pilche_, a case, which comes rom _pilcher_, a sheath. Do you want German? Here is the _caleur_, the waiter, kellner_; the _hers_, the master, _herzog_ (duke). Do you want Latin? Here is frangir_, to break, _frangere; affurer_, to steal, _fur; cadene_, chain, catena_. There is one word which crops up in every language of the continent, ith a sort of mysterious power and authority. It is the word _magnus_; the cotchman makes of it his _mac_, which designates the chief of the clan; ac-Farlane, Mac-Callumore, the great Farlane, the great Callumore41; slang urns it into _meck_ and later _le meg_, that is to say, God. Would you like asque? Here is _gahisto_, the devil, which comes from _gaïztoa_, evil; sorgabon_, good night, which comes from _gabon_, good evening. Do you want eltic? Here is _blavin_, a handkerchief, which comes from _blavet_, gushing ater; _ménesse_, a woman (in a bad sense), which comes from _meinec_, full of tones; _barant_, brook, from _baranton_, fountain; _goffeur_, locksmith, from goff_, blacksmith; _guedouze_, death, which comes from _guenn-du_, black-white. inally, would you like history? Slang calls crowns _les maltèses_, a souvenir f the coin in circulation on the galleys of Malta.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.11#In addition to the philological origins just indicated, slang possesses ther and still more natural roots, which spring, so to speak, from the mind of an itself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.12#In the first place, the direct creation of words. Therein lies the mystery f tongues. To paint with words, which contains figures one knows not how or hy, is the primitive foundation of all human languages, what may be called heir granite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.13#Slang abounds in words of this description, immediate words, words created nstantaneously no one knows either where or by whom, without etymology, without nalogies, without derivatives, solitary, barbarous, sometimes hideous words, hich at times possess a singular power of expression and which live. The xecutioner, _le taule_; the forest, _le sabri_; fear, flight, _taf_; the ackey, _le larbin_; the mineral, the prefect, the minister, _pharos_; the evil, _le rabouin_. Nothing is stranger than these words which both mask and eveal. Some, _le rabouin_, for example, are at the same time grotesque and errible, and produce on you the effect of a cyclopean grimace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.14#In the second place, metaphor. The peculiarity of a language which is esirous of saying all yet concealing all is that it is rich in figures. etaphor is an enigma, wherein the thief who is plotting a stroke, the prisoner ho is arranging an escape, take refuge. No idiom is more metaphorical than lang: _dévisser le coco_ (to unscrew the nut), to twist the neck; _tortiller_ to wriggle), to eat; _être gerbé_, to be tried; _a rat_, a bread thief; _il ansquine_, it rains, a striking, ancient figure which partly bears its date bout it, which assimilates long oblique lines of rain, with the dense and lanting pikes of the lancers, and which compresses into a single word the opular expression: it rains halberds. Sometimes, in proportion as slang rogresses from the first epoch to the second, words pass from the primitive and avage sense to the metaphorical sense. The devil ceases to be _le rabouin_, and ecomes _le boulanger_ (the baker), who puts the bread into the oven. This is ore witty, but less grand, something like Racine after Corneille, like uripides after Æschylus. Certain slang phrases which participate in the two pochs and have at once the barbaric character and the metaphorical character esemble phantasmagories. _Les sorgueuers vont solliciter des gails à la une_—the prowlers are going to steal horses by night,—this passes before the ind like a group of spectres. One knows not what one sees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.15#In the third place, the expedient. Slang lives on the language. It uses it n accordance with its fancy, it dips into it hap-hazard, and it often confines tself, when occasion arises, to alter it in a gross and summary fashion. ccasionally, with the ordinary words thus deformed and complicated with words f pure slang, picturesque phrases are formed, in which there can be felt the ixture of the two preceding elements, the direct creation and the metaphor: _le ab jaspine, je marronne que la roulotte de Pantin trime dans le sabri_, the dog s barking, I suspect that the diligence for Paris is passing through the woods. Le dab est sinve, la dabuge est merloussière, la fée est bative_, the bourgeois s stupid, the bourgeoise is cunning, the daughter is pretty. Generally, to hrow listeners off the track, slang confines itself to adding to all the words f the language without distinction, an ignoble tail, a termination in _aille_, n _orgue_, in _iergue_, or in _uche_. Thus: _Vousiergue trouvaille bonorgue ce igotmuche?_ Do you think that leg of mutton good? A phrase addressed by artouche to a turnkey in order to find out whether the sum offered for his scape suited him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.16#The termination in _mar_ has been added recently.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.17#Slang, being the dialect of corruption, quickly becomes corrupted itself. esides this, as it is always seeking concealment, as soon as it feels that it s understood, it changes its form. Contrary to what happens with every other egetation, every ray of light which falls upon it kills whatever it touches. hus slang is in constant process of decomposition and recomposition; an obscure nd rapid work which never pauses. It passes over more ground in ten years than language in ten centuries. Thus _le larton_ (bread) becomes _le lartif; le ail_ (horse) becomes _le gaye; la fertanche_ (straw) becomes _la fertille; le omignard_ (brat), _le momacque; les fiques_ (duds), _frusques; la chique_ (the hurch), _l‘égrugeoir; le colabre_ (neck), _le colas_. The devil is at first, gahisto_, then _le rabouin_, then _the baker_; the priest is a _ratichon_, then he boar (_le sanglier_); the dagger is _le vingt-deux_ (twenty-two), then _le urin_, then _le lingre_; the police are _railles_, then _roussins_, then rousses_, then _marchands de lacets_ (dealers in stay-laces), then _coquers_, hen _cognes_; the executioner is _le taule_, then _Charlot, l’atigeur_, then le becquillard_. In the seventeenth century, to fight was “to give each other nuff”; in the nineteenth it is “to chew each other’s throats.” There have been wenty different phrases between these two extremes. Cartouche’s talk would have een Hebrew to Lacenaire. All the words of this language are perpetually engaged n flight like the men who utter them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.18#Still, from time to time, and in consequence of this very movement, the ncient slang crops up again and becomes new once more. It has its headquarters here it maintains its sway. The Temple preserved the slang of the seventeenth entury; Bicêtre, when it was a prison, preserved the slang of Thunes. There one ould hear the termination in _anche_ of the old Thuneurs. _Boyanches-tu_ bois-tu), do you drink? But perpetual movement remains its law, evertheless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.19#If the philosopher succeeds in fixing, for a moment, for purposes of bservation, this language which is incessantly evaporating, he falls into oleful and useful meditation. No study is more efficacious and more fecund in nstruction. There is not a metaphor, not an analogy, in slang, which does not ontain a lesson. Among these men, to beat means to feign; one beats a malady; use is their strength.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.20#For them, the idea of the man is not separated from the idea of darkness. he night is called _la sorgue_; man, _l’orgue_. Man is a derivative of the ight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.21#They have taken up the practice of considering society in the light of an tmosphere which kills them, of a fatal force, and they speak of their liberty s one would speak of his health. A man under arrest is a _sick man_; one who is ondemned is a _dead man_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.22#The most terrible thing for the prisoner within the four walls in which he s buried, is a sort of glacial chastity, and he calls the dungeon the _castus_. n that funereal place, life outside always presents itself under its most miling aspect. The prisoner has irons on his feet; you think, perhaps, that his hought is that it is with the feet that one walks? No; he is thinking that it s with the feet that one dances; so, when he has succeeded in severing his etters, his first idea is that now he can dance, and he calls the saw the bastringue_ (public-house ball).—A name is a centre; profound assimilation.—The uffian has two heads, one of which reasons out his actions and leads him all is life long, and the other which he has upon his shoulders on the day of his eath; he calls the head which counsels him in crime _la sorbonne_, and the head hich expiates it _la tronche_.—When a man has no longer anything but rags upon is body and vices in his heart, when he has arrived at that double moral and aterial degradation which the word blackguard characterizes in its two cceptations, he is ripe for crime; he is like a well-whetted knife; he has two utting edges, his distress and his malice; so slang does not say a blackguard, t says _un réguisé_.—What are the galleys? A brazier of damnation, a hell. The onvict calls himself a _fagot_.—And finally, what name do malefactors give to heir prison? The _college_. A whole penitentiary system can be evolved from hat word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.23#Does the reader wish to know where the majority of the songs of the alleys, those refrains called in the special vocabulary _lirlonfa_, have had heir birth?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.24#Let him listen to what follows:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.25#There existed at the Châtelet in Paris a large and long cellar. This ellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine. It had neither windows nor ir-holes, its only aperture was the door; men could enter there, air could not. his vault had for ceiling a vault of stone, and for floor ten inches of mud. It as flagged; but the pavement had rotted and cracked under the oozing of the ater. Eight feet above the floor, a long and massive beam traversed this ubterranean excavation from side to side; from this beam hung, at short istances apart, chains three feet long, and at the end of these chains there ere rings for the neck. In this vault, men who had been condemned to the alleys were incarcerated until the day of their departure for Toulon. They were hrust under this beam, where each one found his fetters swinging in the arkness and waiting for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.26#The chains, those pendant arms, and the necklets, those open hands, caught he unhappy wretches by the throat. They were rivetted and left there. As the hain was too short, they could not lie down. They remained motionless in that avern, in that night, beneath that beam, almost hanging, forced to unheard-of fforts to reach their bread, jug, or their vault overhead, mud even to mid-leg, ilth flowing to their very calves, broken asunder with fatigue, with thighs and nees giving way, clinging fast to the chain with their hands in order to obtain ome rest, unable to sleep except when standing erect, and awakened every moment y the strangling of the collar; some woke no more. In order to eat, they pushed he bread, which was flung to them in the mud, along their leg with their heel ntil it reached their hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.27#How long did they remain thus? One month, two months, six months ometimes; one stayed a year. It was the antechamber of the galleys. Men were ut there for stealing a hare from the king. In this sepulchre-hell, what did hey do? What man can do in a sepulchre, they went through the agonies of death, nd what can man do in hell, they sang; for song lingers where there is no onger any hope. In the waters of Malta, when a galley was approaching, the song ould be heard before the sound of the oars. Poor Survincent, the poacher, who ad gone through the prison-cellar of the Châtelet, said: “It was the rhymes hat kept me up.” Uselessness of poetry. What is the good of rhyme?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.28#It is in this cellar that nearly all the slang songs had their birth. It s from the dungeon of the Grand-Châtelet of Paris that comes the melancholy efrain of the Montgomery galley: _“Timaloumisaine, timaloumison.”_ The majority f these songs are melancholy; some are gay; one is tender:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.29#Icicaille est la theatre Here is the theatre Du petit dardant. Of the ittle archer (Cupid).
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.30#Do what you will, you cannot annihilate that eternal relic in the heart of an, love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.31#In this world of dismal deeds, people keep their secrets. The secret is he thing above all others. The secret, in the eyes of these wretches, is unity hich serves as a base of union. To betray a secret is to tear from each member f this fierce community something of his own personality. To inform against, in he energetic slang dialect, is called: “to eat the bit.” As though the informer rew to himself a little of the substance of all and nourished himself on a bit f each one’s flesh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.32#What does it signify to receive a box on the ear? Commonplace metaphor eplies: “It is to see thirty-six candles.” Here slang intervenes and takes it p: Candle, _camoufle_. Thereupon, the ordinary tongue gives _camouflet_42 as he synonym for _soufflet_. Thus, by a sort of infiltration from below upwards, ith the aid of metaphor, that incalculable, trajectory slang mounts from the avern to the Academy; and Poulailler saying: “I light my _camoufle_,” causes oltaire to write: “Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred camouflets_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.33#Researches in slang mean discoveries at every step. Study and nvestigation of this strange idiom lead to the mysterious point of intersection f regular society with society which is accursed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.34#The thief also has his food for cannon, stealable matter, you, I, whoever asses by; _le pantre_. (_Pan_, everybody.)
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.35#Slang is language turned convict.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.36#That the thinking principle of man be thrust down ever so low, that it can e dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality, that it can be ound by no one knows what fetters in that abyss, is sufficient to create onsternation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.37#Oh, poor thought of miserable wretches!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.2.38#Alas! will no one come to the succor of the human soul in that darkness? s it her destiny there to await forever the mind, the liberator, the immense ider of Pegasi and hippogriffs, the combatant of heroes of the dawn who shall escend from the azure between two wings, the radiant knight of the future? Will he forever summon in vain to her assistance the lance of light of the ideal? Is he condemned to hear the fearful approach of Evil through the density of the ulf, and to catch glimpses, nearer and nearer at hand, beneath the hideous ater of that dragon’s head, that maw streaked with foam, and that writhing ndulation of claws, swellings, and rings? Must it remain there, without a gleam f light, without hope, given over to that terrible approach, vaguely scented ut by the monster, shuddering, dishevelled, wringing its arms, forever chained o the rock of night, a sombre Andromeda white and naked amid the shadows!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.head#CHAPTER III—SLANG WHICH WEEPS AND SLANG WHICH LAUGHS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.1#As the reader perceives, slang in its entirety, slang of four hundred years go, like the slang of to-day, is permeated with that sombre, symbolical spirit hich gives to all words a mien which is now mournful, now menacing. One feels n it the wild and ancient sadness of those vagrants of the Court of Miracles ho played at cards with packs of their own, some of which have come down to us. he eight of clubs, for instance, represented a huge tree bearing eight enormous refoil leaves, a sort of fantastic personification of the forest. At the foot f this tree a fire was burning, over which three hares were roasting a huntsman n a spit, and behind him, on another fire, hung a steaming pot, whence emerged he head of a dog. Nothing can be more melancholy than these reprisals in ainting, by a pack of cards, in the presence of stakes for the roasting of mugglers and of the cauldron for the boiling of counterfeiters. The diverse orms assumed by thought in the realm of slang, even song, even raillery, even enace, all partook of this powerless and dejected character. All the songs, the elodies of some of which have been collected, were humble and lamentable to the oint of evoking tears. The _pègre_ is always the poor _pègre_, and he is always he hare in hiding, the fugitive mouse, the flying bird. He hardly complains, he ontents himself with sighing; one of his moans has come down to us: “I do not nderstand how God, the father of men, can torture his children and his randchildren and hear them cry, without himself suffering torture."43 The retch, whenever he has time to think, makes himself small before the low, and rail in the presence of society; he lies down flat on his face, he entreats, he ppeals to the side of compassion; we feel that he is conscious of his uilt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.2#Towards the middle of the last century a change took place, prison songs nd thieves’ ritournelles assumed, so to speak, an insolent and jovial mien. The laintive _maluré_ was replaced by the _larifla_. We find in the eighteenth entury, in nearly all the songs of the galleys and prisons, a diabolical and nigmatical gayety. We hear this strident and lilting refrain which we should ay had been lighted up by a phosphorescent gleam, and which seems to have been lung into the forest by a will-o’-the-wisp playing the fife:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.3#Miralabi suslababo Mirliton ribonribette Surlababi mirlababo Mirliton ibonribo.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.4#This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting a man’s hroat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.5#A serious symptom. In the eighteenth century, the ancient melancholy of the ejected classes vanishes. They began to laugh. They rally the _grand meg_ and he _grand dab_. Given Louis XV. they call the King of France “le Marquis de antin.” And behold, they are almost gay. A sort of gleam proceeds from these iserable wretches, as though their consciences were not heavy within them any ore. These lamentable tribes of darkness have no longer merely the desperate udacity of actions, they possess the heedless audacity of mind. A sign that hey are losing the sense of their criminality, and that they feel, even among hinkers and dreamers, some indefinable support which the latter themselves know ot of. A sign that theft and pillage are beginning to filter into doctrines and ophisms, in such a way as to lose somewhat of their ugliness, while ommunicating much of it to sophisms and doctrines. A sign, in short, of some utbreak which is prodigious and near unless some diversion shall arise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.6#Let us pause a moment. Whom are we accusing here? Is it the eighteenth entury? Is it philosophy? Certainly not. The work of the eighteenth century is ealthy and good and wholesome. The encyclopedists, Diderot at their head; the hysiocrates, Turgot at their head; the philosophers, Voltaire at their head; he Utopians, Rousseau at their head,—these are four sacred legions. Humanity’s mmense advance towards the light is due to them. They are the four vanguards of he human race, marching towards the four cardinal points of progress. Diderot owards the beautiful, Turgot towards the useful, Voltaire towards the true, ousseau towards the just. But by the side of and above the philosophers, there ere the sophists, a venomous vegetation mingled with a healthy growth, hemlock n the virgin forest. While the executioner was burning the great books of the iberators of the century on the grand staircase of the court-house, writers now orgotten were publishing, with the King’s sanction, no one knows what strangely isorganizing writings, which were eagerly read by the unfortunate. Some of hese publications, odd to say, which were patronized by a prince, are to be ound in the Secret Library. These facts, significant but unknown, were mperceptible on the surface. Sometimes, in the very obscurity of a fact lurks ts danger. It is obscure because it is underhand. Of all these writers, the one ho probably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery was Restif e La Bretonne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.7#This work, peculiar to the whole of Europe, effected more ravages in ermany than anywhere else. In Germany, during a given period, summed up by chiller in his famous drama _The Robbers_, theft and pillage rose up in protest gainst property and labor, assimilated certain specious and false elementary deas, which, though just in appearance, were absurd in reality, enveloped hemselves in these ideas, disappeared within them, after a fashion, assumed an bstract name, passed into the state of theory, and in that shape circulated mong the laborious, suffering, and honest masses, unknown even to the imprudent hemists who had prepared the mixture, unknown even to the masses who accepted t. Whenever a fact of this sort presents itself, the case is grave. Suffering ngenders wrath; and while the prosperous classes blind themselves or fall sleep, which is the same thing as shutting one’s eyes, the hatred of the nfortunate classes lights its torch at some aggrieved or ill-made spirit which reams in a corner, and sets itself to the scrutiny of society. The scrutiny of atred is a terrible thing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.8#Hence, if the ill-fortune of the times so wills it, those fearful ommotions which were formerly called _jacqueries_, beside which purely olitical agitations are the merest child’s play, which are no longer the onflict of the oppressed and the oppressor, but the revolt of discomfort gainst comfort. Then everything crumbles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.9#Jacqueries are earthquakes of the people.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.10#It is this peril, possibly imminent towards the close of the eighteenth entury, which the French Revolution, that immense act of probity, cut hort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.11#The French Revolution, which is nothing else than the idea armed with the word, rose erect, and, with the same abrupt movement, closed the door of ill nd opened the door of good.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.12#It put a stop to torture, promulgated the truth, expelled miasma, rendered he century healthy, crowned the populace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.13#It may be said of it that it created man a second time, by giving him a econd soul, the right.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.14#The nineteenth century has inherited and profited by its work, and to-day, he social catastrophe to which we lately alluded is simply impossible. Blind is e who announces it! Foolish is he who fears it! Revolution is the vaccine of acquerie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.15#Thanks to the Revolution, social conditions have changed. Feudal and onarchical maladies no longer run in our blood. There is no more of the Middle ges in our constitution. We no longer live in the days when terrible swarms ithin made irruptions, when one heard beneath his feet the obscure course of a ull rumble, when indescribable elevations from mole-like tunnels appeared on he surface of civilization, where the soil cracked open, where the roofs of averns yawned, and where one suddenly beheld monstrous heads emerging from the arth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.16#The revolutionary sense is a moral sense. The sentiment of right, once eveloped, develops the sentiment of duty. The law of all is liberty, which ends here the liberty of others begins, according to Robespierre’s admirable efinition. Since ’89, the whole people has been dilating into a sublime ndividual; there is not a poor man, who, possessing his right, has not his ray f sun; the die-of-hunger feels within him the honesty of France; the dignity of he citizen is an internal armor; he who is free is scrupulous; he who votes eigns. Hence incorruptibility; hence the miscarriage of unhealthy lusts; hence yes heroically lowered before temptations. The revolutionary wholesomeness is uch, that on a day of deliverance, a 14th of July, a 10th of August, there is o longer any populace. The first cry of the enlightened and increasing throngs s: death to thieves! Progress is an honest man; the ideal and the absolute do ot filch pocket-handkerchiefs. By whom were the wagons containing the wealth of he Tuileries escorted in 1848? By the rag-pickers of the Faubourg aint-Antoine. Rags mounted guard over the treasure. Virtue rendered these atterdemalions resplendent. In those wagons in chests, hardly closed, and some, ven, half-open, amid a hundred dazzling caskets, was that ancient crown of rance, studded with diamonds, surmounted by the carbuncle of royalty, by the egent diamond, which was worth thirty millions. Barefooted, they guarded that rown.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.3.17#Hence, no more Jacquerie. I regret it for the sake of the skilful. The old ear has produced its last effects in that quarter; and henceforth it can no onger be employed in politics. The principal spring of the red spectre is roken. Every one knows it now. The scare-crow scares no longer. The birds take iberties with the mannikin, foul creatures alight upon it, the bourgeois laugh t it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE TWO DUTIES: TO WATCH AND TO HOPE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.1#This being the case, is all social danger dispelled? Certainly not. There s no Jacquerie; society may rest assured on that point; blood will no longer ush to its head. But let society take heed to the manner in which it breathes. poplexy is no longer to be feared, but phthisis is there. Social phthisis is alled misery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.2#One can perish from being undermined as well as from being struck by ightning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.3#Let us not weary of repeating, and sympathetic souls must not forget that his is the first of fraternal obligations, and selfish hearts must understand hat the first of political necessities consists in thinking first of all of the isinherited and sorrowing throngs, in solacing, airing, enlightening, loving hem, in enlarging their horizon to a magnificent extent, in lavishing upon them ducation in every form, in offering them the example of labor, never the xample of idleness, in diminishing the individual burden by enlarging the otion of the universal aim, in setting a limit to poverty without setting a imit to wealth, in creating vast fields of public and popular activity, in aving, like Briareus, a hundred hands to extend in all directions to the ppressed and the feeble, in employing the collective power for that grand duty f opening workshops for all arms, schools for all aptitudes, and laboratories or all degrees of intelligence, in augmenting salaries, diminishing trouble, alancing what should be and what is, that is to say, in proportioning enjoyment o effort and a glut to need; in a word, in evolving from the social apparatus ore light and more comfort for the benefit of those who suffer and those who re ignorant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.4#And, let us say it, all this is but the beginning. The true question is his: labor cannot be a law without being a right.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.5#We will not insist upon this point; this is not the proper place for hat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.6#If nature calls itself Providence, society should call itself oresight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.7#Intellectual and moral growth is no less indispensable than material mprovement. To know is a sacrament, to think is the prime necessity, truth is ourishment as well as grain. A reason which fasts from science and wisdom grows hin. Let us enter equal complaint against stomachs and minds which do not eat. f there is anything more heart-breaking than a body perishing for lack of read, it is a soul which is dying from hunger for the light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.8#The whole of progress tends in the direction of solution. Some day we shall e amazed. As the human race mounts upward, the deep layers emerge naturally rom the zone of distress. The obliteration of misery will be accomplished by a imple elevation of level.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.9#We should do wrong were we to doubt this blessed consummation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.10#The past is very strong, it is true, at the present moment. It censures. his rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising. Behold, it is walking and dvancing. It seems a victor; this dead body is a conqueror. He arrives with his egions, superstitions, with his sword, despotism, with his banner, ignorance; a hile ago, he won ten battles. He advances, he threatens, he laughs, he is at ur doors. Let us not despair, on our side. Let us sell the field on which annibal is encamped.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.11#What have we to fear, we who believe?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.12#No such thing as a back-flow of ideas exists any more than there exists a eturn of a river on its course.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.13#But let those who do not desire a future reflect on this matter. When they ay “no” to progress, it is not the future but themselves that they are ondemning. They are giving themselves a sad malady; they are inoculating hemselves with the past. There is but one way of rejecting To-morrow, and that s to die.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.14#Now, no death, that of the body as late as possible, that of the soul ever,—this is what we desire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.15#Yes, the enigma will utter its word, the sphinx will speak, the problem ill be solved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.16#Yes, the people, sketched out by the eighteenth century, will be finished y the nineteenth. He who doubts this is an idiot! The future blossoming, the ear blossoming forth of universal well-being, is a divinely fatal henomenon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.17#Immense combined propulsions direct human affairs and conduct them within given time to a logical state, that is to say, to a state of equilibrium; that s to say, to equity. A force composed of earth and heaven results from humanity nd governs it; this force is a worker of miracles; marvellous issues are no ore difficult to it than extraordinary vicissitudes. Aided by science, which omes from one man, and by the event, which comes from another, it is not reatly alarmed by these contradictions in the attitude of problems, which seem mpossibilities to the vulgar herd. It is no less skilful at causing a solution o spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas, than a lesson from the econciliation of facts, and we may expect anything from that mysterious power f progress, which brought the Orient and the Occident face to face one fine ay, in the depths of a sepulchre, and made the imaums converse with Bonaparte n the interior of the Great Pyramid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.18#In the meantime, let there be no halt, no hesitation, no pause in the randiose onward march of minds. Social philosophy consists essentially in cience and peace. Its object is, and its result must be, to dissolve wrath by he study of antagonisms. It examines, it scrutinizes, it analyzes; then it puts ogether once more, it proceeds by means of reduction, discarding all atred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.19#More than once, a society has been seen to give way before the wind which s let loose upon mankind; history is full of the shipwrecks of nations and mpires; manners, customs, laws, religions,—and some fine day that unknown orce, the hurricane, passes by and bears them all away. The civilizations of ndia, of Chaldea, of Persia, of Syria, of Egypt, have disappeared one after the ther. Why? We know not. What are the causes of these disasters? We do not know. ould these societies have been saved? Was it their fault? Did they persist in he fatal vice which destroyed them? What is the amount of suicide in these errible deaths of a nation and a race? Questions to which there exists no eply. Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations. They sprung a leak, then they ank. We have nothing more to say; and it is with a sort of terror that we look n, at the bottom of that sea which is called the past, behind those colossal aves, at the shipwreck of those immense vessels, Babylon, Nineveh, Tarsus, hebes, Rome, beneath the fearful gusts which emerge from all the mouths of the hadows. But shadows are there, and light is here. We are not acquainted with he maladies of these ancient civilizations, we do not know the infirmities of ur own. Everywhere upon it we have the right of light, we contemplate its eauties, we lay bare its defects. Where it is ill, we probe; and the sickness nce diagnosed, the study of the cause leads to the discovery of the remedy. Our ivilization, the work of twenty centuries, is its law and its prodigy; it is orth the trouble of saving. It will be saved. It is already much to have olaced it; its enlightenment is yet another point. All the labors of modern ocial philosophies must converge towards this point. The thinker of to-day has great duty—to auscultate civilization.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.20#We repeat, that this auscultation brings encouragement; it is by this ersistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages, an austere nterlude in a mournful drama. Beneath the social mortality, we feel human mperishableness. The globe does not perish, because it has these wounds, raters, eruptions, sulphur pits, here and there, nor because of a volcano which jects its pus. The maladies of the people do not kill man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.21#And yet, any one who follows the course of social clinics shakes his head t times. The strongest, the tenderest, the most logical have their hours of eakness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.22#Will the future arrive? It seems as though we might almost put this uestion, when we behold so much terrible darkness. Melancholy face-to-face ncounter of selfish and wretched. On the part of the selfish, the prejudices, hadows of costly education, appetite increasing through intoxication, a iddiness of prosperity which dulls, a fear of suffering which, in some, goes as ar as an aversion for the suffering, an implacable satisfaction, the _I_ so wollen that it bars the soul; on the side of the wretched covetousness, envy, atred of seeing others enjoy, the profound impulses of the human beast towards ssuaging its desires, hearts full of mist, sadness, need, fatality, impure and imple ignorance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.7.4.23#Shall we continue to raise our eyes to heaven? is the luminous point which e distinguish there one of those which vanish? The ideal is frightful to ehold, thus lost in the depths, small, isolated, imperceptible, brilliant, but urrounded by those great, black menaces, monstrously heaped around it; yet no ore in danger than a star in the maw of the clouds.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.head#BOOK EIGHTH—ENCHANTMENTS AND DESOLATIONS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.head#CHAPTER I—FULL LIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.1#The reader has probably understood that Éponine, having recognized through he gate, the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon had sent her, had egun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet, and had then conducted arius thither, and that, after many days spent in ecstasy before that gate, arius, drawn on by that force which draws the iron to the magnet and a lover owards the stones of which is built the house of her whom he loves, had finally ntered Cosette’s garden as Romeo entered the garden of Juliet. This had even roved easier for him than for Romeo; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall, Marius ad only to use a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate which acillated in its rusty recess, after the fashion of old people’s teeth. Marius as slender and readily passed through.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.2#As there was never any one in the street, and as Marius never entered the arden except at night, he ran no risk of being seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.3#Beginning with that blessed and holy hour when a kiss betrothed these two ouls, Marius was there every evening. If, at that period of her existence, osette had fallen in love with a man in the least unscrupulous or debauched, he would have been lost; for there are generous natures which yield themselves, nd Cosette was one of them. One of woman’s magnanimities is to yield. Love, at he height where it is absolute, is complicated with some indescribably elestial blindness of modesty. But what dangers you run, O noble souls! Often ou give the heart, and we take the body. Your heart remains with you, you gaze pon it in the gloom with a shudder. Love has no middle course; it either ruins r it saves. All human destiny lies in this dilemma. This dilemma, ruin, or afety, is set forth no more inexorably by any fatality than by love. Love is ife, if it is not death. Cradle; also coffin. The same sentiment says “yes” and no” in the human heart. Of all the things that God has made, the human heart is he one which sheds the most light, alas! and the most darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.4#God willed that Cosette’s love should encounter one of the loves which ave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.5#Throughout the whole of the month of May of that year 1832, there were here, in every night, in that poor, neglected garden, beneath that thicket hich grew thicker and more fragrant day by day, two beings composed of all hastity, all innocence, overflowing with all the felicity of heaven, nearer to he archangels than to mankind, pure, honest, intoxicated, radiant, who shone or each other amid the shadows. It seemed to Cosette that Marius had a crown, nd to Marius that Cosette had a nimbus. They touched each other, they gazed at ach other, they clasped each other’s hands, they pressed close to each other; ut there was a distance which they did not pass. Not that they respected it; hey did not know of its existence. Marius was conscious of a barrier, Cosette’s nnocence; and Cosette of a support, Marius’ loyalty. The first kiss had also een the last. Marius, since that time, had not gone further than to touch osette’s hand, or her kerchief, or a lock of her hair, with his lips. For him, osette was a perfume and not a woman. He inhaled her. She refused nothing, and e asked nothing. Cosette was happy, and Marius was satisfied. They lived in his ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of one soul by nother soul. It was the ineffable first embrace of two maiden souls in the deal. Two swans meeting on the Jungfrau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.6#At that hour of love, an hour when voluptuousness is absolutely mute, eneath the omnipotence of ecstasy, Marius, the pure and seraphic Marius, would ather have gone to a woman of the town than have raised Cosette’s robe to the eight of her ankle. Once, in the moonlight, Cosette stooped to pick up omething on the ground, her bodice fell apart and permitted a glimpse of the eginning of her throat. Marius turned away his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.7#What took place between these two beings? Nothing. They adored each ther.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.8#At night, when they were there, that garden seemed a living and a sacred pot. All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense; and they opened heir souls and scattered them over the flowers. The wanton and vigorous egetation quivered, full of strength and intoxication, around these two nnocents, and they uttered words of love which set the trees to trembling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.9#What words were these? Breaths. Nothing more. These breaths sufficed to rouble and to touch all nature round about. Magic power which we should find it ifficult to understand were we to read in a book these conversations which are ade to be borne away and dispersed like smoke wreaths by the breeze beneath the eaves. Take from those murmurs of two lovers that melody which proceeds from he soul and which accompanies them like a lyre, and what remains is nothing ore than a shade; you say: “What! is that all!” eh! yes, childish prattle, epetitions, laughter at nothing, nonsense, everything that is deepest and most ublime in the world! The only things which are worth the trouble of saying and earing!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.10#The man who has never heard, the man who has never uttered these bsurdities, these paltry remarks, is an imbecile and a malicious fellow. osette said to Marius:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.11#“Dost thou know?—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.12#[In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness, and without either f them being able to say how it had come about, they had begun to call each ther _thou_.]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.13#“Dost thou know? My name is Euphrasie.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.14#“Euphrasie? Why, no, thy name is Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.15#“Oh! Cosette is a very ugly name that was given to me when I was a little hing. But my real name is Euphrasie. Dost thou like that name—Euphrasie?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.16#“Yes. But Cosette is not ugly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.17#“Do you like it better than Euphrasie?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.18#“Why, yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.19#“Then I like it better too. Truly, it is pretty, Cosette. Call me osette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.20#And the smile that she added made of this dialogue an idyl worthy of a rove situated in heaven. On another occasion she gazed intently at him and xclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.21#“Monsieur, you are handsome, you are good-looking, you are witty, you are ot at all stupid, you are much more learned than I am, but I bid you defiance ith this word: I love you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.22#And Marius, in the very heavens, thought he heard a strain sung by a tar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.23#Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed, and she said to im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.24#“Don’t cough, sir; I will not have people cough on my domain without my ermission. It’s very naughty to cough and to disturb me. I want you to be well, ecause, in the first place, if you were not well, I should be very unhappy. hat should I do then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.25#And this was simply divine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.26#Once Marius said to Cosette:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.27#“Just imagine, I thought at one time that your name was Ursule.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.28#This made both of them laugh the whole evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.29#In the middle of another conversation, he chanced to exclaim:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.30#“Oh! One day, at the Luxembourg, I had a good mind to finish breaking up a eteran!” But he stopped short, and went no further. He would have been obliged o speak to Cosette of her garter, and that was impossible. This bordered on a trange theme, the flesh, before which that immense and innocent love recoiled ith a sort of sacred fright.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.31#Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this, without anything lse; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet, to displace the old and ccommodating bar of the chief-justice’s gate, to sit elbow to elbow on that ench, to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of the on-coming night, to it a fold of the knee of his trousers into the ample fall of Cosette’s gown, to aress her thumb-nail, to call her _thou_, to smell of the same flower, one fter the other, forever, indefinitely. During this time, clouds passed above heir heads. Every time that the wind blows it bears with it more of the dreams f men than of the clouds of heaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.32#This chaste, almost shy love was not devoid of gallantry, by any means. To ay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method of bestowing aresses, and he is half audacious who tries it. A compliment is something like kiss through a veil. Voluptuousness mingles there with its sweet tiny point, hile it hides itself. The heart draws back before voluptuousness only to love he more. Marius’ blandishments, all saturated with fancy, were, so to speak, of zure hue. The birds when they fly up yonder, in the direction of the angels, ust hear such words. There were mingled with them, nevertheless, life, umanity, all the positiveness of which Marius was capable. It was what is said n the bower, a prelude to what will be said in the chamber; a lyrical effusion, trophe and sonnet intermingled, pleasing hyperboles of cooing, all the efinements of adoration arranged in a bouquet and exhaling a celestial perfume, n ineffable twitter of heart to heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.33#“Oh!” murmured Marius, “how beautiful you are! I dare not look at you. It s all over with me when I contemplate you. You are a grace. I know not what is he matter with me. The hem of your gown, when the tip of your shoe peeps from eneath, upsets me. And then, what an enchanted gleam when you open your thought ven but a little! You talk astonishingly good sense. It seems to me at times hat you are a dream. Speak, I listen, I admire. Oh Cosette! how strange it is nd how charming! I am really beside myself. You are adorable, Mademoiselle. I tudy your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.34#And Cosette answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.35#“I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed since this orning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.36#Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue, which lways turned with mutual consent upon love, as the little pith figures always urn on their peg.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.37#Cosette’s whole person was ingenuousness, ingenuity, transparency, hiteness, candor, radiance. It might have been said of Cosette that she was lear. She produced on those who saw her the sensation of April and dawn. There as dew in her eyes. Cosette was a condensation of the auroral light in the form f a woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.38#It was quite simple that Marius should admire her, since he adored her. ut the truth is, that this little school-girl, fresh from the convent, talked ith exquisite penetration and uttered, at times, all sorts of true and delicate ayings. Her prattle was conversation. She never made a mistake about anything, nd she saw things justly. The woman feels and speaks with the tender instinct f the heart, which is infallible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.39#No one understands so well as a woman, how to say things that are, at nce, both sweet and deep. Sweetness and depth, they are the whole of woman; in hem lies the whole of heaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.40#In this full felicity, tears welled up to their eyes every instant. A rushed lady-bug, a feather fallen from a nest, a branch of hawthorn broken, roused their pity, and their ecstasy, sweetly mingled with melancholy, seemed o ask nothing better than to weep. The most sovereign symptom of love is a enderness that is, at times, almost unbearable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.41#And, in addition to this,—all these contradictions are the lightning play f love,—they were fond of laughing, they laughed readily and with a delicious reedom, and so familiarly that they sometimes presented the air of two oys.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.42#Still, though unknown to hearts intoxicated with purity, nature is always resent and will not be forgotten. She is there with her brutal and sublime bject; and however great may be the innocence of souls, one feels in the most odest private interview, the adorable and mysterious shade which separates a ouple of lovers from a pair of friends.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.43#They idolized each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.44#The permanent and the immutable are persistent. People live, they smile, hey laugh, they make little grimaces with the tips of their lips, they nterlace their fingers, they call each other _thou_, and that does not prevent ternity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.1.45#Two lovers hide themselves in the evening, in the twilight, in the nvisible, with the birds, with the roses; they fascinate each other in the arkness with their hearts which they throw into their eyes, they murmur, they hisper, and in the meantime, immense librations of the planets fill the nfinite universe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE BEWILDERMENT OF PERFECT HAPPINESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.1#They existed vaguely, frightened at their happiness. They did not notice he cholera which decimated Paris precisely during that very month. They had onfided in each other as far as possible, but this had not extended much urther than their names. Marius had told Cosette that he was an orphan, that is name was Marius Pontmercy, that he was a lawyer, that he lived by writing hings for publishers, that his father had been a colonel, that the latter had een a hero, and that he, Marius, was on bad terms with his grandfather who was ich. He had also hinted at being a baron, but this had produced no effect on osette. She did not know the meaning of the word. Marius was Marius. On her ide, she had confided to him that she had been brought up at the Petit-Picpus onvent, that her mother, like his own, was dead, that her father’s name was M. auchelevent, that he was very good, that he gave a great deal to the poor, but hat he was poor himself, and that he denied himself everything though he denied er nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.2#Strange to say, in the sort of symphony which Marius had lived since he had een in the habit of seeing Cosette, the past, even the most recent past, had ecome so confused and distant to him, that what Cosette told him satisfied him ompletely. It did not even occur to him to tell her about the nocturnal dventure in the hovel, about Thénardier, about the burn, and about the strange ttitude and singular flight of her father. Marius had momentarily forgotten all his; in the evening he did not even know that there had been a morning, what he ad done, where he had breakfasted, nor who had spoken to him; he had songs in is ears which rendered him deaf to every other thought; he only existed at the ours when he saw Cosette. Then, as he was in heaven, it was quite natural that e should forget earth. Both bore languidly the indefinable burden of immaterial leasures. Thus lived these somnambulists who are called lovers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.3#Alas! Who is there who has not felt all these things? Why does there come n hour when one emerges from this azure, and why does life go on fterwards?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.4#Loving almost takes the place of thinking. Love is an ardent forgetfulness f all the rest. Then ask logic of passion if you will. There is no more bsolute logical sequence in the human heart than there is a perfect geometrical igure in the celestial mechanism. For Cosette and Marius nothing existed except arius and Cosette. The universe around them had fallen into a hole. They lived n a golden minute. There was nothing before them, nothing behind. It hardly ccurred to Marius that Cosette had a father. His brain was dazzled and bliterated. Of what did these lovers talk then? We have seen, of the flowers, nd the swallows, the setting sun and the rising moon, and all sorts of mportant things. They had told each other everything except everything. The verything of lovers is nothing. But the father, the realities, that lair, the uffians, that adventure, to what purpose? And was he very sure that this ightmare had actually existed? They were two, and they adored each other, and eyond that there was nothing. Nothing else existed. It is probable that this anishing of hell in our rear is inherent to the arrival of paradise. Have we eheld demons? Are there any? Have we trembled? Have we suffered? We no longer now. A rosy cloud hangs over it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.5#So these two beings lived in this manner, high aloft, with all that mprobability which is in nature; neither at the nadir nor at the zenith, etween man and seraphim, above the mire, below the ether, in the clouds; hardly lesh and blood, soul and ecstasy from head to foot; already too sublime to walk he earth, still too heavily charged with humanity to disappear in the blue, uspended like atoms which are waiting to be precipitated; apparently beyond the ounds of destiny; ignorant of that rut; yesterday, to-day, to-morrow; amazed, apturous, floating, soaring; at times so light that they could take their light out into the infinite; almost prepared to soar away to all eternity. They lept wide-awake, thus sweetly lulled. Oh! splendid lethargy of the real verwhelmed by the ideal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.6#Sometimes, beautiful as Cosette was, Marius shut his eyes in her presence. he best way to look at the soul is through closed eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.2.7#Marius and Cosette never asked themselves whither this was to lead them. hey considered that they had already arrived. It is a strange claim on man’s art to wish that love should lead to something.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE BEGINNING OF SHADOW
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.1#Jean Valjean suspected nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.2#Cosette, who was rather less dreamy than Marius, was gay, and that sufficed or Jean Valjean’s happiness. The thoughts which Cosette cherished, her tender reoccupations, Marius’ image which filled her heart, took away nothing from the ncomparable purity of her beautiful, chaste, and smiling brow. She was at the ge when the virgin bears her love as the angel his lily. So Jean Valjean was at ase. And then, when two lovers have come to an understanding, things always go ell; the third party who might disturb their love is kept in a state of perfect lindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always the same in the ase of all lovers. Thus, Cosette never objected to any of Jean Valjean’s roposals. Did she want to take a walk? “Yes, dear little father.” Did she want o stay at home? Very good. Did he wish to pass the evening with Cosette? She as delighted. As he always went to bed at ten o’clock, Marius did not come to he garden on such occasions until after that hour, when, from the street, he eard Cosette open the long glass door on the veranda. Of course, no one ever et Marius in the daytime. Jean Valjean never even dreamed any longer that arius was in existence. Only once, one morning, he chanced to say to Cosette: Why, you have whitewash on your back!” On the previous evening, Marius, in a ransport, had pushed Cosette against the wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.3#Old Toussaint, who retired early, thought of nothing but her sleep, and was s ignorant of the whole matter as Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.4#Marius never set foot in the house. When he was with Cosette, they hid hemselves in a recess near the steps, in order that they might neither be seen or heard from the street, and there they sat, frequently contenting themselves, y way of conversation, with pressing each other’s hands twenty times a minute s they gazed at the branches of the trees. At such times, a thunderbolt might ave fallen thirty paces from them, and they would not have noticed it, so eeply was the reverie of the one absorbed and sunk in the reverie of the ther.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.5#Limpid purity. Hours wholly white; almost all alike. This sort of love is a ecollection of lily petals and the plumage of the dove.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.6#The whole extent of the garden lay between them and the street. Every time hat Marius entered and left, he carefully adjusted the bar of the gate in such manner that no displacement was visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.7#He usually went away about midnight, and returned to Courfeyrac’s lodgings. ourfeyrac said to Bahorel:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.8#“Would you believe it? Marius comes home nowadays at one o’clock in the orning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.9#Bahorel replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.10#“What do you expect? There’s always a petard in a seminary fellow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.11#At times, Courfeyrac folded his arms, assumed a serious air, and said to arius:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.12#“You are getting irregular in your habits, young man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.13#Courfeyrac, being a practical man, did not take in good part this eflection of an invisible paradise upon Marius; he was not much in the habit of oncealed passions; it made him impatient, and now and then he called upon arius to come back to reality.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.14#One morning, he threw him this admonition:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.15#“My dear fellow, you produce upon me the effect of being located in the oon, the realm of dreams, the province of illusions, capital, soap-bubble. ome, be a good boy, what’s her name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.16#But nothing could induce Marius “to talk.” They might have torn out his ails before one of the two sacred syllables of which that ineffable name, osette, was composed. True love is as luminous as the dawn and as silent as the omb. Only, Courfeyrac saw this change in Marius, that his taciturnity was of he beaming order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.17#During this sweet month of May, Marius and Cosette learned to know these mmense delights. To dispute and to say _you_ for _thou_, simply that they might ay _thou_ the better afterwards. To talk at great length with very minute etails, of persons in whom they took not the slightest interest in the world; nother proof that in that ravishing opera called love, the libretto counts for lmost nothing;
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.18#For Marius, to listen to Cosette discussing finery;
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.19#For Cosette, to listen to Marius talk in politics;
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.20#To listen, knee pressed to knee, to the carriages rolling along the Rue de abylone;
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.21#To gaze upon the same planet in space, or at the same glowworm gleaming in he grass;
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.22#To hold their peace together; a still greater delight than onversation;
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.23#Etc., etc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.24#In the meantime, divers complications were approaching.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.25#One evening, Marius was on his way to the rendezvous, by way of the oulevard des Invalides. He habitually walked with drooping head. As he was on he point of turning the corner of the Rue Plumet, he heard some one quite close o him say:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.26#“Good evening, Monsieur Marius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.27#He raised his head and recognized Éponine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.28#This produced a singular effect upon him. He had not thought of that girl single time since the day when she had conducted him to the Rue Plumet, he had ot seen her again, and she had gone completely out of his mind. He had no easons for anything but gratitude towards her, he owed her his happiness, and et, it was embarrassing to him to meet her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.29#It is an error to think that passion, when it is pure and happy, leads man o a state of perfection; it simply leads him, as we have noted, to a state of blivion. In this situation, man forgets to be bad, but he also forgets to be ood. Gratitude, duty, matters essential and important to be remembered, vanish. t any other time, Marius would have behaved quite differently to Éponine. bsorbed in Cosette, he had not even clearly put it to himself that this Éponine as named Éponine Thénardier, and that she bore the name inscribed in his ather’s will, that name, for which, but a few months before, he would have so rdently sacrificed himself. We show Marius as he was. His father himself was ading out of his soul to some extent, under the splendor of his love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.30#He replied with some embarrassment:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.31#“Ah! so it’s you, Éponine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.32#“Why do you call me _you?_ Have I done anything to you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.33#“No,” he answered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.34#Certainly, he had nothing against her. Far from it. Only, he felt that he ould not do otherwise, now that he used _thou_ to Cosette, than say _you_ to ponine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.35#As he remained silent, she exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.36#“Say—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.37#Then she paused. It seemed as though words failed that creature formerly o heedless and so bold. She tried to smile and could not. Then she esumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.38#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.39#Then she paused again, and remained with downcast eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.3.40#“Good evening, Mr. Marius,” said she suddenly and abruptly; and away she ent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.head#CHAPTER IV—A CAB RUNS IN ENGLISH AND BARKS IN SLANG
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.1#The following day was the 3d of June, 1832, a date which it is necessary to ndicate on account of the grave events which at that epoch hung on the horizon f Paris in the state of lightning-charged clouds. Marius, at nightfall, was ursuing the same road as on the preceding evening, with the same thoughts of elight in his heart, when he caught sight of Éponine approaching, through the rees of the boulevard. Two days in succession—this was too much. He turned astily aside, quitted the boulevard, changed his course and went to the Rue lumet through the Rue Monsieur.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.2#This caused Éponine to follow him to the Rue Plumet, a thing which she had ot yet done. Up to that time, she had contented herself with watching him on is passage along the boulevard without ever seeking to encounter him. It was nly on the evening before that she had attempted to address him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.3#So Éponine followed him, without his suspecting the fact. She saw him isplace the bar and slip into the garden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.4#She approached the railing, felt of the bars one after the other, and eadily recognized the one which Marius had moved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.5#She murmured in a low voice and in gloomy accents:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.6#“None of that, Lisette!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.7#She seated herself on the underpinning of the railing, close beside the ar, as though she were guarding it. It was precisely at the point where the ailing touched the neighboring wall. There was a dim nook there, in which ponine was entirely concealed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.8#She remained thus for more than an hour, without stirring and without reathing, a prey to her thoughts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.9#Towards ten o’clock in the evening, one of the two or three persons who assed through the Rue Plumet, an old, belated bourgeois who was making haste to scape from this deserted spot of evil repute, as he skirted the garden railings nd reached the angle which it made with the wall, heard a dull and threatening oice saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.10#“I’m no longer surprised that he comes here every evening.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.11#The passer-by cast a glance around him, saw no one, dared not peer into he black niche, and was greatly alarmed. He redoubled his pace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.12#This passer-by had reason to make haste, for a very few instants later, ix men, who were marching separately and at some distance from each other, long the wall, and who might have been taken for a gray patrol, entered the Rue lumet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.13#The first to arrive at the garden railing halted, and waited for the thers; a second later, all six were reunited.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.14#These men began to talk in a low voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.15#“This is the place,” said one of them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.16#“Is there a _cab_ [dog] in the garden?” asked another.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.17#“I don’t know. In any case, I have fetched a ball that we’ll make him at.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.18#“Have you some putty to break the pane with?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.19#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.20#“The railing is old,” interpolated a fifth, who had the voice of a entriloquist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.21#“So much the better,” said the second who had spoken. “It won’t screech nder the saw, and it won’t be hard to cut.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.22#The sixth, who had not yet opened his lips, now began to inspect the gate, s Éponine had done an hour earlier, grasping each bar in succession, and haking them cautiously.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.23#Thus he came to the bar which Marius had loosened. As he was on the point f grasping this bar, a hand emerged abruptly from the darkness, fell upon his rm; he felt himself vigorously thrust aside by a push in the middle of his reast, and a hoarse voice said to him, but not loudly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.24#“There’s a dog.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.25#At the same moment, he perceived a pale girl standing before him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.26#The man underwent that shock which the unexpected always brings. He ristled up in hideous wise; nothing is so formidable to behold as ferocious easts who are uneasy; their terrified air evokes terror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.27#He recoiled and stammered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.28#“What jade is this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.29#“Your daughter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.30#It was, in fact, Éponine, who had addressed Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.31#At the apparition of Éponine, the other five, that is to say, Claquesous, uelemer, Babet, Brujon, and Montparnasse had noiselessly drawn near, without recipitation, without uttering a word, with the sinister slowness peculiar to hese men of the night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.32#Some indescribable but hideous tools were visible in their hands. Guelemer eld one of those pairs of curved pincers which prowlers call _fanchons_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.33#“Ah, see here, what are you about there? What do you want with us? Are you razy?” exclaimed Thénardier, as loudly as one can exclaim and still speak low; what have you come here to hinder our work for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.34#Éponine burst out laughing, and threw herself on his neck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.35#“I am here, little father, because I am here. Isn’t a person allowed to it on the stones nowadays? It’s you who ought not to be here. What have you ome here for, since it’s a biscuit? I told Magnon so. There’s nothing to be one here. But embrace me, my good little father! It’s a long time since I’ve een you! So you’re out?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.36#Thénardier tried to disentangle himself from Éponine’s arms, and rumbled:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.37#“That’s good. You’ve embraced me. Yes, I’m out. I’m not in. Now, get away ith you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.38#But Éponine did not release her hold, and redoubled her caresses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.39#“But how did you manage it, little pa? You must have been very clever to et out of that. Tell me about it! And my mother? Where is mother? Tell me about amma.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.40#Thénardier replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.41#“She’s well. I don’t know, let me alone, and be off, I tell you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.42#“I won’t go, so there now,” pouted Éponine like a spoiled child; “you send e off, and it’s four months since I saw you, and I’ve hardly had time to kiss ou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.43#And she caught her father round the neck again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.44#“Come, now, this is stupid!” said Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.45#“Make haste!” said Guelemer, “the cops may pass.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.46#The ventriloquist’s voice repeated his distich:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.47#“Nous n’ sommes pas le jour de l’an, “This isn’t New Year’s day A bécoter apa, maman.” To peck at pa and ma.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.48#Éponine turned to the five ruffians.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.49#“Why, it’s Monsieur Brujon. Good day, Monsieur Babet. Good day, Monsieur laquesous. Don’t you know me, Monsieur Guelemer? How goes it, ontparnasse?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.50#“Yes, they know you!” ejaculated Thénardier. “But good day, good evening, heer off! leave us alone!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.51#“It’s the hour for foxes, not for chickens,” said Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.52#“You see the job we have on hand here,” added Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.53#Éponine caught Montparnasse’s hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.54#“Take care,” said he, “you’ll cut yourself, I’ve a knife open.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.55#“My little Montparnasse,” responded Éponine very gently, “you must have onfidence in people. I am the daughter of my father, perhaps. Monsieur Babet, onsieur Guelemer, I’m the person who was charged to investigate this atter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.56#It is remarkable that Éponine did not talk slang. That frightful tongue ad become impossible to her since she had known Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.57#She pressed in her hand, small, bony, and feeble as that of a skeleton, uelemer’s huge, coarse fingers, and continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.58#“You know well that I’m no fool. Ordinarily, I am believed. I have endered you service on various occasions. Well, I have made inquiries; you will xpose yourselves to no purpose, you see. I swear to you that there is nothing n this house.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.59#“There are lone women,” said Guelemer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.60#“No, the persons have moved away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.61#“The candles haven’t, anyway!” ejaculated Babet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.62#And he pointed out to Éponine, across the tops of the trees, a light which as wandering about in the mansard roof of the pavilion. It was Toussaint, who ad stayed up to spread out some linen to dry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.63#Éponine made a final effort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.64#“Well,” said she, “they’re very poor folks, and it’s a hovel where there sn’t a sou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.65#“Go to the devil!” cried Thénardier. “When we’ve turned the house upside own and put the cellar at the top and the attic below, we’ll tell you what here is inside, and whether it’s francs or sous or half-farthings.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.66#And he pushed her aside with the intention of entering.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.67#“My good friend, Mr. Montparnasse,” said Éponine, “I entreat you, you are good fellow, don’t enter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.68#“Take care, you’ll cut yourself,” replied Montparnasse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.69#Thénardier resumed in his decided tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.70#“Decamp, my girl, and leave men to their own affairs!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.71#Éponine released Montparnasse’s hand, which she had grasped again, and aid:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.72#“So you mean to enter this house?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.73#“Rather!” grinned the ventriloquist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.74#Then she set her back against the gate, faced the six ruffians who were rmed to the teeth, and to whom the night lent the visages of demons, and said n a firm, low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.75#“Well, I don’t mean that you shall.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.76#They halted in amazement. The ventriloquist, however, finished his grin. he went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.77#“Friends! Listen well. This is not what you want. Now I’m talking. In the irst place, if you enter this garden, if you lay a hand on this gate, I’ll cream, I’ll beat on the door, I’ll rouse everybody, I’ll have the whole six of ou seized, I’ll call the police.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.78#“She’d do it, too,” said Thénardier in a low tone to Brujon and the entriloquist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.79#She shook her head and added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.80#“Beginning with my father!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.81#Thénardier stepped nearer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.82#“Not so close, my good man!” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.83#He retreated, growling between his teeth:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.84#“Why, what’s the matter with her?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.85#And he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.86#“Bitch!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.87#She began to laugh in a terrible way:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.88#“As you like, but you shall not enter here. I’m not the daughter of a dog, ince I’m the daughter of a wolf. There are six of you, what matters that to me? ou are men. Well, I’m a woman. You don’t frighten me. I tell you that you han’t enter this house, because it doesn’t suit me. If you approach, I’ll bark. told you, I’m the dog, and I don’t care a straw for you. Go your way, you bore e! Go where you please, but don’t come here, I forbid it! You can use your nives. I’ll use kicks; it’s all the same to me, come on!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.89#She advanced a pace nearer the ruffians, she was terrible, she burst out aughing:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.90#“Pardine! I’m not afraid. I shall be hungry this summer, and I shall be old this winter. Aren’t they ridiculous, these ninnies of men, to think they an scare a girl! What! Scare? Oh, yes, much! Because you have finical poppets f mistresses who hide under the bed when you put on a big voice, forsooth! I in’t afraid of anything, that I ain’t!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.91#She fastened her intent gaze upon Thénardier and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.92#“Not even of you, father!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.93#Then she continued, as she cast her blood-shot, spectre-like eyes upon the uffians in turn:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.94#“What do I care if I’m picked up to-morrow morning on the pavement of the ue Plumet, killed by the blows of my father’s club, or whether I’m found a year rom now in the nets at Saint-Cloud or the Isle of Swans in the midst of rotten ld corks and drowned dogs?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.95#She was forced to pause; she was seized by a dry cough, her breath came rom her weak and narrow chest like the death-rattle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.96#She resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.97#“I have only to cry out, and people will come, and then slap, bang! There re six of you; I represent the whole world.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.98#Thénardier made a movement towards her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.99#“Don’t approach!” she cried.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.100#He halted, and said gently:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.101#“Well, no; I won’t approach, but don’t speak so loud. So you intend to inder us in our work, my daughter? But we must earn our living all the same. ave you no longer any kind feeling for your father?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.102#“You bother me,” said Éponine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.103#“But we must live, we must eat—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.104#“Burst!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.105#So saying, she seated herself on the underpinning of the fence and ummed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.106#“Mon bras si dodu, “My arm so plump, Ma jambe bien faite My leg well ormed, Et le temps perdu.” And time wasted.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.107#She had set her elbow on her knee and her chin in her hand, and she swung er foot with an air of indifference. Her tattered gown permitted a view of her hin shoulder-blades. The neighboring street lantern illuminated her profile and er attitude. Nothing more resolute and more surprising could be seen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.108#The six rascals, speechless and gloomy at being held in check by a girl, etreated beneath the shadow cast by the lantern, and held counsel with furious nd humiliated shrugs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.109#In the meantime she stared at them with a stern but peaceful air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.110#“There’s something the matter with her,” said Babet. “A reason. Is she in ove with the dog? It’s a shame to miss this, anyway. Two women, an old fellow ho lodges in the back-yard, and curtains that ain’t so bad at the windows. The ld cove must be a Jew. I think the job’s a good one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.111#“Well, go in, then, the rest of you,” exclaimed Montparnasse. “Do the ob. I’ll stay here with the girl, and if she fails us—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.112#He flashed the knife, which he held open in his hand, in the light of the antern.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.113#Thénardier said not a word, and seemed ready for whatever the rest leased.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.114#Brujon, who was somewhat of an oracle, and who had, as the reader knows, put up the job,” had not as yet spoken. He seemed thoughtful. He had the eputation of not sticking at anything, and it was known that he had plundered a olice post simply out of bravado. Besides this he made verses and songs, which ave him great authority.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.115#Babet interrogated him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.116#“You say nothing, Brujon?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.117#Brujon remained silent an instant longer, then he shook his head in arious ways, and finally concluded to speak:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.118#“See here; this morning I came across two sparrows fighting, this evening jostled a woman who was quarrelling. All that’s bad. Let’s quit.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.119#They went away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.120#As they went, Montparnasse muttered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.121#“Never mind! if they had wanted, I’d have cut her throat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.122#Babet responded
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.123#“I wouldn’t. I don’t hit a lady.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.124#At the corner of the street they halted and exchanged the following nigmatical dialogue in a low tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.125#“Where shall we go to sleep to-night?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.126#“Under Pantin [Paris].”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.127#“Have you the key to the gate, Thénardier?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.128#“Pardi.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.129#Éponine, who never took her eyes off of them, saw them retreat by the oad by which they had come. She rose and began to creep after them along the alls and the houses. She followed them thus as far as the boulevard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.4.130#There they parted, and she saw these six men plunge into the gloom, where hey appeared to melt away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.5.head#CHAPTER V—THINGS OF THE NIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.5.1#After the departure of the ruffians, the Rue Plumet resumed its tranquil, octurnal aspect. That which had just taken place in this street would not have stonished a forest. The lofty trees, the copses, the heaths, the branches udely interlaced, the tall grass, exist in a sombre manner; the savage swarming here catches glimpses of sudden apparitions of the invisible; that which is elow man distinguishes, through the mists, that which is beyond man; and the hings of which we living beings are ignorant there meet face to face in the ight. Nature, bristling and wild, takes alarm at certain approaches in which he fancies that she feels the supernatural. The forces of the gloom know each ther, and are strangely balanced by each other. Teeth and claws fear what they annot grasp. Blood-drinking bestiality, voracious appetites, hunger in search f prey, the armed instincts of nails and jaws which have for source and aim the elly, glare and smell out uneasily the impassive spectral forms straying eneath a shroud, erect in its vague and shuddering robe, and which seem to them o live with a dead and terrible life. These brutalities, which are only matter, ntertain a confused fear of having to deal with the immense obscurity condensed nto an unknown being. A black figure barring the way stops the wild beast hort. That which emerges from the cemetery intimidates and disconcerts that hich emerges from the cave; the ferocious fear the sinister; wolves recoil when hey encounter a ghoul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.head#CHAPTER VI—MARIUS BECOMES PRACTICAL ONCE MORE TO THE EXTENT OF GIVING OSETTE HIS ADDRESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.1#While this sort of a dog with a human face was mounting guard over the ate, and while the six ruffians were yielding to a girl, Marius was by osette’s side.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.2#Never had the sky been more studded with stars and more charming, the trees ore trembling, the odor of the grass more penetrating; never had the birds allen asleep among the leaves with a sweeter noise; never had all the harmonies f universal serenity responded more thoroughly to the inward music of love; ever had Marius been more captivated, more happy, more ecstatic.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.3#But he had found Cosette sad; Cosette had been weeping. Her eyes were ed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.4#This was the first cloud in that wonderful dream.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.5#Marius’ first word had been: “What is the matter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.6#And she had replied: “This.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.7#Then she had seated herself on the bench near the steps, and while he remblingly took his place beside her, she had continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.8#“My father told me this morning to hold myself in readiness, because he has usiness, and we may go away from here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.9#Marius shivered from head to foot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.10#When one is at the end of one’s life, to die means to go away; when one is t the beginning of it, to go away means to die.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.11#For the last six weeks, Marius had little by little, slowly, by degrees, aken possession of Cosette each day. As we have already explained, in the case f first love, the soul is taken long before the body; later on, one takes the ody long before the soul; sometimes one does not take the soul at all; the aublas and the Prudhommes add: “Because there is none”; but the sarcasm is, ortunately, a blasphemy. So Marius possessed Cosette, as spirits possess, but e enveloped her with all his soul, and seized her jealously with incredible onviction. He possessed her smile, her breath, her perfume, the profound adiance of her blue eyes, the sweetness of her skin when he touched her hand, he charming mark which she had on her neck, all her thoughts. Therefore, he ossessed all Cosette’s dreams.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.12#He incessantly gazed at, and he sometimes touched lightly with his breath, he short locks on the nape of her neck, and he declared to himself that there as not one of those short hairs which did not belong to him, Marius. He gazed pon and adored the things that she wore, her knot of ribbon, her gloves, her leeves, her shoes, her cuffs, as sacred objects of which he was the master. He reamed that he was the lord of those pretty shell combs which she wore in her air, and he even said to himself, in confused and suppressed stammerings of oluptuousness which did not make their way to the light, that there was not a ibbon of her gown, not a mesh in her stockings, not a fold in her bodice, which as not his. Beside Cosette he felt himself beside his own property, his own hing, his own despot and his slave. It seemed as though they had so ntermingled their souls, that it would have been impossible to tell them apart ad they wished to take them back again.—“This is mine.” “No, it is mine.” “I ssure you that you are mistaken. This is my property.” “What you are taking as our own is myself.”—Marius was something that made a part of Cosette, and osette was something which made a part of Marius. Marius felt Cosette within im. To have Cosette, to possess Cosette, this, to him, was not to be istinguished from breathing. It was in the midst of this faith, of this ntoxication, of this virgin possession, unprecedented and absolute, of this overeignty, that these words: “We are going away,” fell suddenly, at a blow, nd that the harsh voice of reality cried to him: “Cosette is not yours!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.13#Marius awoke. For six weeks Marius had been living, as we have said, utside of life; those words, _going away!_ caused him to re-enter it arshly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.14#He found not a word to say. Cosette merely felt that his hand was very old. She said to him in her turn: “What is the matter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.15#He replied in so low a tone that Cosette hardly heard him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.16#“I did not understand what you said.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.17#She began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.18#“This morning my father told me to settle all my little affairs and to old myself in readiness, that he would give me his linen to put in a trunk, hat he was obliged to go on a journey, that we were to go away, that it is ecessary to have a large trunk for me and a small one for him, and that all is o be ready in a week from now, and that we might go to England.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.19#“But this is outrageous!” exclaimed Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.20#It is certain, that, at that moment, no abuse of power, no violence, not ne of the abominations of the worst tyrants, no action of Busiris, of Tiberius, r of Henry VIII., could have equalled this in atrocity, in the opinion of arius; M. Fauchelevent taking his daughter off to England because he had usiness there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.21#He demanded in a weak voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.22#“And when do you start?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.23#“He did not say when.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.24#“And when shall you return?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.25#“He did not say when.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.26#Marius rose and said coldly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.27#“Cosette, shall you go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.28#Cosette turned toward him her beautiful eyes, all filled with anguish, and eplied in a sort of bewilderment:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.29#“Where?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.30#“To England. Shall you go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.31#“Why do you say _you_ to me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.32#“I ask you whether you will go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.33#“What do you expect me to do?” she said, clasping her hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.34#“So, you will go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.35#“If my father goes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.36#“So, you will go?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.37#Cosette took Marius’ hand, and pressed it without replying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.38#“Very well,” said Marius, “then I will go elsewhere.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.39#Cosette felt rather than understood the meaning of these words. She turned o pale that her face shone white through the gloom. She stammered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.40#“What do you mean?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.41#Marius looked at her, then raised his eyes to heaven, and answered: Nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.42#When his eyes fell again, he saw Cosette smiling at him. The smile of a oman whom one loves possesses a visible radiance, even at night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.43#“How silly we are! Marius, I have an idea.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.44#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.45#“If we go away, do you go too! I will tell you where! Come and join me herever I am.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.46#Marius was now a thoroughly roused man. He had fallen back into reality. e cried to Cosette:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.47#“Go away with you! Are you mad? Why, I should have to have money, and I ave none! Go to England? But I am in debt now, I owe, I don’t know how much, ore than ten louis to Courfeyrac, one of my friends with whom you are not cquainted! I have an old hat which is not worth three francs, I have a coat hich lacks buttons in front, my shirt is all ragged, my elbows are torn, my oots let in the water; for the last six weeks I have not thought about it, and have not told you about it. You only see me at night, and you give me your ove; if you were to see me in the daytime, you would give me a sou! Go to ngland! Eh! I haven’t enough to pay for a passport!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.48#He threw himself against a tree which was close at hand, erect, his brow ressed close to the bark, feeling neither the wood which flayed his skin, nor he fever which was throbbing in his temples, and there he stood motionless, on he point of falling, like the statue of despair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.49#He remained a long time thus. One could remain for eternity in such bysses. At last he turned round. He heard behind him a faint stifled noise, hich was sweet yet sad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.50#It was Cosette sobbing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.51#She had been weeping for more than two hours beside Marius as he editated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.52#He came to her, fell at her knees, and slowly prostrating himself, he took he tip of her foot which peeped out from beneath her robe, and kissed it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.53#She let him have his way in silence. There are moments when a woman ccepts, like a sombre and resigned goddess, the religion of love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.54#“Do not weep,” he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.55#She murmured:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.56#“Not when I may be going away, and you cannot come!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.57#He went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.58#“Do you love me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.59#She replied, sobbing, by that word from paradise which is never more harming than amid tears:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.60#“I adore you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.61#He continued in a tone which was an indescribable caress:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.62#“Do not weep. Tell me, will you do this for me, and cease to weep?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.63#“Do you love me?” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.64#He took her hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.65#“Cosette, I have never given my word of honor to any one, because my word f honor terrifies me. I feel that my father is by my side. Well, I give you my ost sacred word of honor, that if you go away I shall die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.66#In the tone with which he uttered these words there lay a melancholy so olemn and so tranquil, that Cosette trembled. She felt that chill which is roduced by a true and gloomy thing as it passes by. The shock made her cease eeping.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.67#“Now, listen,” said he, “do not expect me to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.68#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.69#“Do not expect me until the day after to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.70#“Oh! Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.71#“You will see.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.72#“A day without seeing you! But that is impossible!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.73#“Let us sacrifice one day in order to gain our whole lives, perhaps.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.74#And Marius added in a low tone and in an aside:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.75#“He is a man who never changes his habits, and he has never received any ne except in the evening.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.76#“Of what man are you speaking?” asked Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.77#“I? I said nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.78#“What do you hope, then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.79#“Wait until the day after to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.80#“You wish it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.81#“Yes, Cosette.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.82#She took his head in both her hands, raising herself on tiptoe in order to e on a level with him, and tried to read his hope in his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.83#Marius resumed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.84#“Now that I think of it, you ought to know my address: something might appen, one never knows; I live with that friend named Courfeyrac, Rue de la errerie, No. 16.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.85#He searched in his pocket, pulled out his penknife, and with the blade he rote on the plaster of the wall:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.86#_“16 Rue de la Verrerie.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.87#In the meantime, Cosette had begun to gaze into his eyes once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.88#“Tell me your thought, Marius; you have some idea. Tell it to me. Oh! tell e, so that I may pass a pleasant night.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.89#“This is my idea: that it is impossible that God should mean to part us. ait; expect me the day after to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.90#“What shall I do until then?” said Cosette. “You are outside, you go, and ome! How happy men are! I shall remain entirely alone! Oh! How sad I shall be! hat is it that you are going to do to-morrow evening? tell me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.91#“I am going to try something.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.92#“Then I will pray to God and I will think of you here, so that you may be uccessful. I will question you no further, since you do not wish it. You are my aster. I shall pass the evening to-morrow in singing that music from Euryanthe_ that you love, and that you came one evening to listen to, outside y shutters. But day after to-morrow you will come early. I shall expect you at usk, at nine o’clock precisely, I warn you. Mon Dieu! how sad it is that the ays are so long! On the stroke of nine, do you understand, I shall be in the arden.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.93#“And I also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.94#And without having uttered it, moved by the same thought, impelled by hose electric currents which place lovers in continual communication, both eing intoxicated with delight even in their sorrow, they fell into each other’s rms, without perceiving that their lips met while their uplifted eyes, verflowing with rapture and full of tears, gazed upon the stars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.95#When Marius went forth, the street was deserted. This was the moment when ponine was following the ruffians to the boulevard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.6.96#While Marius had been dreaming with his head pressed to the tree, an idea ad crossed his mind; an idea, alas! that he himself judged to be senseless and mpossible. He had come to a desperate decision.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE OLD HEART AND THE YOUNG HEART IN THE PRESENCE OF EACH THER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.1#At that epoch, Father Gillenormand was well past his ninety-first birthday. e still lived with Mademoiselle Gillenormand in the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, o. 6, in the old house which he owned. He was, as the reader will remember, one f those antique old men who await death perfectly erect, whom age bears down ithout bending, and whom even sorrow cannot curve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.2#Still, his daughter had been saying for some time: “My father is sinking.” e no longer boxed the maids’ ears; he no longer thumped the landing-place so igorously with his cane when Basque was slow in opening the door. The evolution of July had exasperated him for the space of barely six months. He ad viewed, almost tranquilly, that coupling of words, in the _Moniteur:_ M. umblot-Conté, peer of France. The fact is, that the old man was deeply ejected. He did not bend, he did not yield; this was no more a characteristic f his physical than of his moral nature, but he felt himself giving way nternally. For four years he had been waiting for Marius, with his foot firmly lanted, that is the exact word, in the conviction that that good-for-nothing oung scamp would ring at his door some day or other; now he had reached the oint, where, at certain gloomy hours, he said to himself, that if Marius made im wait much longer—It was not death that was insupportable to him; it was the dea that perhaps he should never see Marius again. The idea of never seeing arius again had never entered his brain until that day; now the thought began o recur to him, and it chilled him. Absence, as is always the case in genuine nd natural sentiments, had only served to augment the grandfather’s love for he ungrateful child, who had gone off like a flash. It is during December ights, when the cold stands at ten degrees, that one thinks oftenest of the on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.3#M. Gillenormand was, or thought himself, above all things, incapable of aking a single step, he—the grandfather, towards his grandson; “I would die ather,” he said to himself. He did not consider himself as the least to blame; ut he thought of Marius only with profound tenderness, and the mute despair of n elderly, kindly old man who is about to vanish in the dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.4#He began to lose his teeth, which added to his sadness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.5#M. Gillenormand, without however acknowledging it to himself, for it would ave rendered him furious and ashamed, had never loved a mistress as he loved arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.6#He had had placed in his chamber, opposite the head of his bed, so that it hould be the first thing on which his eyes fell on waking, an old portrait of is other daughter, who was dead, Madame Pontmercy, a portrait which had been aken when she was eighteen. He gazed incessantly at that portrait. One day, he appened to say, as he gazed upon it:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.7#“I think the likeness is strong.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.8#“To my sister?” inquired Mademoiselle Gillenormand. “Yes, certainly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.9#The old man added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.10#“And to him also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.11#Once as he sat with his knees pressed together, and his eyes almost losed, in a despondent attitude, his daughter ventured to say to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.12#“Father, are you as angry with him as ever?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.13#She paused, not daring to proceed further.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.14#“With whom?” he demanded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.15#“With that poor Marius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.16#He raised his aged head, laid his withered and emaciated fist on the able, and exclaimed in his most irritated and vibrating tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.17#“Poor Marius, do you say! That gentleman is a knave, a wretched scoundrel, vain little ingrate, a heartless, soulless, haughty, and wicked man!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.18#And he turned away so that his daughter might not see the tear that stood n his eye.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.19#Three days later he broke a silence which had lasted four hours, to say to is daughter point-blank:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.20#“I had the honor to ask Mademoiselle Gillenormand never to mention him to e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.21#Aunt Gillenormand renounced every effort, and pronounced this acute iagnosis: “My father never cared very much for my sister after her folly. It is lear that he detests Marius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.22#“After her folly” meant: “after she had married the colonel.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.23#However, as the reader has been able to conjecture, Mademoiselle illenormand had failed in her attempt to substitute her favorite, the officer f lancers, for Marius. The substitute, Théodule, had not been a success. M. illenormand had not accepted the _quid pro quo_. A vacancy in the heart does ot accommodate itself to a stop-gap. Théodule, on his side, though he scented he inheritance, was disgusted at the task of pleasing. The goodman bored the ancer; and the lancer shocked the goodman. Lieutenant Théodule was gay, no oubt, but a chatter-box, frivolous, but vulgar; a high liver, but a frequenter f bad company; he had mistresses, it is true, and he had a great deal to say bout them, it is true also; but he talked badly. All his good qualities had a efect. M. Gillenormand was worn out with hearing him tell about the love ffairs that he had in the vicinity of the barracks in the Rue de Babylone. And hen, Lieutenant Gillenormand sometimes came in his uniform, with the tricolored ockade. This rendered him downright intolerable. Finally, Father Gillenormand ad said to his daughter: “I’ve had enough of that Théodule. I haven’t much aste for warriors in time of peace. Receive him if you choose. I don’t know but prefer slashers to fellows that drag their swords. The clash of blades in attle is less dismal, after all, than the clank of the scabbard on the avement. And then, throwing out your chest like a bully and lacing yourself ike a girl, with stays under your cuirass, is doubly ridiculous. When one is a eritable man, one holds equally aloof from swagger and from affected airs. He s neither a blusterer nor a finnicky-hearted man. Keep your Théodule for ourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.24#It was in vain that his daughter said to him: “But he is your grandnephew, evertheless,”—it turned out that M. Gillenormand, who was a grandfather to the ery finger-tips, was not in the least a grand-uncle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.25#In fact, as he had good sense, and as he had compared the two, Théodule ad only served to make him regret Marius all the more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.26#One evening,—it was the 24th of June, which did not prevent Father illenormand having a rousing fire on the hearth,—he had dismissed his daughter, ho was sewing in a neighboring apartment. He was alone in his chamber, amid its astoral scenes, with his feet propped on the andirons, half enveloped in his uge screen of coromandel lacquer, with its nine leaves, with his elbow resting n a table where burned two candles under a green shade, engulfed in his apestry armchair, and in his hand a book which he was not reading. He was ressed, according to his wont, like an _incroyable_, and resembled an antique ortrait by Garat. This would have made people run after him in the street, had ot his daughter covered him up, whenever he went out, in a vast bishop’s wadded loak, which concealed his attire. At home, he never wore a dressing gown, xcept when he rose and retired. “It gives one a look of age,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.27#Father Gillenormand was thinking of Marius lovingly and bitterly; and, as sual, bitterness predominated. His tenderness once soured always ended by oiling and turning to indignation. He had reached the point where a man tries o make up his mind and to accept that which rends his heart. He was explaining o himself that there was no longer any reason why Marius should return, that if e intended to return, he should have done it long ago, that he must renounce he idea. He was trying to accustom himself to the thought that all was over, nd that he should die without having beheld “that gentleman” again. But his hole nature revolted; his aged paternity would not consent to this. “Well!” aid he,—this was his doleful refrain,—“he will not return!” His bald head had allen upon his breast, and he fixed a melancholy and irritated gaze upon the shes on his hearth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.28#In the very midst of his reverie, his old servant Basque entered, and nquired:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.29#“Can Monsieur receive M. Marius?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.30#The old man sat up erect, pallid, and like a corpse which rises under the nfluence of a galvanic shock. All his blood had retreated to his heart. He tammered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.31#“M. Marius what?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.32#“I don’t know,” replied Basque, intimidated and put out of countenance by is master’s air; “I have not seen him. Nicolette came in and said to me: There’s a young man here; say that it is M. Marius.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.33#Father Gillenormand stammered in a low voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.34#“Show him in.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.35#And he remained in the same attitude, with shaking head, and his eyes ixed on the door. It opened once more. A young man entered. It was Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.36#Marius halted at the door, as though waiting to be bidden to enter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.37#His almost squalid attire was not perceptible in the obscurity caused by he shade. Nothing could be seen but his calm, grave, but strangely sad ace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.38#It was several minutes before Father Gillenormand, dulled with amazement nd joy, could see anything except a brightness as when one is in the presence f an apparition. He was on the point of swooning; he saw Marius through a azzling light. It certainly was he, it certainly was Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.39#At last! After the lapse of four years! He grasped him entire, so to peak, in a single glance. He found him noble, handsome, distinguished, ell-grown, a complete man, with a suitable mien and a charming air. He felt a esire to open his arms, to call him, to fling himself forward; his heart melted ith rapture, affectionate words swelled and overflowed his breast; at length ll his tenderness came to the light and reached his lips, and, by a contrast hich constituted the very foundation of his nature, what came forth was arshness. He said abruptly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.40#“What have you come here for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.41#Marius replied with embarrassment:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.42#“Monsieur—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.43#M. Gillenormand would have liked to have Marius throw himself into his rms. He was displeased with Marius and with himself. He was conscious that he as brusque, and that Marius was cold. It caused the goodman unendurable and rritating anxiety to feel so tender and forlorn within, and only to be able to e hard outside. Bitterness returned. He interrupted Marius in a peevish one:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.44#“Then why did you come?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.45#That “then” signified: _If you do not come to embrace me_. Marius looked t his grandfather, whose pallor gave him a face of marble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.46#“Monsieur—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.47#“Have you come to beg my pardon? Do you acknowledge your faults?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.48#He thought he was putting Marius on the right road, and that “the child” ould yield. Marius shivered; it was the denial of his father that was required f him; he dropped his eyes and replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.49#“No, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.50#“Then,” exclaimed the old man impetuously, with a grief that was poignant nd full of wrath, “what do you want of me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.51#Marius clasped his hands, advanced a step, and said in a feeble and rembling voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.52#“Sir, have pity on me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.53#These words touched M. Gillenormand; uttered a little sooner, they would ave rendered him tender, but they came too late. The grandfather rose; he upported himself with both hands on his cane; his lips were white, his brow avered, but his lofty form towered above Marius as he bowed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.54#“Pity on you, sir! It is youth demanding pity of the old man of inety-one! You are entering into life, I am leaving it; you go to the play, to alls, to the café, to the billiard-hall; you have wit, you please the women, ou are a handsome fellow; as for me, I spit on my brands in the heart of ummer; you are rich with the only riches that are really such, I possess all he poverty of age; infirmity, isolation! You have your thirty-two teeth, a good igestion, bright eyes, strength, appetite, health, gayety, a forest of black air; I have no longer even white hair, I have lost my teeth, I am losing my egs, I am losing my memory; there are three names of streets that I confound ncessantly, the Rue Charlot, the Rue du Chaume, and the Rue Saint-Claude, that s what I have come to; you have before you the whole future, full of sunshine, nd I am beginning to lose my sight, so far am I advancing into the night; you re in love, that is a matter of course, I am beloved by no one in all the orld; and you ask pity of me! Parbleu! Molière forgot that. If that is the way ou jest at the courthouse, Messieurs the lawyers, I sincerely compliment you. ou are droll.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.55#And the octogenarian went on in a grave and angry voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.56#“Come, now, what do you want of me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.57#“Sir,” said Marius, “I know that my presence is displeasing to you, but I ave come merely to ask one thing of you, and then I shall go away mmediately.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.58#“You are a fool!” said the old man. “Who said that you were to go way?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.59#This was the translation of the tender words which lay at the bottom of is heart:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.60#“Ask my pardon! Throw yourself on my neck!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.61#M. Gillenormand felt that Marius would leave him in a few moments, that is harsh reception had repelled the lad, that his hardness was driving him way; he said all this to himself, and it augmented his grief; and as his grief as straightway converted into wrath, it increased his harshness. He would have iked to have Marius understand, and Marius did not understand, which made the oodman furious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.62#He began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.63#“What! you deserted me, your grandfather, you left my house to go no one nows whither, you drove your aunt to despair, you went off, it is easily uessed, to lead a bachelor life; it’s more convenient, to play the dandy, to ome in at all hours, to amuse yourself; you have given me no signs of life, you ave contracted debts without even telling me to pay them, you have become a masher of windows and a blusterer, and, at the end of four years, you come to e, and that is all you have to say to me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.64#This violent fashion of driving a grandson to tenderness was productive nly of silence on the part of Marius. M. Gillenormand folded his arms; a esture which with him was peculiarly imperious, and apostrophized Marius itterly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.65#“Let us make an end of this. You have come to ask something of me, you ay? Well, what? What is it? Speak!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.66#“Sir,” said Marius, with the look of a man who feels that he is falling ver a precipice, “I have come to ask your permission to marry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.67#M. Gillenormand rang the bell. Basque opened the door half-way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.68#“Call my daughter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.69#A second later, the door was opened once more, Mademoiselle Gillenormand id not enter, but showed herself; Marius was standing, mute, with pendant arms nd the face of a criminal; M. Gillenormand was pacing back and forth in the oom. He turned to his daughter and said to her:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.70#“Nothing. It is Monsieur Marius. Say good day to him. Monsieur wishes to arry. That’s all. Go away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.71#The curt, hoarse sound of the old man’s voice announced a strange degree f excitement. The aunt gazed at Marius with a frightened air, hardly appeared o recognize him, did not allow a gesture or a syllable to escape her, and isappeared at her father’s breath more swiftly than a straw before the urricane.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.72#In the meantime, Father Gillenormand had returned and placed his back gainst the chimney-piece once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.73#“You marry! At one and twenty! You have arranged that! You have only a ermission to ask! a formality. Sit down, sir. Well, you have had a revolution ince I had the honor to see you last. The Jacobins got the upper hand. You must ave been delighted. Are you not a Republican since you are a Baron? You can ake that agree. The Republic makes a good sauce for the barony. Are you one of hose decorated by July? Have you taken the Louvre at all, sir? Quite near here, n the Rue Saint-Antoine, opposite the Rue des Nonamdières, there is a annon-ball incrusted in the wall of the third story of a house with this nscription: ‘July 28th, 1830.’ Go take a look at that. It produces a good ffect. Ah! those friends of yours do pretty things. By the way, aren’t they recting a fountain in the place of the monument of M. le Duc de Berry? So you ant to marry? Whom? Can one inquire without indiscretion?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.74#He paused, and, before Marius had time to answer, he added violently:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.75#“Come now, you have a profession? A fortune made? How much do you earn at our trade of lawyer?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.76#“Nothing,” said Marius, with a sort of firmness and resolution that was lmost fierce.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.77#“Nothing? Then all that you have to live upon is the twelve hundred livres hat I allow you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.78#Marius did not reply. M. Gillenormand continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.79#“Then I understand the girl is rich?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.80#“As rich as I am.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.81#“What! No dowry?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.82#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.83#“Expectations?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.84#“I think not.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.85#“Utterly naked! What’s the father?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.86#“I don’t know.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.87#“And what’s her name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.88#“Mademoiselle Fauchelevent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.89#“Fauchewhat?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.90#“Fauchelevent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.91#“Pttt!” ejaculated the old gentleman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.92#“Sir!” exclaimed Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.93#M. Gillenormand interrupted him with the tone of a man who is speaking to imself:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.94#“That’s right, one and twenty years of age, no profession, twelve hundred ivres a year, Madame la Baronne de Pontmercy will go and purchase a couple of ous’ worth of parsley from the fruiterer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.95#“Sir,” repeated Marius, in the despair at the last hope, which was anishing, “I entreat you! I conjure you in the name of Heaven, with clasped ands, sir, I throw myself at your feet, permit me to marry her!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.96#The old man burst into a shout of strident and mournful laughter, coughing nd laughing at the same time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.97#“Ah! ah! ah! You said to yourself: ‘Pardine! I’ll go hunt up that old lockhead, that absurd numskull! What a shame that I’m not twenty-five! How I’d reat him to a nice respectful summons! How nicely I’d get along without him! t’s nothing to me, I’d say to him: “You’re only too happy to see me, you old diot, I want to marry, I desire to wed Mamselle No-matter-whom, daughter of onsieur No-matter-what, I have no shoes, she has no chemise, that just suits; I ant to throw my career, my future, my youth, my life to the dogs; I wish to ake a plunge into wretchedness with a woman around my neck, that’s an idea, and ou must consent to it!” and the old fossil will consent.’ Go, my lad, do as you ike, attach your paving-stone, marry your Pousselevent, your Coupelevent—Never, ir, never!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.98#“Father—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.99#“Never!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.100#At the tone in which that “never” was uttered, Marius lost all hope. He raversed the chamber with slow steps, with bowed head, tottering and more like dying man than like one merely taking his departure. M. Gillenormand followed im with his eyes, and at the moment when the door opened, and Marius was on the oint of going out, he advanced four paces, with the senile vivacity of mpetuous and spoiled old gentlemen, seized Marius by the collar, brought him ack energetically into the room, flung him into an armchair and said to im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.101#“Tell me all about it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.102#“It was that single word “father” which had effected this revolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.103#Marius stared at him in bewilderment. M. Gillenormand’s mobile face was o longer expressive of anything but rough and ineffable good-nature. The randsire had given way before the grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.104#“Come, see here, speak, tell me about your love affairs, jabber, tell me verything! Sapristi! how stupid young folks are!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.105#“Father—” repeated Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.106#The old man’s entire countenance lighted up with indescribable adiance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.107#“Yes, that’s right, call me father, and you’ll see!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.108#There was now something so kind, so gentle, so openhearted, and so aternal in this brusqueness, that Marius, in the sudden transition from iscouragement to hope, was stunned and intoxicated by it, as it were. He was eated near the table, the light from the candles brought out the dilapidation f his costume, which Father Gillenormand regarded with amazement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.109#“Well, father—” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.110#“Ah, by the way,” interrupted M. Gillenormand, “you really have not a enny then? You are dressed like a pickpocket.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.111#He rummaged in a drawer, drew forth a purse, which he laid on the table: Here are a hundred louis, buy yourself a hat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.112#“Father,” pursued Marius, “my good father, if you only knew! I love her. ou cannot imagine it; the first time I saw her was at the Luxembourg, she came here; in the beginning, I did not pay much heed to her, and then, I don’t know ow it came about, I fell in love with her. Oh! how unhappy that made me! Now, t last, I see her every day, at her own home, her father does not know it, just ancy, they are going away, it is in the garden that we meet, in the evening, er father means to take her to England, then I said to myself: ‘I’ll go and see y grandfather and tell him all about the affair. I should go mad first, I hould die, I should fall ill, I should throw myself into the water. I bsolutely must marry her, since I should go mad otherwise.’ This is the whole ruth, and I do not think that I have omitted anything. She lives in a garden ith an iron fence, in the Rue Plumet. It is in the neighborhood of the nvalides.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.113#Father Gillenormand had seated himself, with a beaming countenance, eside Marius. As he listened to him and drank in the sound of his voice, he njoyed at the same time a protracted pinch of snuff. At the words “Rue Plumet” e interrupted his inhalation and allowed the remainder of his snuff to fall pon his knees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.114#“The Rue Plumet, the Rue Plumet, did you say?—Let us see!—Are there not arracks in that vicinity?—Why, yes, that’s it. Your cousin Théodule has spoken o me about it. The lancer, the officer. A gay girl, my good friend, a gay irl!—Pardieu, yes, the Rue Plumet. It is what used to be called the Rue lomet.—It all comes back to me now. I have heard of that little girl of the ron railing in the Rue Plumet. In a garden, a Pamela. Your taste is not bad. he is said to be a very tidy creature. Between ourselves, I think that impleton of a lancer has been courting her a bit. I don’t know where he did it. owever, that’s not to the purpose. Besides, he is not to be believed. He brags, arius! I think it quite proper that a young man like you should be in love. t’s the right thing at your age. I like you better as a lover than as a acobin. I like you better in love with a petticoat, sapristi! with twenty etticoats, than with M. de Robespierre. For my part, I will do myself the ustice to say, that in the line of _sans-culottes_, I have never loved any one ut women. Pretty girls are pretty girls, the deuce! There’s no objection to hat. As for the little one, she receives you without her father’s knowledge. hat’s in the established order of things. I have had adventures of that same ort myself. More than one. Do you know what is done then? One does not take the atter ferociously; one does not precipitate himself into the tragic; one does ot make one’s mind to marriage and M. le Maire with his scarf. One simply ehaves like a fellow of spirit. One shows good sense. Slip along, mortals; on’t marry. You come and look up your grandfather, who is a good-natured fellow t bottom, and who always has a few rolls of louis in an old drawer; you say to im: ‘See here, grandfather.’ And the grandfather says: ‘That’s a simple matter. outh must amuse itself, and old age must wear out. I have been young, you will e old. Come, my boy, you shall pass it on to your grandson. Here are two undred pistoles. Amuse yourself, deuce take it!’ Nothing better! That’s the way he affair should be treated. You don’t marry, but that does no harm. You nderstand me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.115#Marius, petrified and incapable of uttering a syllable, made a sign with is head that he did not.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.116#The old man burst out laughing, winked his aged eye, gave him a slap on he knee, stared him full in the face with a mysterious and beaming air, and aid to him, with the tenderest of shrugs of the shoulder:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.117#“Booby! make her your mistress.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.118#Marius turned pale. He had understood nothing of what his grandfather had ust said. This twaddle about the Rue Blomet, Pamela, the barracks, the lancer, ad passed before Marius like a dissolving view. Nothing of all that could bear ny reference to Cosette, who was a lily. The good man was wandering in his ind. But this wandering terminated in words which Marius did understand, and hich were a mortal insult to Cosette. Those words, “make her your mistress,” ntered the heart of the strict young man like a sword.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.119#He rose, picked up his hat which lay on the floor, and walked to the door ith a firm, assured step. There he turned round, bowed deeply to his randfather, raised his head erect again, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.120#“Five years ago you insulted my father; to-day you have insulted my wife. ask nothing more of you, sir. Farewell.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.121#Father Gillenormand, utterly confounded, opened his mouth, extended his rms, tried to rise, and before he could utter a word, the door closed once ore, and Marius had disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.122#The old man remained for several minutes motionless and as though struck y lightning, without the power to speak or breathe, as though a clenched fist rasped his throat. At last he tore himself from his armchair, ran, so far as a an can run at ninety-one, to the door, opened it, and cried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.123#“Help! Help!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.124#His daughter made her appearance, then the domestics. He began again, ith a pitiful rattle: “Run after him! Bring him back! What have I done to him? e is mad! He is going away! Ah! my God! Ah! my God! This time he will not come ack!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.125#He went to the window which looked out on the street, threw it open with is aged and palsied hands, leaned out more than half-way, while Basque and icolette held him behind, and shouted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.126#“Marius! Marius! Marius! Marius!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.127#But Marius could no longer hear him, for at that moment he was turning he corner of the Rue Saint-Louis.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.8.7.128#The octogenarian raised his hands to his temples two or three times with n expression of anguish, recoiled tottering, and fell back into an armchair, ulseless, voiceless, tearless, with quivering head and lips which moved with a tupid air, with nothing in his eyes and nothing any longer in his heart except gloomy and profound something which resembled night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.head#BOOK NINTH—WHITHER ARE THEY GOING?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.head#CHAPTER I—JEAN VALJEAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.1#That same day, towards four o’clock in the afternoon, Jean Valjean was itting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes in the hamp-de-Mars. Either from prudence, or from a desire to meditate, or simply in onsequence of one of those insensible changes of habit which gradually ntroduce themselves into the existence of every one, he now rarely went out ith Cosette. He had on his workman’s waistcoat, and trousers of gray linen; and is long-visored cap concealed his countenance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.2#He was calm and happy now beside Cosette; that which had, for a time, larmed and troubled him had been dissipated; but for the last week or two, nxieties of another nature had come up. One day, while walking on the oulevard, he had caught sight of Thénardier; thanks to his disguise, Thénardier ad not recognized him; but since that day, Jean Valjean had seen him epeatedly, and he was now certain that Thénardier was prowling about in their eighborhood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.3#This had been sufficient to make him come to a decision.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.4#Moreover, Paris was not tranquil: political troubles presented this nconvenient feature, for any one who had anything to conceal in his life, that he police had grown very uneasy and very suspicious, and that while seeking to erret out a man like Pépin or Morey, they might very readily discover a man ike Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.5#Jean Valjean had made up his mind to quit Paris, and even France, and go ver to England.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.6#He had warned Cosette. He wished to set out before the end of the week.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.7#He had seated himself on the slope in the Champ-de-Mars, turning over all orts of thoughts in his mind,—Thénardier, the police, the journey, and the ifficulty of procuring a passport.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.8#He was troubled from all these points of view.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.9#Last of all, an inexplicable circumstance which had just attracted his ttention, and from which he had not yet recovered, had added to his state of larm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.10#On the morning of that very day, when he alone of the household was tirring, while strolling in the garden before Cosette’s shutters were open, he ad suddenly perceived on the wall, the following line, engraved, probably with nail:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.11#_16 Rue de la Verrerie_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.12#This was perfectly fresh, the grooves in the ancient black mortar were hite, a tuft of nettles at the foot of the wall was powdered with the fine, resh plaster.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.13#This had probably been written on the preceding night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.14#What was this? A signal for others? A warning for himself?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.15#In any case, it was evident that the garden had been violated, and that trangers had made their way into it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.16#He recalled the odd incidents which had already alarmed the household.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.17#His mind was now filling in this canvas.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.18#He took good care not to speak to Cosette of the line written on the wall, or fear of alarming her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.19#In the midst of his preoccupations, he perceived, from a shadow cast by he sun, that some one had halted on the crest of the slope immediately behind im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.20#He was on the point of turning round, when a paper folded in four fell pon his knees as though a hand had dropped it over his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.21#He took the paper, unfolded it, and read these words written in large haracters, with a pencil:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.22#“MOVE AWAY FROM YOUR HOUSE.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.23#Jean Valjean sprang hastily to his feet; there was no one on the slope; he azed all around him and perceived a creature larger than a child, not so large s a man, clad in a gray blouse and trousers of dust-colored cotton velvet, who as jumping over the parapet and who slipped into the moat of the hamp-de-Mars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.1.24#Jean Valjean returned home at once, in a very thoughtful mood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.head#CHAPTER II—MARIUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.1#Marius had left M. Gillenormand in despair. He had entered the house with ery little hope, and quitted it with immense despair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.2#However, and those who have observed the depths of the human heart will nderstand this, the officer, the lancer, the ninny, Cousin Théodule, had left o trace in his mind. Not the slightest. The dramatic poet might, apparently, xpect some complications from this revelation made point-blank by the randfather to the grandson. But what the drama would gain thereby, truth would ose. Marius was at an age when one believes nothing in the line of evil; later n comes the age when one believes everything. Suspicions are nothing else than rinkles. Early youth has none of them. That which overwhelmed Othello glides nnocuous over Candide. Suspect Cosette! There are hosts of crimes which Marius ould sooner have committed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.3#He began to wander about the streets, the resource of those who suffer. He hought of nothing, so far as he could afterwards remember. At two o’clock in he morning he returned to Courfeyrac’s quarters and flung himself, without ndressing, on his mattress. The sun was shining brightly when he sank into that rightful leaden slumber which permits ideas to go and come in the brain. When e awoke, he saw Courfeyrac, Enjolras, Feuilly, and Combeferre standing in the oom with their hats on and all ready to go out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.4#Courfeyrac said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.5#“Are you coming to General Lamarque’s funeral?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.6#It seemed to him that Courfeyrac was speaking Chinese.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.7#He went out some time after them. He put in his pocket the pistols which avert had given him at the time of the adventure on the 3d of February, and hich had remained in his hands. These pistols were still loaded. It would be ifficult to say what vague thought he had in his mind when he took them with im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.8#All day long he prowled about, without knowing where he was going; it ained at times, he did not perceive it; for his dinner, he purchased a penny oll at a baker’s, put it in his pocket and forgot it. It appears that he took a ath in the Seine without being aware of it. There are moments when a man has a urnace within his skull. Marius was passing through one of those moments. He no onger hoped for anything; this step he had taken since the preceding evening. e waited for night with feverish impatience, he had but one idea clearly before is mind;—this was, that at nine o’clock he should see Cosette. This last appiness now constituted his whole future; after that, gloom. At intervals, as e roamed through the most deserted boulevards, it seemed to him that he heard trange noises in Paris. He thrust his head out of his reverie and said: “Is here fighting on hand?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.9#At nightfall, at nine o’clock precisely, as he had promised Cosette, he was n the Rue Plumet. When he approached the grating he forgot everything. It was orty-eight hours since he had seen Cosette; he was about to behold her once ore; every other thought was effaced, and he felt only a profound and nheard-of joy. Those minutes in which one lives centuries always have this overeign and wonderful property, that at the moment when they are passing they ill the heart completely.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.10#Marius displaced the bar, and rushed headlong into the garden. Cosette was ot at the spot where she ordinarily waited for him. He traversed the thicket, nd approached the recess near the flight of steps: “She is waiting for me here,” said he. Cosette was not there. He raised his eyes, and saw that the hutters of the house were closed. He made the tour of the garden, the garden as deserted. Then he returned to the house, and, rendered senseless by love, ntoxicated, terrified, exasperated with grief and uneasiness, like a master who eturns home at an evil hour, he tapped on the shutters. He knocked and knocked gain, at the risk of seeing the window open, and her father’s gloomy face make ts appearance, and demand: “What do you want?” This was nothing in comparison ith what he dimly caught a glimpse of. When he had rapped, he lifted up his oice and called Cosette.—“Cosette!” he cried; “Cosette!” he repeated mperiously. There was no reply. All was over. No one in the garden; no one in he house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.11#Marius fixed his despairing eyes on that dismal house, which was as black nd as silent as a tomb and far more empty. He gazed at the stone seat on which e had passed so many adorable hours with Cosette. Then he seated himself on the light of steps, his heart filled with sweetness and resolution, he blessed his ove in the depths of his thought, and he said to himself that, since Cosette as gone, all that there was left for him was to die.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.12#All at once he heard a voice which seemed to proceed from the street, and hich was calling to him through the trees:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.13#“Mr. Marius!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.14#He started to his feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.15#“Hey?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.16#“Mr. Marius, are you there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.17#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.18#“Mr. Marius,” went on the voice, “your friends are waiting for you at the arricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.2.19#This voice was not wholly unfamiliar to him. It resembled the hoarse, ough voice of Éponine. Marius hastened to the gate, thrust aside the movable ar, passed his head through the aperture, and saw some one who appeared to him o be a young man, disappearing at a run into the gloom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.head#CHAPTER III—M. MABEUF
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.1#Jean Valjean’s purse was of no use to M. Mabeuf. M. Mabeuf, in his enerable, infantile austerity, had not accepted the gift of the stars; he had ot admitted that a star could coin itself into louis d’or. He had not divined hat what had fallen from heaven had come from Gavroche. He had taken the purse o the police commissioner of the quarter, as a lost article placed by the inder at the disposal of claimants. The purse was actually lost. It is nnecessary to say that no one claimed it, and that it did not succor M. abeuf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.2#Moreover, M. Mabeuf had continued his downward course.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.3#His experiments on indigo had been no more successful in the Jardin des lantes than in his garden at Austerlitz. The year before he had owed his ousekeeper’s wages; now, as we have seen, he owed three quarters of his rent. he pawnshop had sold the plates of his _Flora_ after the expiration of thirteen onths. Some coppersmith had made stewpans of them. His copper plates gone, and eing unable to complete even the incomplete copies of his _Flora_ which were in is possession, he had disposed of the text, at a miserable price, as waste aper, to a second-hand bookseller. Nothing now remained to him of his life’s ork. He set to work to eat up the money for these copies. When he saw that this retched resource was becoming exhausted, he gave up his garden and allowed it o run to waste. Before this, a long time before, he had given up his two eggs nd the morsel of beef which he ate from time to time. He dined on bread and otatoes. He had sold the last of his furniture, then all duplicates of his edding, his clothing and his blankets, then his herbariums and prints; but he till retained his most precious books, many of which were of the greatest arity, among others, _Les Quadrins Historiques de la Bible_, edition of 1560; La Concordance des Bibles_, by Pierre de Besse; _Les Marguerites de la arguerite_, of Jean de La Haye, with a dedication to the Queen of Navarre; the ook _de la Charge et Dignité de l’Ambassadeur_, by the Sieur de Villiers otman; a _Florilegium Rabbinicum_ of 1644; a _Tibullus_ of 1567, with this agnificent inscription: _Venetiis, in ædibus Manutianis_; and lastly, a iogenes Laertius, printed at Lyons in 1644, which contained the famous variant f the manuscript 411, thirteenth century, of the Vatican, and those of the two anuscripts of Venice, 393 and 394, consulted with such fruitful results by enri Estienne, and all the passages in Doric dialect which are only found in he celebrated manuscript of the twelfth century belonging to the Naples ibrary. M. Mabeuf never had any fire in his chamber, and went to bed at undown, in order not to consume any candles. It seemed as though he had no onger any neighbors: people avoided him when he went out; he perceived the act. The wretchedness of a child interests a mother, the wretchedness of a oung man interests a young girl, the wretchedness of an old man interests no ne. It is, of all distresses, the coldest. Still, Father Mabeuf had not ntirely lost his childlike serenity. His eyes acquired some vivacity when they ested on his books, and he smiled when he gazed at the Diogenes Laertius, which as a unique copy. His bookcase with glass doors was the only piece of furniture hich he had kept beyond what was strictly indispensable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.4#One day, Mother Plutarque said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.5#“I have no money to buy any dinner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.6#What she called dinner was a loaf of bread and four or five potatoes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.7#“On credit?” suggested M. Mabeuf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.8#“You know well that people refuse me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.9#M. Mabeuf opened his bookcase, took a long look at all his books, one after nother, as a father obliged to decimate his children would gaze upon them efore making a choice, then seized one hastily, put it in under his arm and ent out. He returned two hours later, without anything under his arm, laid hirty sous on the table, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.10#“You will get something for dinner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.11#From that moment forth, Mother Plutarque saw a sombre veil, which was ever more lifted, descend over the old man’s candid face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.12#On the following day, on the day after, and on the day after that, it had o be done again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.13#M. Mabeuf went out with a book and returned with a coin. As the econd-hand dealers perceived that he was forced to sell, they purchased of him or twenty sous that for which he had paid twenty francs, sometimes at those ery shops. Volume by volume, the whole library went the same road. He said at imes: “But I am eighty;” as though he cherished some secret hope that he should rrive at the end of his days before reaching the end of his books. His elancholy increased. Once, however, he had a pleasure. He had gone out with a obert Estienne, which he had sold for thirty-five sous under the Quai alaquais, and he returned with an Aldus which he had bought for forty sous in he Rue des Grès.—“I owe five sous,” he said, beaming on Mother Plutarque. That ay he had no dinner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.14#He belonged to the Horticultural Society. His destitution became known here. The president of the society came to see him, promised to speak to the inister of Agriculture and Commerce about him, and did so.—“Why, what!” xclaimed the Minister, “I should think so! An old savant! a botanist! an noffensive man! Something must be done for him!” On the following day, M. abeuf received an invitation to dine with the Minister. Trembling with joy, he howed the letter to Mother Plutarque. “We are saved!” said he. On the day ppointed, he went to the Minister’s house. He perceived that his ragged cravat, is long, square coat, and his waxed shoes astonished the ushers. No one spoke o him, not even the Minister. About ten o’clock in the evening, while he was till waiting for a word, he heard the Minister’s wife, a beautiful woman in a ow-necked gown whom he had not ventured to approach, inquire: “Who is that old entleman?” He returned home on foot at midnight, in a driving rain-storm. He ad sold an Elzevir to pay for a carriage in which to go thither.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.15#He had acquired the habit of reading a few pages in his Diogenes Laertius very night, before he went to bed. He knew enough Greek to enjoy the eculiarities of the text which he owned. He had now no other enjoyment. Several eeks passed. All at once, Mother Plutarque fell ill. There is one thing sadder han having no money with which to buy bread at the baker’s and that is having o money to purchase drugs at the apothecary’s. One evening, the doctor had rdered a very expensive potion. And the malady was growing worse; a nurse was equired. M. Mabeuf opened his bookcase; there was nothing there. The last olume had taken its departure. All that was left to him was Diogenes Laertius. e put this unique copy under his arm, and went out. It was the 4th of June, 832; he went to the Porte Saint-Jacques, to Royal’s successor, and returned ith one hundred francs. He laid the pile of five-franc pieces on the old erving-woman’s nightstand, and returned to his chamber without saying a ord.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.16#On the following morning, at dawn, he seated himself on the overturned ost in his garden, and he could be seen over the top of the hedge, sitting the hole morning motionless, with drooping head, his eyes vaguely fixed on the ithered flower-beds. It rained at intervals; the old man did not seem to erceive the fact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.17#In the afternoon, extraordinary noises broke out in Paris. They resembled hots and the clamors of a multitude.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.18#Father Mabeuf raised his head. He saw a gardener passing, and nquired:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.19#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.20#The gardener, spade on back, replied in the most unconcerned tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.21#“It is the riots.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.22#“What riots?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.23#“Yes, they are fighting.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.24#“Why are they fighting?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.25#“Ah, good Heavens!” ejaculated the gardener.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.26#“In what direction?” went on M. Mabeuf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.27#“In the neighborhood of the Arsenal.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.9.3.28#Father Mabeuf went to his room, took his hat, mechanically sought for a ook to place under his arm, found none, said: “Ah! truly!” and went off with a ewildered air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.head#BOOK TENTH—THE 5TH OF JUNE, 1832
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE SURFACE OF THE QUESTION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.1#Of what is revolt composed? Of nothing and of everything. Of an electricity isengaged, little by little, of a flame suddenly darting forth, of a wandering orce, of a passing breath. This breath encounters heads which speak, brains hich dream, souls which suffer, passions which burn, wretchedness which howls, nd bears them away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.2#Whither?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.3#At random. Athwart the state, the laws, athwart prosperity and the nsolence of others.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.4#Irritated convictions, embittered enthusiasms, agitated indignations, nstincts of war which have been repressed, youthful courage which has been xalted, generous blindness; curiosity, the taste for change, the thirst for the nexpected, the sentiment which causes one to take pleasure in reading the osters for the new play, and love, the prompter’s whistle, at the theatre; the ague hatreds, rancors, disappointments, every vanity which thinks that destiny as bankrupted it; discomfort, empty dreams, ambitions that are hedged about, hoever hopes for a downfall, some outcome, in short, at the very bottom, the abble, that mud which catches fire,—such are the elements of revolt. That which s grandest and that which is basest; the beings who prowl outside of all ounds, awaiting an occasion, bohemians, vagrants, vagabonds of the crossroads, hose who sleep at night in a desert of houses with no other roof than the cold louds of heaven, those who, each day, demand their bread from chance and not rom toil, the unknown of poverty and nothingness, the bare-armed, the are-footed, belong to revolt. Whoever cherishes in his soul a secret revolt gainst any deed whatever on the part of the state, of life or of fate, is ripe or riot, and, as soon as it makes its appearance, he begins to quiver, and to eel himself borne away with the whirlwind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.5#Revolt is a sort of waterspout in the social atmosphere which forms uddenly in certain conditions of temperature, and which, as it eddies about, ounts, descends, thunders, tears, razes, crushes, demolishes, uproots, bearing ith it great natures and small, the strong man and the feeble mind, the tree runk and the stalk of straw. Woe to him whom it bears away as well as to him hom it strikes! It breaks the one against the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.6#It communicates to those whom it seizes an indescribable and extraordinary ower. It fills the firstcomer with the force of events; it converts everything nto projectiles. It makes a cannon-ball of a rough stone, and a general of a orter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.7#If we are to believe certain oracles of crafty political views, a little evolt is desirable from the point of view of power. System: revolt strengthens hose governments which it does not overthrow. It puts the army to the test; it onsecrates the bourgeoisie, it draws out the muscles of the police; it emonstrates the force of the social framework. It is an exercise in gymnastics; t is almost hygiene. Power is in better health after a revolt, as a man is fter a good rubbing down.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.8#Revolt, thirty years ago, was regarded from still other points of view.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.9#There is for everything a theory, which proclaims itself “good sense”; hilintus against Alcestis; mediation offered between the false and the true; xplanation, admonition, rather haughty extenuation which, because it is mingled ith blame and excuse, thinks itself wisdom, and is often only pedantry. A whole olitical school called “the golden mean” has been the outcome of this. As etween cold water and hot water, it is the lukewarm water party. This school ith its false depth, all on the surface, which dissects effects without going ack to first causes, chides from its height of a demi-science, the agitation of he public square.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.10#If we listen to this school, “The riots which complicated the affair of 830 deprived that great event of a portion of its purity. The Revolution of uly had been a fine popular gale, abruptly followed by blue sky. They made the loudy sky reappear. They caused that revolution, at first so remarkable for its nanimity, to degenerate into a quarrel. In the Revolution of July, as in all rogress accomplished by fits and starts, there had been secret fractures; these iots rendered them perceptible. It might have been said: ‘Ah! this is broken.’ fter the Revolution of July, one was sensible only of deliverance; after the iots, one was conscious of a catastrophe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.11#“All revolt closes the shops, depresses the funds, throws the Exchange nto consternation, suspends commerce, clogs business, precipitates failures; no ore money, private fortunes rendered uneasy, public credit shaken, industry isconcerted, capital withdrawing, work at a discount, fear everywhere; ounter-shocks in every town. Hence gulfs. It has been calculated that the first ay of a riot costs France twenty millions, the second day forty, the third ixty, a three days’ uprising costs one hundred and twenty millions, that is to ay, if only the financial result be taken into consideration, it is equivalent o a disaster, a shipwreck or a lost battle, which should annihilate a fleet of ixty ships of the line.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.12#“No doubt, historically, uprisings have their beauty; the war of the avements is no less grandiose, and no less pathetic, than the war of thickets: n the one there is the soul of forests, in the other the heart of cities; the ne has Jean Chouan, the other has a Jeanne. Revolts have illuminated with a red lare all the most original points of the Parisian character, generosity, evotion, stormy gayety, students proving that bravery forms part of ntelligence, the National Guard invincible, bivouacs of shopkeepers, fortresses f street urchins, contempt of death on the part of passers-by. Schools and egions clashed together. After all, between the combatants, there was only a ifference of age; the race is the same; it is the same stoical men who died at he age of twenty for their ideas, at forty for their families. The army, always sad thing in civil wars, opposed prudence to audacity. Uprisings, while roving popular intrepidity, also educated the courage of the bourgeois.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.13#“This is well. But is all this worth the bloodshed? And to the bloodshed dd the future darkness, progress compromised, uneasiness among the best men, onest liberals in despair, foreign absolutism happy in these wounds dealt to evolution by its own hand, the vanquished of 1830 triumphing and saying: ‘We old you so!’ Add Paris enlarged, possibly, but France most assuredly iminished. Add, for all must needs be told, the massacres which have too often ishonored the victory of order grown ferocious over liberty gone mad. To sum up ll, uprisings have been disastrous.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.14#Thus speaks that approximation to wisdom with which the bourgeoisie, that pproximation to the people, so willingly contents itself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.15#For our parts, we reject this word _uprisings_ as too large, and onsequently as too convenient. We make a distinction between one popular ovement and another popular movement. We do not inquire whether an uprising osts as much as a battle. Why a battle, in the first place? Here the question f war comes up. Is war less of a scourge than an uprising is of a calamity? And hen, are all uprisings calamities? And what if the revolt of July did cost a undred and twenty millions? The establishment of Philip V. in Spain cost France wo milliards. Even at the same price, we should prefer the 14th of July. owever, we reject these figures, which appear to be reasons and which are only ords. An uprising being given, we examine it by itself. In all that is said by he doctrinarian objection above presented, there is no question of anything but ffect, we seek the cause.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.1.16#We will be explicit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE ROOT OF THE MATTER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.1#There is such a thing as an uprising, and there is such a thing as nsurrection; these are two separate phases of wrath; one is in the wrong, the ther is in the right. In democratic states, the only ones which are founded on ustice, it sometimes happens that the fraction usurps; then the whole rises and he necessary claim of its rights may proceed as far as resort to arms. In all uestions which result from collective sovereignty, the war of the whole against he fraction is insurrection; the attack of the fraction against the whole is evolt; according as the Tuileries contain a king or the Convention, they are ustly or unjustly attacked. The same cannon, pointed against the populace, is rong on the 10th of August, and right on the 14th of Vendémiaire. Alike in ppearance, fundamentally different in reality; the Swiss defend the false, onaparte defends the true. That which universal suffrage has effected in its iberty and in its sovereignty cannot be undone by the street. It is the same in hings pertaining purely to civilization; the instinct of the masses, lear-sighted to-day, may be troubled to-morrow. The same fury legitimate when irected against Terray and absurd when directed against Turgot. The destruction f machines, the pillage of warehouses, the breaking of rails, the demolition of ocks, the false routes of multitudes, the refusal by the people of justice to rogress, Ramus assassinated by students, Rousseau driven out of Switzerland and toned,—that is revolt. Israel against Moses, Athens against Phocian, Rome gainst Cicero,—that is an uprising; Paris against the Bastille,—that is nsurrection. The soldiers against Alexander, the sailors against Christopher olumbus,—this is the same revolt; impious revolt; why? Because Alexander is oing for Asia with the sword that which Christopher Columbus is doing for merica with the compass; Alexander like Columbus, is finding a world. These ifts of a world to civilization are such augmentations of light, that all esistance in that case is culpable. Sometimes the populace counterfeits idelity to itself. The masses are traitors to the people. Is there, for xample, anything stranger than that long and bloody protest of dealers in ontraband salt, a legitimate chronic revolt, which, at the decisive moment, on he day of salvation, at the very hour of popular victory, espouses the throne, urns into _chouannerie_, and, from having been an insurrection against, becomes n uprising for, sombre masterpieces of ignorance! The contraband salt dealer scapes the royal gibbets, and with a rope’s end round his neck, mounts the hite cockade. “Death to the salt duties,” brings forth, “Long live the King!” he assassins of Saint-Barthélemy, the cut-throats of September, the anslaughterers of Avignon, the assassins of Coligny, the assassins of Madam amballe, the assassins of Brune, Miquelets, Verdets, Cadenettes, the companions f Jéhu, the chevaliers of Brassard,—behold an uprising. La Vendée is a grand, atholic uprising. The sound of right in movement is recognizable, it does not lways proceed from the trembling of excited masses; there are mad rages, there re cracked bells, all tocsins do not give out the sound of bronze. The brawl of assions and ignorances is quite another thing from the shock of progress. Show e in what direction you are going. Rise, if you will, but let it be that you ay grow great. There is no insurrection except in a forward direction. Any ther sort of rising is bad; every violent step towards the rear is a revolt; to etreat is to commit a deed of violence against the human race. Insurrection is fit of rage on the part of truth; the pavements which the uprising disturbs ive forth the spark of right. These pavements bequeath to the uprising only heir mud. Danton against Louis XIV. is insurrection; Hébert against Danton is evolt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.2#Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be, as Lafayette ays, the most holy of duties, an uprising may be the most fatal of crimes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.3#There is also a difference in the intensity of heat; insurrection is often volcano, revolt is often only a fire of straw.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.4#Revolt, as we have said, is sometimes found among those in power. Polignac s a rioter; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governing powers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.5#Insurrection is sometimes resurrection.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.6#The solution of everything by universal suffrage being an absolutely modern act, and all history anterior to this fact being, for the space of four housand years, filled with violated right, and the suffering of peoples, each poch of history brings with it that protest of which it is capable. Under the æsars, there was no insurrection, but there was Juvenal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.7#The _facit indignatio_ replaces the Gracchi.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.8#Under the Cæsars, there is the exile to Syene; there is also the man of the Annales_. We do not speak of the immense exile of Patmos who, on his part also, verwhelms the real world with a protest in the name of the ideal world, who akes of his vision an enormous satire and casts on Rome-Nineveh, on ome-Babylon, on Rome-Sodom, the flaming reflection of the Apocalypse. John on is rock is the sphinx on its pedestal; we may understand him, he is a Jew, and t is Hebrew; but the man who writes the _Annales_ is of the Latin race, let us ather say he is a Roman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.9#As the Neros reign in a black way, they should be painted to match. The ork of the graving-tool alone would be too pale; there must be poured into the hannel a concentrated prose which bites.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.10#Despots count for something in the question of philosophers. A word that s chained is a terrible word. The writer doubles and trebles his style when ilence is imposed on a nation by its master. From this silence there arises a ertain mysterious plenitude which filters into thought and there congeals into ronze. The compression of history produces conciseness in the historian. The ranite solidity of such and such a celebrated prose is nothing but the ccumulation effected by the tyrant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.11#Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which are ugmentations of force. The Ciceronian period, which hardly sufficed for Verres, ould be blunted on Caligula. The less spread of sail in the phrase, the more ntensity in the blow. Tacitus thinks with all his might.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.12#The honesty of a great heart, condensed in justice and truth, overwhelms s with lightning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.13#Be it remarked, in passing, that Tacitus is not historically superposed pon Cæsar. The Tiberii were reserved for him. Cæsar and Tacitus are two uccessive phenomena, a meeting between whom seems to be mysteriously avoided, y the One who, when He sets the centuries on the stage, regulates the entrances nd the exits. Cæsar is great, Tacitus is great; God spares these two reatnesses by not allowing them to clash with one another. The guardian of ustice, in striking Cæsar, might strike too hard and be unjust. God does not ill it. The great wars of Africa and Spain, the pirates of Sicily destroyed, ivilization introduced into Gaul, into Britanny, into Germany,—all this glory overs the Rubicon. There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine justice, esitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the formidable historian, paring Cæsar Tacitus, and according extenuating circumstances to genius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.14#Certainly, despotism remains despotism, even under the despot of genius. here is corruption under all illustrious tyrants, but the moral pest is still ore hideous under infamous tyrants. In such reigns, nothing veils the shame; nd those who make examples, Tacitus as well as Juvenal, slap this ignominy hich cannot reply, in the face, more usefully in the presence of all umanity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.15#Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sylla. Under Claudius and nder Domitian, there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the epulsiveness of the tyrant. The villainy of slaves is a direct product of the espot; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein the master is eflected; public powers are unclean; hearts are small; consciences are dull, ouls are like vermin; thus it is under Caracalla, thus it is under Commodus, hus it is under Heliogabalus, while, from the Roman Senate, under Cæsar, there omes nothing but the odor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the agles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.16#Hence the advent, apparently tardy, of the Tacituses and the Juvenals; it s in the hour for evidence, that the demonstrator makes his appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.17#But Juvenal and Tacitus, like Isaiah in Biblical times, like Dante in the iddle Ages, is man; riot and insurrection are the multitude, which is sometimes ight and sometimes wrong.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.18#In the majority of cases, riot proceeds from a material fact; insurrection s always a moral phenomenon. Riot is Masaniello; insurrection, Spartacus. nsurrection borders on mind, riot on the stomach; Gaster grows irritated; but aster, assuredly, is not always in the wrong. In questions of famine, riot, uzançais, for example, holds a true, pathetic, and just point of departure. evertheless, it remains a riot. Why? It is because, right at bottom, it was rong in form. Shy although in the right, violent although strong, it struck at andom; it walked like a blind elephant; it left behind it the corpses of old en, of women, and of children; it wished the blood of inoffensive and innocent ersons without knowing why. The nourishment of the people is a good object; to assacre them is a bad means.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.19#All armed protests, even the most legitimate, even that of the 10th of ugust, even that of July 14th, begin with the same troubles. Before the right ets set free, there is foam and tumult. In the beginning, the insurrection is a iot, just as a river is a torrent. Ordinarily it ends in that ocean: evolution. Sometimes, however, coming from those lofty mountains which dominate he moral horizon, justice, wisdom, reason, right, formed of the pure snow of he ideal, after a long fall from rock to rock, after having reflected the sky n its transparency and increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of riumph, insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire, as the Rhine is in a wamp.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.20#All this is of the past, the future is another thing. Universal suffrage as this admirable property, that it dissolves riot in its inception, and, by iving the vote to insurrection, it deprives it of its arms. The disappearance f wars, of street wars as well as of wars on the frontiers, such is the nevitable progression. Whatever To-day may be, To-morrow will be peace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.21#However, insurrection, riot, and points of difference between the former nd the latter,—the bourgeois, properly speaking, knows nothing of such shades. n his mind, all is sedition, rebellion pure and simple, the revolt of the dog gainst his master, an attempt to bite whom must be punished by the chain and he kennel, barking, snapping, until such day as the head of the dog, suddenly nlarged, is outlined vaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.22#Then the bourgeois shouts: “Long live the people!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.23#This explanation given, what does the movement of June, 1832, signify, so ar as history is concerned? Is it a revolt? Is it an insurrection?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.24#It may happen to us, in placing this formidable event on the stage, to say evolt now and then, but merely to distinguish superficial facts, and always reserving the distinction between revolt, the form, and insurrection, the oundation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.25#This movement of 1832 had, in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholy xtinction, so much grandeur, that even those who see in it only an uprising, ever refer to it otherwise than with respect. For them, it is like a relic of 830. Excited imaginations, say they, are not to be calmed in a day. A evolution cannot be cut off short. It must needs undergo some undulations efore it returns to a state of rest, like a mountain sinking into the plain. here are no Alps without their Jura, nor Pyrenees without the Asturias.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.26#This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory of Parisians alls “the epoch of the riots,” is certainly a characteristic hour amid the tormy hours of this century. A last word, before we enter on the recital.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.2.27#The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic and living eality, which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of time and space. here, nevertheless, we insist upon it, is life, palpitation, human tremor. etty details, as we think we have already said, are, so to speak, the foliage f great events, and are lost in the distance of history. The epoch, surnamed of the riots,” abounds in details of this nature. Judicial inquiries have not evealed, and perhaps have not sounded the depths, for another reason than istory. We shall therefore bring to light, among the known and published eculiarities, things which have not heretofore been known, about facts over hich have passed the forgetfulness of some, and the death of others. The ajority of the actors in these gigantic scenes have disappeared; beginning with he very next day they held their peace; but of what we shall relate, we shall e able to say: “We have seen this.” We alter a few names, for history relates nd does not inform against, but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine. n accordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing, we shall how only one side and one episode, and certainly, the least known at that, of he two days, the 5th and the 6th of June, 1832, but we shall do it in such wise hat the reader may catch a glimpse, beneath the gloomy veil which we are about o lift, of the real form of this frightful public adventure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.head#CHAPTER III—A BURIAL; AN OCCASION TO BE BORN AGAIN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.1#In the spring of 1832, although the cholera had been chilling all minds for he last three months and had cast over their agitation an indescribable and loomy pacification, Paris had already long been ripe for commotion. As we have aid, the great city resembles a piece of artillery; when it is loaded, it uffices for a spark to fall, and the shot is discharged. In June, 1832, the park was the death of General Lamarque.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.2#Lamarque was a man of renown and of action. He had had in succession, under he Empire and under the Restoration, the sorts of bravery requisite for the two pochs, the bravery of the battle-field and the bravery of the tribune. He was s eloquent as he had been valiant; a sword was discernible in his speech. Like oy, his predecessor, after upholding the command, he upheld liberty; he sat etween the left and the extreme left, beloved of the people because he accepted he chances of the future, beloved of the populace because he had served the mperor well; he was, in company with Comtes Gérard and Drouet, one of apoleon’s marshals _in petto_. The treaties of 1815 removed him as a personal ffence. He hated Wellington with a downright hatred which pleased the ultitude; and, for seventeen years, he majestically preserved the sadness of aterloo, paying hardly any attention to intervening events. In his death agony, t his last hour, he clasped to his breast a sword which had been presented to im by the officers of the Hundred Days. Napoleon had died uttering the word army_, Lamarque uttering the word _country_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.3#His death, which was expected, was dreaded by the people as a loss, and by he government as an occasion. This death was an affliction. Like everything hat is bitter, affliction may turn to revolt. This is what took place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.4#On the preceding evening, and on the morning of the 5th of June, the day ppointed for Lamarque’s burial, the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, which the rocession was to touch at, assumed a formidable aspect. This tumultuous network f streets was filled with rumors. They armed themselves as best they might. oiners carried off door-weights of their establishment “to break down doors.” ne of them had made himself a dagger of a stocking-weaver’s hook by breaking ff the hook and sharpening the stump. Another, who was in a fever “to attack,” lept wholly dressed for three days. A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade, ho asked him: “Whither are you going?” “Eh! well, I have no weapons.” “What hen?” “I’m going to my timber-yard to get my compasses.” “What for?” “I don’t now,” said Lombier. A certain Jacqueline, an expeditious man, accosted some assing artisans: “Come here, you!” He treated them to ten sous’ worth of wine nd said: “Have you work?” “No.” “Go to Filspierre, between the Barrière haronne and the Barrière Montreuil, and you will find work.” At Filspierre’s hey found cartridges and arms. Certain well-known leaders were going the ounds, that is to say, running from one house to another, to collect their men. t Barthélemy’s, near the Barrière du Trône, at Capel’s, near the Petit-Chapeau, he drinkers accosted each other with a grave air. They were heard to say: “Have ou your pistol?” “Under my blouse.” “And you?” “Under my shirt.” In the Rue raversière, in front of the Bland workshop, and in the yard of the aison-Brulée, in front of tool-maker Bernier’s, groups whispered together. mong them was observed a certain Mavot, who never remained more than a week in ne shop, as the masters always discharged him “because they were obliged to ispute with him every day.” Mavot was killed on the following day at the arricade of the Rue Ménilmontant. Pretot, who was destined to perish also in he struggle, seconded Mavot, and to the question: “What is your object?” he eplied: _“Insurrection.”_ Workmen assembled at the corner of the Rue de Bercy, aited for a certain Lemarin, the revolutionary agent for the Faubourg aint-Marceau. Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.5#On the 5th of June, accordingly, a day of mingled rain and sun, General amarque’s funeral procession traversed Paris with official military pomp, omewhat augmented through precaution. Two battalions, with draped drums and eversed arms, ten thousand National Guards, with their swords at their sides, scorted the coffin. The hearse was drawn by young men. The officers of the nvalides came immediately behind it, bearing laurel branches. Then came an nnumerable, strange, agitated multitude, the sectionaries of the Friends of the eople, the Law School, the Medical School, refugees of all nationalities, and panish, Italian, German, and Polish flags, tricolored horizontal banners, every ossible sort of banner, children waving green boughs, stone-cutters and arpenters who were on strike at the moment, printers who were recognizable by heir paper caps, marching two by two, three by three, uttering cries, nearly ll of them brandishing sticks, some brandishing sabres, without order and yet ith a single soul, now a tumultuous rout, again a column. Squads chose hemselves leaders; a man armed with a pair of pistols in full view, seemed to ass the host in review, and the files separated before him. On the side alleys f the boulevards, in the branches of the trees, on balconies, in windows, on he roofs, swarmed the heads of men, women, and children; all eyes were filled ith anxiety. An armed throng was passing, and a terrified throng looked on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.6#The Government, on its side, was taking observations. It observed with its and on its sword. Four squadrons of carabineers could be seen in the Place ouis XV. in their saddles, with their trumpets at their head, cartridge-boxes illed and muskets loaded, all in readiness to march; in the Latin country and t the Jardin des Plantes, the Municipal Guard echelonned from street to street; t the Halle-aux-Vins, a squadron of dragoons; at the Grève half of the 12th ight Infantry, the other half being at the Bastille; the 6th Dragoons at the élestins; and the courtyard of the Louvre full of artillery. The remainder of he troops were confined to their barracks, without reckoning the regiments of he environs of Paris. Power being uneasy, held suspended over the menacing ultitude twenty-four thousand soldiers in the city and thirty thousand in the anlieue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.7#Divers reports were in circulation in the cortège. Legitimist tricks were inted at; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt, whom God had marked out for eath at that very moment when the populace were designating him for the Empire. ne personage, whose name has remained unknown, announced that at a given hour wo overseers who had been won over, would throw open the doors of a factory of rms to the people. That which predominated on the uncovered brows of the ajority of those present was enthusiasm mingled with dejection. Here and there, lso, in that multitude given over to such violent but noble emotions, there ere visible genuine visages of criminals and ignoble mouths which said: “Let us lunder!” There are certain agitations which stir up the bottoms of marshes and ake clouds of mud rise through the water. A phenomenon to which “well drilled” olicemen are no strangers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.8#The procession proceeded, with feverish slowness, from the house of the eceased, by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille. It rained from time o time; the rain mattered nothing to that throng. Many incidents, the coffin orne round the Vendome column, stones thrown at the Duc de Fitz-James, who was een on a balcony with his hat on his head, the Gallic cock torn from a popular lag and dragged in the mire, a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at he Porte Saint-Martin, an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud: “I m a Republican,” the Polytechnic School coming up unexpectedly against orders o remain at home, the shouts of: “Long live the Polytechnique! Long live the epublic!” marked the passage of the funeral train. At the Bastille, long files f curious and formidable people who descended from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, ffected a junction with the procession, and a certain terrible seething began o agitate the throng.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.9#One man was heard to say to another: “Do you see that fellow with a red eard, he’s the one who will give the word when we are to fire.” It appears that his red beard was present, at another riot, the Quénisset affair, entrusted ith this same function.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.10#The hearse passed the Bastille, traversed the small bridge, and reached he esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz. There it halted. The crowd, surveyed t that moment with a bird’s-eye view, would have presented the aspect of a omet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tail spread out over the Quai ourdon, covered the Bastille, and was prolonged on the boulevard as far as the orte Saint-Martin. A circle was traced around the hearse. The vast rout held heir peace. Lafayette spoke and bade Lamarque farewell. This was a touching and ugust instant, all heads uncovered, all hearts beat high.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.11#All at once, a man on horseback, clad in black, made his appearance in the iddle of the group with a red flag, others say, with a pike surmounted with a ed liberty-cap. Lafayette turned aside his head. Exelmans quitted the rocession.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.12#This red flag raised a storm, and disappeared in the midst of it. From the oulevard Bourdon to the bridge of Austerlitz one of those clamors which esemble billows stirred the multitude. Two prodigious shouts went up: “Lamarque o the Pantheon!—Lafayette to the Town-hall!” Some young men, amid the eclamations of the throng, harnessed themselves and began to drag Lamarque in he hearse across the bridge of Austerlitz and Lafayette in a hackney-coach long the Quai Morland.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.13#In the crowd which surrounded and cheered Lafayette, it was noticed that a erman showed himself named Ludwig Snyder, who died a centenarian afterwards, ho had also been in the war of 1776, and who had fought at Trenton under ashington, and at Brandywine under Lafayette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.14#In the meantime, the municipal cavalry on the left bank had been set in otion, and came to bar the bridge, on the right bank the dragoons emerged from he Célestins and deployed along the Quai Morland. The men who were dragging afayette suddenly caught sight of them at the corner of the quay and shouted: The dragoons!” The dragoons advanced at a walk, in silence, with their pistols n their holsters, their swords in their scabbards, their guns slung in their eather sockets, with an air of gloomy expectation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.15#They halted two hundred paces from the little bridge. The carriage in hich sat Lafayette advanced to them, their ranks opened and allowed it to pass, nd then closed behind it. At that moment the dragoons and the crowd touched. he women fled in terror. What took place during that fatal minute? No one can ay. It is the dark moment when two clouds come together. Some declare that a last of trumpets sounding the charge was heard in the direction of the Arsenal, thers that a blow from a dagger was given by a child to a dragoon. The fact is, hat three shots were suddenly discharged: the first killed Cholet, chief of the quadron, the second killed an old deaf woman who was in the act of closing her indow, the third singed the shoulder of an officer; a woman screamed: “They are eginning too soon!” and all at once, a squadron of dragoons which had remained n the barracks up to this time, was seen to debouch at a gallop with bared words, through the Rue Bassompierre and the Boulevard Bourdon, sweeping all efore them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.3.16#Then all is said, the tempest is loosed, stones rain down, a fusillade reaks forth, many precipitate themselves to the bottom of the bank, and pass he small arm of the Seine, now filled in, the timber-yards of the Isle ouviers, that vast citadel ready to hand, bristle with combatants, stakes are orn up, pistol-shots fired, a barricade begun, the young men who are thrust ack pass the Austerlitz bridge with the hearse at a run, and the municipal uard, the carabineers rush up, the dragoons ply their swords, the crowd isperses in all directions, a rumor of war flies to all four quarters of Paris, en shout: “To arms!” they run, tumble down, flee, resist. Wrath spreads abroad he riot as wind spreads a fire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE EBULLITIONS OF FORMER DAYS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.1#Nothing is more extraordinary than the first breaking out of a riot. verything bursts forth everywhere at once. Was it foreseen? Yes. Was it repared? No. Whence comes it? From the pavements. Whence falls it? From the louds. Here insurrection assumes the character of a plot; there of an mprovisation. The first comer seizes a current of the throng and leads it hither he wills. A beginning full of terror, in which is mingled a sort of ormidable gayety. First come clamors, the shops are closed, the displays of the erchants disappear; then come isolated shots; people flee; blows from un-stocks beat against portes-cochères, servants can be heard laughing in the ourtyards of houses and saying: “There’s going to be a row!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.2#A quarter of an hour had not elapsed when this is what was taking place at wenty different spots in Paris at once.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.3#In the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie, twenty young men, bearded and ith long hair, entered a dram-shop and emerged a moment later, carrying a orizontal tricolored flag covered with crape, and having at their head three en armed, one with a sword, one with a gun, and the third with a pike.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.4#In the Rue des Nonaindières, a very well-dressed bourgeois, who had a rominent belly, a sonorous voice, a bald head, a lofty brow, a black beard, and ne of these stiff moustaches which will not lie flat, offered cartridges ublicly to passers-by.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.5#In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre, men with bare arms carried about a lack flag, on which could be read in white letters this inscription: “Republic r Death!” In the Rue des Jeûneurs, Rue du Cadran, Rue Montorgueil, Rue Mandar, roups appeared waving flags on which could be distinguished in gold letters, he word _section_ with a number. One of these flags was red and blue with an lmost imperceptible stripe of white between.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.6#They pillaged a factory of small-arms on the Boulevard Saint-Martin, and hree armorers’ shops, the first in the Rue Beaubourg, the second in the Rue ichel-le-Comte, the other in the Rue du Temple. In a few minutes, the thousand ands of the crowd had seized and carried off two hundred and thirty guns, early all double-barrelled, sixty-four swords, and eighty-three pistols. In rder to provide more arms, one man took the gun, the other the bayonet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.7#Opposite the Quai de la Grève, young men armed with muskets installed hemselves in the houses of some women for the purpose of firing. One of them ad a flint-lock. They rang, entered, and set about making cartridges. One of hese women relates: “I did not know what cartridges were; it was my husband who old me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.8#One cluster broke into a curiosity shop in the Rue des ieilles-Haudriettes, and seized yataghans and Turkish arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.9#The body of a mason who had been killed by a gun-shot lay in the Rue de la erle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.10#And then on the right bank, the left bank, on the quays, on the oulevards, in the Latin country, in the quarter of the Halles, panting men, rtisans, students, members of sections read proclamations and shouted: “To rms!” broke street lanterns, unharnessed carriages, unpaved the streets, broke n the doors of houses, uprooted trees, rummaged cellars, rolled out hogsheads, eaped up paving-stones, rough slabs, furniture and planks, and made arricades.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.11#They forced the bourgeois to assist them in this. They entered the wellings of women, they forced them to hand over the swords and guns of their bsent husbands, and they wrote on the door, with whiting: “The arms have been elivered”; some signed “their names” to receipts for the guns and swords and aid: “Send for them to-morrow at the Mayor’s office.” They disarmed isolated entinels and National Guardsmen in the streets on their way to the Townhall. hey tore the epaulets from officers. In the Rue du Cimitière-Saint-Nicholas, an fficer of the National Guard, on being pursued by a crowd armed with clubs and oils, took refuge with difficulty in a house, whence he was only able to emerge t nightfall and in disguise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.12#In the Quartier Saint-Jacques, the students swarmed out of their hotels nd ascended the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe to the Café du Progrèss, or descended to he Café des Sept-Billards, in the Rue des Mathurins. There, in front of the oor, young men mounted on the stone corner-posts, distributed arms. They lundered the timber-yard in the Rue Transnonain in order to obtain material for arricades. On a single point the inhabitants resisted, at the corner of the Rue ainte-Avoye and the Rue Simon-Le-Franc, where they destroyed the barricade with heir own hands. At a single point the insurgents yielded; they abandoned a arricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired on a detachment of the ational Guard, and fled through the Rue de la Corderie. The detachment picked p in the barricade a red flag, a package of cartridges, and three hundred istol-balls. The National Guardsmen tore up the flag, and carried off its attered remains on the points of their bayonets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.13#All that we are here relating slowly and successively took place imultaneously at all points of the city in the midst of a vast tumult, like a ass of tongues of lightning in one clap of thunder. In less than an hour, wenty-seven barricades sprang out of the earth in the quarter of the Halles lone. In the centre was that famous house No. 50, which was the fortress of eanne and her six hundred companions, and which, flanked on the one hand by a arricade at Saint-Merry, and on the other by a barricade of the Rue Maubuée, ommanded three streets, the Rue des Arcis, the Rue Saint-Martin, and the Rue ubry-le-Boucher, which it faced. The barricades at right angles fell back, the ne of the Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie, the other of the Rue eoffroy-Langevin on the Rue Sainte-Avoye. Without reckoning innumerable arricades in twenty other quarters of Paris, in the Marais, at ont-Sainte-Geneviève; one in the Rue Ménilmontant, where was visible a orte-cochère torn from its hinges; another near the little bridge of the ôtel-Dieu made with an “écossais,” which had been unharnessed and overthrown, hree hundred paces from the Prefecture of Police.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.14#At the barricade of the Rue des Ménétriers, a well-dressed man distributed oney to the workmen. At the barricade of the Rue Grenetat, a horseman made his ppearance and handed to the one who seemed to be the commander of the barricade hat had the appearance of a roll of silver. “Here,” said he, “this is to pay xpenses, wine, et cætera.” A light-haired young man, without a cravat, went rom barricade to barricade, carrying pass-words. Another, with a naked sword, a lue police cap on his head, placed sentinels. In the interior, beyond the arricades, the wine-shops and porters’ lodges were converted into guard-houses. therwise the riot was conducted after the most scientific military tactics. The arrow, uneven, sinuous streets, full of angles and turns, were admirably hosen; the neighborhood of the Halles, in particular, a network of streets more ntricate than a forest. The Society of the Friends of the People had, it was aid, undertaken to direct the insurrection in the Quartier Sainte-Avoye. A man illed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a plan of aris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.15#That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was a sort f strange impetuosity which was in the air. The insurrection had abruptly built arricades with one hand, and with the other seized nearly all the posts of the arrison. In less than three hours, like a train of powder catching fire, the nsurgents had invaded and occupied, on the right bank, the Arsenal, the ayoralty of the Place Royale, the whole of the Marais, the Popincourt arms anufactory, la Galiote, the Château-d’Eau, and all the streets near the Halles; n the left bank, the barracks of the Veterans, Sainte-Pélagie, the Place aubert, the powder magazine of the Deux-Moulins, and all the barriers. At five ’clock in the evening, they were masters of the Bastille, of the Lingerie, of he Blancs-Manteaux; their scouts had reached the Place des Victoires, and enaced the Bank, the Petits-Pères barracks, and the Post-Office. A third of aris was in the hands of the rioters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.16#The conflict had been begun on a gigantic scale at all points; and, as a esult of the disarming domiciliary visits, and armorers’ shops hastily invaded, as, that the combat which had begun with the throwing of stones was continued ith gun-shots.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.17#About six o’clock in the evening, the Passage du Saumon became the field f battle. The uprising was at one end, the troops were at the other. They fired rom one gate to the other. An observer, a dreamer, the author of this book, who ad gone to get a near view of this volcano, found himself in the passage etween the two fires. All that he had to protect him from the bullets was the well of the two half-columns which separate the shops; he remained in this elicate situation for nearly half an hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.18#Meanwhile the call to arms was beaten, the National Guard armed in haste, he legions emerged from the Mayoralities, the regiments from their barracks. pposite the passage de l’Ancre a drummer received a blow from a dagger. nother, in the Rue du Cygne, was assailed by thirty young men who broke his nstrument, and took away his sword. Another was killed in the Rue renier-Saint-Lazare. In the Rue Michel-le-Comte, three officers fell dead one fter the other. Many of the Municipal Guards, on being wounded, in the Rue des ombards, retreated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.19#In front of the Cour-Batave, a detachment of National Guards found a red lag bearing the following inscription: _Republican revolution, No. 127_. Was his a revolution, in fact?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.20#The insurrection had made of the centre of Paris a sort of inextricable, ortuous, colossal citadel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.21#There was the hearth; there, evidently, was the question. All the rest was othing but skirmishes. The proof that all would be decided there lay in the act that there was no fighting going on there as yet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.22#In some regiments, the soldiers were uncertain, which added to the fearful ncertainty of the crisis. They recalled the popular ovation which had greeted he neutrality of the 53d of the Line in July, 1830. Two intrepid men, tried in reat wars, the Marshal Lobau and General Bugeaud, were in command, Bugeaud nder Lobau. Enormous patrols, composed of battalions of the Line, enclosed in ntire companies of the National Guard, and preceded by a commissary of police earing his scarf of office, went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion. The nsurgents, on their side, placed videttes at the corners of all open spaces, nd audaciously sent their patrols outside the barricades. Each side was atching the other. The Government, with an army in its hand, hesitated; the ight was almost upon them, and the Saint-Merry tocsin began to make itself eard. The Minister of War at that time, Marshal Soult, who had seen Austerlitz, egarded this with a gloomy air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.23#These old sailors, accustomed to correct manœuvres and having as resource nd guide only tactics, that compass of battles, are utterly disconcerted in the resence of that immense foam which is called public wrath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.24#The National Guards of the suburbs rushed up in haste and disorder. A attalion of the 12th Light came at a run from Saint-Denis, the 14th of the Line rrived from Courbevoie, the batteries of the Military School had taken up their osition on the Carrousel; cannons were descending from Vincennes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.4.25#Solitude was formed around the Tuileries. Louis Philippe was perfectly erene.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.head#CHAPTER V—ORIGINALITY OF PARIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.1#During the last two years, as we have said, Paris had witnessed more than ne insurrection. Nothing is, generally, more singularly calm than the hysiognomy of Paris during an uprising beyond the bounds of the rebellious uarters. Paris very speedily accustoms herself to anything,—it is only a iot,—and Paris has so many affairs on hand, that she does not put herself out or so small a matter. These colossal cities alone can offer such spectacles. hese immense enclosures alone can contain at the same time civil war and an odd nd indescribable tranquillity. Ordinarily, when an insurrection commences, when he shop-keeper hears the drum, the call to arms, the general alarm, he contents imself with the remark:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.2#“There appears to be a squabble in the Rue Saint-Martin.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.3#Or:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.4#“In the Faubourg Saint-Antoine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.5#Often he adds carelessly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.6#“Or somewhere in that direction.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.7#Later on, when the heart-rending and mournful hubbub of musketry and firing y platoons becomes audible, the shopkeeper says:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.8#“It’s getting hot! Hullo, it’s getting hot!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.9#A moment later, the riot approaches and gains in force, he shuts up his hop precipitately, hastily dons his uniform, that is to say, he places his erchandise in safety and risks his own person.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.10#Men fire in a square, in a passage, in a blind alley; they take and e-take the barricade; blood flows, the grape-shot riddles the fronts of the ouses, the balls kill people in their beds, corpses encumber the streets. A few treets away, the shock of billiard-balls can be heard in the cafés.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.11#The theatres open their doors and present vaudevilles; the curious laugh nd chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled with war. ackney-carriages go their way; passers-by are going to a dinner somewhere in own. Sometimes in the very quarter where the fighting is going on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.12#In 1831, a fusillade was stopped to allow a wedding party to pass.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.13#At the time of the insurrection of 1839, in the Rue Saint-Martin a little, nfirm old man, pushing a hand-cart surmounted by a tricolored rag, in which he ad carafes filled with some sort of liquid, went and came from barricade to roops and from troops to the barricade, offering his glasses of cocoa mpartially,—now to the Government, now to anarchy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.14#Nothing can be stranger; and this is the peculiar character of uprisings n Paris, which cannot be found in any other capital. To this end, two things re requisite, the size of Paris and its gayety. The city of Voltaire and apoleon is necessary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.15#On this occasion, however, in the resort to arms of June 5th, 1832, the reat city felt something which was, perhaps, stronger than itself. It was fraid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.16#Closed doors, windows, and shutters were to be seen everywhere, in the ost distant and most “disinterested” quarters. The courageous took to arms, the oltroons hid. The busy and heedless passer-by disappeared. Many streets were mpty at four o’clock in the morning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.17#Alarming details were hawked about, fatal news was disseminated,—that they_ were masters of the Bank;—that there were six hundred of them in the loister of Saint-Merry alone, entrenched and embattled in the church; that the ine was not to be depended on; that Armand Carrel had been to see Marshal lausel and that the Marshal had said: “Get a regiment first”; that Lafayette as ill, but that he had said to them, nevertheless: “I am with you. I will ollow you wherever there is room for a chair”; that one must be on one’s guard; hat at night there would be people pillaging isolated dwellings in the deserted orners of Paris (there the imagination of the police, that Anne Radcliffe mixed p with the Government was recognizable); that a battery had been established in he Rue Aubry le Boucher; that Lobau and Bugeaud were putting their heads ogether, and that, at midnight, or at daybreak at latest, four columns would arch simultaneously on the centre of the uprising, the first coming from the astille, the second from the Porte Saint-Martin, the third from the Grève, the ourth from the Halles; that perhaps, also, the troops would evacuate Paris and ithdraw to the Champ-de-Mars; that no one knew what would happen, but that this ime, it certainly was serious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.18#People busied themselves over Marshal Soult’s hesitations. Why did not he ttack at once? It is certain that he was profoundly absorbed. The old lion eemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.19#Evening came, the theatres did not open; the patrols circulated with an ir of irritation; passers-by were searched; suspicious persons were arrested. y nine o’clock, more than eight hundred persons had been arrested, the refecture of Police was encumbered with them, so was the Conciergerie, so was a Force.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.20#At the Conciergerie in particular, the long vault which is called the Rue e Paris was littered with trusses of straw upon which lay a heap of prisoners, hom the man of Lyons, Lagrange, harangued valiantly. All that straw rustled by ll these men, produced the sound of a heavy shower. Elsewhere prisoners slept n the open air in the meadows, piled on top of each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.21#Anxiety reigned everywhere, and a certain tremor which was not habitual ith Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.22#People barricaded themselves in their houses; wives and mothers were neasy; nothing was to be heard but this: “Ah! my God! He has not come home!” here was hardly even the distant rumble of a vehicle to be heard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.23#People listened on their thresholds, to the rumors, the shouts, the umult, the dull and indistinct sounds, to the things that were said: “It is avalry,” or: “Those are the caissons galloping,” to the trumpets, the drums, he firing, and, above all, to that lamentable alarm peal from Saint-Merry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.10.5.24#They waited for the first cannon-shot. Men sprang up at the corners of the treets and disappeared, shouting: “Go home!” And people made haste to bolt heir doors. They said: “How will all this end?” From moment to moment, in roportion as the darkness descended, Paris seemed to take on a more mournful ue from the formidable flaming of the revolt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.head#BOOK ELEVENTH—THE ATOM FRATERNIZES WITH THE HURRICANE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.head#CHAPTER I—SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF GAVROCHE’S OETRY. THE INFLUENCE OF AN ACADEMICIAN ON THIS POETRY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.1#At the instant when the insurrection, arising from the shock of the opulace and the military in front of the Arsenal, started a movement in advance nd towards the rear in the multitude which was following the hearse and which, hrough the whole length of the boulevards, weighed, so to speak, on the head of he procession, there arose a frightful ebb. The rout was shaken, their ranks ere broken, all ran, fled, made their escape, some with shouts of attack, thers with the pallor of flight. The great river which covered the boulevards ivided in a twinkling, overflowed to right and left, and spread in torrents ver two hundred streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has broken oose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.2#At that moment, a ragged child who was coming down through the Rue énilmontant, holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which he had ust plucked on the heights of Belleville, caught sight of an old holster-pistol n the show-window of a bric-à-brac merchant’s shop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.3#“Mother What’s-your-name, I’m going to borrow your machine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.4#And off he ran with the pistol.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.5#Two minutes later, a flood of frightened bourgeois who were fleeing through he Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse, encountered the lad brandishing his pistol and inging:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.6#La nuit on ne voit rien, Le jour on voit très bien, D’un écrit apocryphe Le ourgeois s‘ébouriffe, Pratiquez la vertu, Tutu, chapeau pointu!44
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.7#It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.8#On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.9#Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march, and f all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion? We know not. ho does know? Himself, perhaps. However, Gavroche was well up in all the opular tunes in circulation, and he mingled with them his own chirpings. An bserving urchin and a rogue, he made a potpourri of the voices of nature and he voices of Paris. He combined the repertory of the birds with the repertory f the workshops. He was acquainted with thieves, a tribe contiguous to his own. e had, it appears, been for three months apprenticed to a printer. He had one ay executed a commission for M. Baour-Lormian, one of the Forty. Gavroche was a amin of letters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.10#Moreover, Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had offered he hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously rainy night, t was to his own brothers that he had played the part of Providence. His rothers in the evening, his father in the morning; that is what his night had een like. On quitting the Rue des Ballets at daybreak, he had returned in haste o the elephant, had artistically extracted from it the two brats, had shared ith them some sort of breakfast which he had invented, and had then gone away, onfiding them to that good mother, the street, who had brought him up, almost ntirely. On leaving them, he had appointed to meet them at the same spot in the vening, and had left them this discourse by way of a farewell: “I break a cane, therwise expressed, I cut my stick, or, as they say at the court, I file off. f you don’t find papa and mamma, young ‘uns, come back here this evening. I’ll cramble you up some supper, and I’ll give you a shakedown.” The two children, icked up by some policeman and placed in the refuge, or stolen by some ountebank, or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a aris, did not return. The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of hese lost traces. Gavroche did not see them again. Ten or twelve weeks had lapsed since that night. More than once he had scratched the back of his head nd said: “Where the devil are my two children?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.11#In the meantime, he had arrived, pistol in hand, in the Rue du ont-aux-Choux. He noticed that there was but one shop open in that street, and, matter worthy of reflection, that was a pastry-cook’s shop. This presented a rovidential occasion to eat another apple-turnover before entering the unknown. avroche halted, fumbled in his fob, turned his pocket inside out, found othing, not even a sou, and began to shout: “Help!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.12#It is hard to miss the last cake.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.13#Nevertheless, Gavroche pursued his way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.14#Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint-Louis. While traversing the Rue u Parc-Royal, he felt called upon to make good the loss of the apple-turnover hich had been impossible, and he indulged himself in the immense delight of earing down the theatre posters in broad daylight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.15#A little further on, on catching sight of a group of comfortable-looking ersons, who seemed to be landed proprietors, he shrugged his shoulders and spit ut at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as they passed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.1.16#“How fat those moneyed men are! They’re drunk! They just wallow in good inners. Ask ‘em what they do with their money. They don’t know. They eat it, hat’s what they do! As much as their bellies will hold.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.head#CHAPTER II—GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.1#The brandishing of a triggerless pistol, grasped in one’s hand in the open treet, is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his fervor increasing ith every moment. Amid the scraps of the Marseillaise which he was singing, he houted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.2#“All goes well. I suffer a great deal in my left paw, I’m all broken up ith rheumatism, but I’m satisfied, citizens. All that the bourgeois have to do s to bear themselves well, I’ll sneeze them out subversive couplets. What are he police spies? Dogs. And I’d just like to have one of them at the end of my istol. I’m just from the boulevard, my friends. It’s getting hot there, it’s etting into a little boil, it’s simmering. It’s time to skim the pot. Forward arch, men! Let an impure blood inundate the furrows! I give my days to my ountry, I shall never see my concubine more, Nini, finished, yes, Nini? But ever mind! Long live joy! Let’s fight, crebleu! I’ve had enough of espotism.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.3#At that moment, the horse of a lancer of the National Guard having fallen, avroche laid his pistol on the pavement, and picked up the man, then he ssisted in raising the horse. After which he picked up his pistol and resumed is way. In the Rue de Thorigny, all was peace and silence. This apathy, eculiar to the Marais, presented a contrast with the vast surrounding uproar. our gossips were chatting in a doorway.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.4#Scotland has trios of witches, Paris has quartettes of old gossiping hags; nd the “Thou shalt be King” could be quite as mournfully hurled at Bonaparte in he Carrefour Baudoyer as at Macbeth on the heath of Armuyr. The croak would be lmost identical.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.5#The gossips of the Rue de Thorigny busied themselves only with their own oncerns. Three of them were portresses, and the fourth was a rag-picker with er basket on her back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.6#All four of them seemed to be standing at the four corners of old age, hich are decrepitude, decay, ruin, and sadness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.7#The rag-picker was humble. In this open-air society, it is the rag-picker ho salutes and the portress who patronizes. This is caused by the corner for efuse, which is fat or lean, according to the will of the portresses, and after he fancy of the one who makes the heap. There may be kindness in the broom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.8#This rag-picker was a grateful creature, and she smiled, with what a smile! n the three portresses. Things of this nature were said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.9#“Ah, by the way, is your cat still cross?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.10#“Good gracious, cats are naturally the enemies of dogs, you know. It’s the ogs who complain.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.11#“And people also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.12#“But the fleas from a cat don’t go after people.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.13#“That’s not the trouble, dogs are dangerous. I remember one year when here were so many dogs that it was necessary to put it in the newspapers. That as at the time when there were at the Tuileries great sheep that drew the ittle carriage of the King of Rome. Do you remember the King of Rome?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.14#“I liked the Duc de Bordeau better.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.15#“I knew Louis XVIII. I prefer Louis XVIII.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.16#“Meat is awfully dear, isn’t it, Mother Patagon?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.17#“Ah! don’t mention it, the butcher’s shop is a horror. A horrible orror—one can’t afford anything but the poor cuts nowadays.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.18#Here the rag-picker interposed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.19#“Ladies, business is dull. The refuse heaps are miserable. No one throws nything away any more. They eat everything.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.20#“There are poorer people than you, la Vargoulême.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.21#“Ah, that’s true,” replied the rag-picker, with deference, “I have a rofession.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.22#A pause succeeded, and the rag-picker, yielding to that necessity for oasting which lies at the bottom of man, added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.23#“In the morning, on my return home, I pick over my basket, I sort my hings. This makes heaps in my room. I put the rags in a basket, the cores and talks in a bucket, the linen in my cupboard, the woollen stuff in my commode, he old papers in the corner of the window, the things that are good to eat in y bowl, the bits of glass in my fireplace, the old shoes behind my door, and he bones under my bed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.24#Gavroche had stopped behind her and was listening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.25#“Old ladies,” said he, “what do you mean by talking politics?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.26#He was assailed by a broadside, composed of a quadruple howl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.27#“Here’s another rascal.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.28#“What’s that he’s got in his paddle? A pistol?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.29#“Well, I’d like to know what sort of a beggar’s brat this is?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.30#“That sort of animal is never easy unless he’s overturning the uthorities.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.31#Gavroche disdainfully contented himself, by way of reprisal, with levating the tip of his nose with his thumb and opening his hand wide.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.32#The rag-picker cried:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.33#“You malicious, bare-pawed little wretch!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.34#The one who answered to the name of Patagon clapped her hands together in orror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.35#“There’s going to be evil doings, that’s certain. The errand-boy next door as a little pointed beard, I have seen him pass every day with a young person n a pink bonnet on his arm; to-day I saw him pass, and he had a gun on his arm. ame Bacheux says, that last week there was a revolution at—at—at—where’s the alf!—at Pontoise. And then, there you see him, that horrid scamp, with his istol! It seems that the Célestins are full of pistols. What do you suppose the overnment can do with good-for-nothings who don’t know how to do anything but ontrive ways of upsetting the world, when we had just begun to get a little uiet after all the misfortunes that have happened, good Lord! to that poor ueen whom I saw pass in the tumbril! And all this is going to make tobacco earer. It’s infamous! And I shall certainly go to see him beheaded on the uillotine, the wretch!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.36#“You’ve got the sniffles, old lady,” said Gavroche. “Blow your romontory.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.37#And he passed on. When he was in the Rue Pavée, the rag-picker occurred to is mind, and he indulged in this soliloquy:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.38#“You’re in the wrong to insult the revolutionists, Mother ust-Heap-Corner. This pistol is in your interests. It’s so that you may have ore good things to eat in your basket.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.39#All at once, he heard a shout behind him; it was the portress Patagon who ad followed him, and who was shaking her fist at him in the distance and rying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.40#“You’re nothing but a bastard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.41#“Oh! Come now,” said Gavroche, “I don’t care a brass farthing for hat!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.42#Shortly afterwards, he passed the Hotel Lamoignon. There he uttered this ppeal:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.43#“Forward march to the battle!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.44#And he was seized with a fit of melancholy. He gazed at his pistol with an ir of reproach which seemed an attempt to appease it:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.45#“I’m going off,” said he, “but you won’t go off!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.46#One dog may distract the attention from another dog.45 A very gaunt poodle ame along at the moment. Gavroche felt compassion for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.47#“My poor doggy,” said he, “you must have gone and swallowed a cask, for ll the hoops are visible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.2.48#Then he directed his course towards l’Orme-Saint-Gervais.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.head#CHAPTER III—JUST INDIGNATION OF A HAIR-DRESSER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.1#The worthy hair-dresser who had chased from his shop the two little fellows o whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the elephant was at that oment in his shop engaged in shaving an old soldier of the legion who had erved under the Empire. They were talking. The hair-dresser had, naturally, poken to the veteran of the riot, then of General Lamarque, and from Lamarque hey had passed to the Emperor. Thence sprang up a conversation between barber nd soldier which Prudhomme, had he been present, would have enriched with rabesques, and which he would have entitled: “Dialogue between the razor and he sword.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.2#“How did the Emperor ride, sir?” said the barber.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.3#“Badly. He did not know how to fall—so he never fell.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.4#“Did he have fine horses? He must have had fine horses!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.5#“On the day when he gave me my cross, I noticed his beast. It was a racing are, perfectly white. Her ears were very wide apart, her saddle deep, a fine ead marked with a black star, a very long neck, strongly articulated knees, rominent ribs, oblique shoulders and a powerful crupper. A little more than ifteen hands in height.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.6#“A pretty horse,” remarked the hair-dresser.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.7#“It was His Majesty’s beast.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.8#The hair-dresser felt, that after this observation, a short silence would e fitting, so he conformed himself to it, and then went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.9#“The Emperor was never wounded but once, was he, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.10#The old soldier replied with the calm and sovereign tone of a man who had een there:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.11#“In the heel. At Ratisbon. I never saw him so well dressed as on that day. e was as neat as a new sou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.12#“And you, Mr. Veteran, you must have been often wounded?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.13#“I?” said the soldier, “ah! not to amount to anything. At Marengo, I eceived two sabre-blows on the back of my neck, a bullet in the right arm at usterlitz, another in the left hip at Jena. At Friedland, a thrust from a ayonet, there,—at the Moskowa seven or eight lance-thrusts, no matter where, at utzen a splinter of a shell crushed one of my fingers. Ah! and then at aterloo, a ball from a biscaïen in the thigh, that’s all.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.14#“How fine that is!” exclaimed the hair-dresser, in Pindaric accents, “to ie on the field of battle! On my word of honor, rather than die in bed, of an llness, slowly, a bit by bit each day, with drugs, cataplasms, syringes, edicines, I should prefer to receive a cannon-ball in my belly!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.15#“You’re not over fastidious,” said the soldier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.16#He had hardly spoken when a fearful crash shook the shop. The show-window ad suddenly been fractured.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.17#The wig-maker turned pale.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.18#“Ah, good God!” he exclaimed, “it’s one of them!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.19#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.20#“A cannon-ball.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.21#“Here it is,” said the soldier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.22#And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor. It was a ebble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.23#The hair-dresser ran to the broken window and beheld Gavroche fleeing at he full speed, towards the Marché Saint-Jean. As he passed the hair-dresser’s hop Gavroche, who had the two brats still in his mind, had not been able to esist the impulse to say good day to him, and had flung a stone through his anes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.3.24#“You see!” shrieked the hair-dresser, who from white had turned blue, that fellow returns and does mischief for the pure pleasure of it. What has any ne done to that gamin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE CHILD IS AMAZED AT THE OLD MAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.1#In the meantime, in the Marché Saint-Jean, where the post had already been isarmed, Gavroche had just “effected a junction” with a band led by Enjolras, ourfeyrac, Combeferre, and Feuilly. They were armed after a fashion. Bahorel nd Jean Prouvaire had found them and swelled the group. Enjolras had a ouble-barrelled hunting-gun, Combeferre the gun of a National Guard bearing the umber of his legion, and in his belt, two pistols which his unbuttoned coat llowed to be seen, Jean Prouvaire an old cavalry musket, Bahorel a rifle; ourfeyrac was brandishing an unsheathed sword-cane. Feuilly, with a naked sword n his hand, marched at their head shouting: “Long live Poland!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.2#They reached the Quai Morland. Cravatless, hatless, breathless, soaked by he rain, with lightning in their eyes. Gavroche accosted them calmly:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.3#“Where are we going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.4#“Come along,” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.5#Behind Feuilly marched, or rather bounded, Bahorel, who was like a fish in ater in a riot. He wore a scarlet waistcoat, and indulged in the sort of words hich break everything. His waistcoat astounded a passer-by, who cried in ewilderment:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.6#“Here are the reds!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.7#“The reds, the reds!” retorted Bahorel. “A queer kind of fear, bourgeois. or my part I don’t tremble before a poppy, the little red hat inspires me with o alarm. Take my advice, bourgeois, let’s leave fear of the red to horned attle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.8#He caught sight of a corner of the wall on which was placarded the most eaceable sheet of paper in the world, a permission to eat eggs, a Lenten dmonition addressed by the Archbishop of Paris to his “flock.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.9#Bahorel exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.10#“‘Flock’; a polite way of saying geese.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.11#And he tore the charge from the nail. This conquered Gavroche. From that nstant Gavroche set himself to study Bahorel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.12#“Bahorel,” observed Enjolras, “you are wrong. You should have let that harge alone, he is not the person with whom we have to deal, you are wasting our wrath to no purpose. Take care of your supply. One does not fire out of the anks with the soul any more than with a gun.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.13#“Each one in his own fashion, Enjolras,” retorted Bahorel. “This bishop’s rose shocks me; I want to eat eggs without being permitted. Your style is the ot and cold; I am amusing myself. Besides, I’m not wasting myself, I’m getting start; and if I tore down that charge, Hercle! ‘twas only to whet my ppetite.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.14#This word, _Hercle_, struck Gavroche. He sought all occasions for earning, and that tearer-down of posters possessed his esteem. He inquired of im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.15#“What does _Hercle_ mean?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.16#Bahorel answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.17#“It means cursed name of a dog, in Latin.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.18#Here Bahorel recognized at a window a pale young man with a black beard ho was watching them as they passed, probably a Friend of the A B C. He shouted o him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.19#“Quick, cartridges, _para bellum_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.20#“A fine man! that’s true,” said Gavroche, who now understood Latin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.21#A tumultuous retinue accompanied them,—students, artists, young men ffiliated to the Cougourde of Aix, artisans, longshoremen, armed with clubs and ayonets; some, like Combeferre, with pistols thrust into their trousers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.22#An old man, who appeared to be extremely aged, was walking in the and.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.23#He had no arms, and he made great haste, so that he might not be left ehind, although he had a thoughtful air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.24#Gavroche caught sight of him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.25#“Keksekça?” said he to Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.26#“He’s an old duffer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.4.27#It was M. Mabeuf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.head#CHAPTER V—THE OLD MAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.1#Let us recount what had taken place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.2#Enjolras and his friends had been on the Boulevard Bourdon, near the public torehouses, at the moment when the dragoons had made their charge. Enjolras, ourfeyrac, and Combeferre were among those who had taken to the Rue assompierre, shouting: “To the barricades!” In the Rue Lesdiguières they had et an old man walking along. What had attracted their attention was that the oodman was walking in a zig-zag, as though he were intoxicated. Moreover, he ad his hat in his hand, although it had been raining all the morning, and was aining pretty briskly at the very time. Courfeyrac had recognized Father abeuf. He knew him through having many times accompanied Marius as far as his oor. As he was acquainted with the peaceful and more than timid habits of the ld beadle-book-collector, and was amazed at the sight of him in the midst of hat uproar, a couple of paces from the cavalry charges, almost in the midst of fusillade, hatless in the rain, and strolling about among the bullets, he had ccosted him, and the following dialogue had been exchanged between the rioter f fire and the octogenarian:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.3#“M. Mabeuf, go to your home.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.4#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.5#“There’s going to be a row.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.6#“That’s well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.7#“Thrusts with the sword and firing, M. Mabeuf.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.8#“That is well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.9#“Firing from cannon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.10#“That is good. Where are the rest of you going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.11#“We are going to fling the government to the earth.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.12#“That is good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.13#And he had set out to follow them. From that moment forth he had not ttered a word. His step had suddenly become firm; artisans had offered him heir arms; he had refused with a sign of the head. He advanced nearly to the ront rank of the column, with the movement of a man who is marching and the ountenance of a man who is sleeping.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.14#“What a fierce old fellow!” muttered the students. The rumor spread hrough the troop that he was a former member of the Convention,—an old egicide. The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.15#Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made of im a sort of trumpet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.16#He sang: “Voici la lune qui paraît, Quand irons-nous dans la forêt? emandait Charlot à Charlotte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.17#Tou tou tou Pour Chatou. Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et u’une botte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.18#“Pour avoir bu de grand matin La rosée à même le thym, Deux moineaux taient en ribotte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.19#Zi zi zi Pour Passy. Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et qu’une otte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.20#“Et ces deux pauvres petits loups, Comme deux grives étaient soûls; Un igre en riait dans sa grotte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.21#Don don don Pour Meudon. Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et u’une botte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.22#“L’un jurait et l’autre sacrait. Quand irons nous dans la forêt? Demandait harlot à Charlotte.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.23#Tin tin tin Pour Pantin. Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et u’une botte."46
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.5.24#They directed their course towards Saint-Merry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.head#CHAPTER VI—RECRUITS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.1#The band augmented every moment. Near the Rue des Billettes, a man of lofty tature, whose hair was turning gray, and whose bold and daring mien was emarked by Courfeyrac, Enjolras, and Combeferre, but whom none of them knew, oined them. Gavroche, who was occupied in singing, whistling, humming, running n ahead and pounding on the shutters of the shops with the butt of his riggerless pistol; paid no attention to this man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.2#It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie, they passed in front of ourfeyrac’s door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.3#“This happens just right,” said Courfeyrac, “I have forgotten my purse, and have lost my hat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.4#He quitted the mob and ran up to his quarters at full speed. He seized an ld hat and his purse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.5#He also seized a large square coffer, of the dimensions of a large valise, hich was concealed under his soiled linen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.6#As he descended again at a run, the portress hailed him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.7#“Monsieur de Courfeyrac!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.8#“What’s your name, portress?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.9#The portress stood bewildered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.10#“Why, you know perfectly well, I’m the concierge; my name is Mother euvain.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.11#“Well, if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again, I shall call you other de Veuvain. Now speak, what’s the matter? What do you want?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.12#“There is some one who wants to speak with you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.13#“Who is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.14#“I don’t know.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.15#“Where is he?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.16#“In my lodge.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.17#“The devil!” ejaculated Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.18#“But the person has been waiting your return for over an hour,” said the ortress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.19#At the same time, a sort of pale, thin, small, freckled, and youthful rtisan, clad in a tattered blouse and patched trousers of ribbed velvet, and ho had rather the air of a girl accoutred as a man than of a man, emerged from he lodge and said to Courfeyrac in a voice which was not the least in the world ike a woman’s voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.20#“Monsieur Marius, if you please.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.21#“He is not here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.22#“Will he return this evening?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.23#“I know nothing about it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.24#And Courfeyrac added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.25#“For my part, I shall not return.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.26#The young man gazed steadily at him and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.27#“Why not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.28#“Because.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.29#“Where are you going, then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.30#“What business is that of yours?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.31#“Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.32#“I am going to the barricades.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.33#“Would you like to have me go with you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.34#“If you like!” replied Courfeyrac. “The street is free, the pavements elong to every one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.35#And he made his escape at a run to join his friends. When he had rejoined hem, he gave the coffer to one of them to carry. It was only a quarter of an our after this that he saw the young man, who had actually followed them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.11.6.36#A mob does not go precisely where it intends. We have explained that a ust of wind carries it away. They overshot Saint-Merry and found themselves, ithout precisely knowing how, in the Rue Saint-Denis.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.head#BOOK TWELFTH—CORINTHE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.head#CHAPTER I—HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.1#The Parisians who nowadays on entering on the Rue Rambuteau at the end near he Halles, notice on their right, opposite the Rue Mondétour, a basket-maker’s hop having for its sign a basket in the form of Napoleon the Great with this nscription:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.2#NAPOLEON IS MADE WHOLLY OF WILLOW,
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.3#have no suspicion of the terrible scenes which this very spot witnessed ardly thirty years ago.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.4#It was there that lay the Rue de la Chanvrerie, which ancient deeds spell hanverrerie, and the celebrated public-house called _Corinthe_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.5#The reader will remember all that has been said about the barricade ffected at this point, and eclipsed, by the way, by the barricade Saint-Merry. t was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, now fallen into rofound obscurity, that we are about to shed a little light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.6#May we be permitted to recur, for the sake of clearness in the recital, to he simple means which we have already employed in the case of Waterloo. Persons ho wish to picture to themselves in a tolerably exact manner the constitution f the houses which stood at that epoch near the Pointe Saint-Eustache, at the ortheast angle of the Halles of Paris, where to-day lies the embouchure of the ue Rambuteau, have only to imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its ummit and the Halles with its base, and whose two vertical bars should form the ue de la Grande-Truanderie, and the Rue de la Chanvrerie, and whose transverse ar should be formed by the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie. The old Rue Mondétour ut the three strokes of the N at the most crooked angles. So that the abyrinthine confusion of these four streets sufficed to form, on a space three athoms square, between the Halles and the Rue Saint-Denis on the one hand, and etween the Rue du Cygne and the Rue des Prêcheurs on the other, seven islands f houses, oddly cut up, of varying sizes, placed crosswise and hap-hazard, and arely separated, like the blocks of stone in a dock, by narrow crannies.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.7#We say narrow crannies, and we can give no more just idea of those dark, ontracted, many-angled alleys, lined with eight-story buildings. These uildings were so decrepit that, in the Rue de la Chanvrerie and the Rue de la etite-Truanderie, the fronts were shored up with beams running from one house o another. The street was narrow and the gutter broad, the pedestrian there alked on a pavement that was always wet, skirting little stalls resembling ellars, big posts encircled with iron hoops, excessive heaps of refuse, and ates armed with enormous, century-old gratings. The Rue Rambuteau has evastated all that.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.8#The name of Mondétour paints marvellously well the sinuosities of that hole set of streets. A little further on, they are found still better expressed y the _Rue Pirouette_, which ran into the Rue Mondétour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.9#The passer-by who got entangled from the Rue Saint-Denis in the Rue de la hanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he had entered an longated funnel. At the end of this street, which was very short, he found urther passage barred in the direction of the Halles by a tall row of houses, nd he would have thought himself in a blind alley, had he not perceived on the ight and left two dark cuts through which he could make his escape. This was he Rue Mondétour, which on one side ran into the Rue de Prêcheurs, and on the ther into the Rue du Cygne and the Petite-Truanderie. At the bottom of this ort of cul-de-sac, at the angle of the cutting on the right, there was to be een a house which was not so tall as the rest, and which formed a sort of cape n the street. It is in this house, of two stories only, that an illustrious ine-shop had been merrily installed three hundred years before. This tavern reated a joyous noise in the very spot which old Theophilus described in the ollowing couplet:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.10#Là branle le squelette horrible D’un pauvre amant qui se pendit.47
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.11#The situation was good, and tavern-keepers succeeded each other there, rom father to son.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.12#In the time of Mathurin Regnier, this cabaret was called the Pot-aux-Roses_, and as the rebus was then in fashion, it had for its ign-board, a post (_poteau_) painted rose-color. In the last century, the orthy Natoire, one of the fantastic masters nowadays despised by the stiff chool, having got drunk many times in this wine-shop at the very table where egnier had drunk his fill, had painted, by way of gratitude, a bunch of Corinth rapes on the pink post. The keeper of the cabaret, in his joy, had changed his evice and had caused to be placed in gilt letters beneath the bunch these ords: “At the Bunch of Corinth Grapes” (_“Au Raisin de Corinthe”_). Hence the ame of Corinthe. Nothing is more natural to drunken men than ellipses. The llipsis is the zig-zag of the phrase. Corinthe gradually dethroned the ot-aux-Roses. The last proprietor of the dynasty, Father Hucheloup, no longer cquainted even with the tradition, had the post painted blue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.13#A room on the ground floor, where the bar was situated, one on the first loor containing a billiard-table, a wooden spiral staircase piercing the eiling, wine on the tables, smoke on the walls, candles in broad daylight,—this as the style of this cabaret. A staircase with a trap-door in the lower room ed to the cellar. On the second floor were the lodgings of the Hucheloup amily. They were reached by a staircase which was a ladder rather than a taircase, and had for their entrance only a private door in the large room on he first floor. Under the roof, in two mansard attics, were the nests for the ervants. The kitchen shared the ground floor with the tap-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.14#Father Hucheloup had, possibly, been born a chemist, but the fact is that e was a cook; people did not confine themselves to drinking alone in his ine-shop, they also ate there. Hucheloup had invented a capital thing which ould be eaten nowhere but in his house, stuffed carps, which he called _carpes u gras_. These were eaten by the light of a tallow candle or of a lamp of the ime of Louis XVI., on tables to which were nailed waxed cloths in lieu of able-cloths. People came thither from a distance. Hucheloup, one fine morning, ad seen fit to notify passers-by of this “specialty”; he had dipped a brush in pot of black paint, and as he was an orthographer on his own account, as well s a cook after his own fashion, he had improvised on his wall this remarkable nscription:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.15#CARPES HO GRAS.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.16#One winter, the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy to bliterate the S which terminated the first word, and the G which began the hird; this is what remained:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.17#CARPE HO RAS.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.18#Time and rain assisting, a humble gastronomical announcement had become a rofound piece of advice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.19#In this way it came about, that though he knew no French, Father Hucheloup nderstood Latin, that he had evoked philosophy from his kitchen, and that, esirous simply of effacing Lent, he had equalled Horace. And the striking thing bout it was, that that also meant: “Enter my wine-shop.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.20#Nothing of all this is in existence now. The Mondétour labyrinth was isembowelled and widely opened in 1847, and probably no longer exists at the resent moment. The Rue de la Chanvrerie and Corinthe have disappeared beneath he pavement of the Rue Rambuteau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.21#As we have already said, Corinthe was the meeting-place if not the allying-point, of Courfeyrac and his friends. It was Grantaire who had iscovered Corinthe. He had entered it on account of the _Carpe horas_, and had eturned thither on account of the _Carpes au gras_. There they drank, there hey ate, there they shouted; they did not pay much, they paid badly, they did ot pay at all, but they were always welcome. Father Hucheloup was a jovial ost.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.22#Hucheloup, that amiable man, as was just said, was a wine-shop-keeper with moustache; an amusing variety. He always had an ill-tempered air, seemed to ish to intimidate his customers, grumbled at the people who entered his stablishment, and had rather the mien of seeking a quarrel with them than of erving them with soup. And yet, we insist upon the word, people were always elcome there. This oddity had attracted customers to his shop, and brought him oung men, who said to each other: “Come hear Father Hucheloup growl.” He had een a fencing-master. All of a sudden, he would burst out laughing. A big oice, a good fellow. He had a comic foundation under a tragic exterior, he sked nothing better than to frighten you, very much like those snuff-boxes hich are in the shape of a pistol. The detonation makes one sneeze.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.23#Mother Hucheloup, his wife, was a bearded and a very homely creature.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.24#About 1830, Father Hucheloup died. With him disappeared the secret of tuffed carps. His inconsolable widow continued to keep the wine-shop. But the ooking deteriorated, and became execrable; the wine, which had always been bad, ecame fearfully bad. Nevertheless, Courfeyrac and his friends continued to go o Corinthe,—out of pity, as Bossuet said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.25#The Widow Hucheloup was breathless and misshapen and given to rustic ecollections. She deprived them of their flatness by her pronunciation. She had way of her own of saying things, which spiced her reminiscences of the village nd of her springtime. It had formerly been her delight, so she affirmed, to ear the _loups-de-gorge_ (_rouges-gorges_) _chanter dans les ogrepines_ _aubépines_)—to hear the redbreasts sing in the hawthorn-trees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.26#The hall on the first floor, where “the restaurant” was situated, was a arge and long apartment encumbered with stools, chairs, benches, and tables, nd with a crippled, lame, old billiard-table. It was reached by a spiral taircase which terminated in the corner of the room at a square hole like the atchway of a ship.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.27#This room, lighted by a single narrow window, and by a lamp that was lways burning, had the air of a garret. All the four-footed furniture comported tself as though it had but three legs—the whitewashed walls had for their only rnament the following quatrain in honor of Mame Hucheloup:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.28#Elle étonne à dix pas, elle épouvente à deux, Une verrue habite en son nez asardeux; On tremble à chaque instant qu’elle ne vous la mouche Et qu’un beau our son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche.48
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.29#This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.30#Mame Hucheloup, a good likeness, went and came from morning till night efore this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity. Two serving-maids, amed Matelote and Gibelotte,49 and who had never been known by any other names, elped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables the jugs of poor wine, and the arious broths which were served to the hungry patrons in earthenware bowls. atelote, large, plump, redhaired, and noisy, the favorite ex-sultana of the efunct Hucheloup, was homelier than any mythological monster, be it what it ay; still, as it becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the istress, she was less homely than Mame Hucheloup. Gibelotte, tall, delicate, hite with a lymphatic pallor, with circles round her eyes, and drooping lids, lways languid and weary, afflicted with what may be called chronic lassitude, he first up in the house and the last in bed, waited on every one, even the ther maid, silently and gently, smiling through her fatigue with a vague and leepy smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.31#Before entering the restaurant room, the visitor read on the door the ollowing line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.1.32#Régale si tu peux et mange si tu l’oses.50
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.head#CHAPTER II—PRELIMINARY GAYETIES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.1#Laigle de Meaux, as the reader knows, lived more with Joly than elsewhere. e had a lodging, as a bird has one on a branch. The two friends lived together, te together, slept together. They had everything in common, even Musichetta, to ome extent. They were, what the subordinate monks who accompany monks are alled, _bini_. On the morning of the 5th of June, they went to Corinthe to reakfast. Joly, who was all stuffed up, had a catarrh which Laigle was eginning to share. Laigle’s coat was threadbare, but Joly was well dressed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.2#It was about nine o’clock in the morning, when they opened the door of orinthe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.3#They ascended to the first floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.4#Matelote and Gibelotte received them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.5#“Oysters, cheese, and ham,” said Laigle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.6#And they seated themselves at a table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.7#The wine-shop was empty; there was no one there but themselves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.8#Gibelotte, knowing Joly and Laigle, set a bottle of wine on the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.9#While they were busy with their first oysters, a head appeared at the atchway of the staircase, and a voice said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.10#“I am passing by. I smell from the street a delicious odor of Brie cheese. enter.” It was Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.11#Grantaire took a stool and drew up to the table.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.12#At the sight of Grantaire, Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on the able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.13#That made three.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.14#“Are you going to drink those two bottles?” Laigle inquired of rantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.15#Grantaire replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.16#“All are ingenious, thou alone art ingenuous. Two bottles never yet stonished a man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.17#The others had begun by eating, Grantaire began by drinking. Half a bottle as rapidly gulped down.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.18#“So you have a hole in your stomach?” began Laigle again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.19#“You have one in your elbow,” said Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.20#And after having emptied his glass, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.21#“Ah, by the way, Laigle of the funeral oration, your coat is old.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.22#“I should hope so,” retorted Laigle. “That’s why we get on well together, y coat and I. It has acquired all my folds, it does not bind me anywhere, it is oulded on my deformities, it falls in with all my movements, I am only onscious of it because it keeps me warm. Old coats are just like old riends.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.23#“That’s true,” ejaculated Joly, striking into the dialogue, “an old goat s an old abi” (_ami_, friend).
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.24#“Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up,” said rantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.25#“Grantaire,” demanded Laigle, “have you just come from the boulevard?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.26#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.27#“We have just seen the head of the procession pass, Joly and I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.28#“It’s a marvellous sight,” said Joly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.29#“How quiet this street is!” exclaimed Laigle. “Who would suspect that aris was turned upside down? How plainly it is to be seen that in former days here were nothing but convents here! In this neighborhood! Du Breul and Sauval ive a list of them, and so does the Abbé Lebeuf. They were all round here, they airly swarmed, booted and barefooted, shaven, bearded, gray, black, white, ranciscans, Minims, Capuchins, Carmelites, Little Augustines, Great Augustines, ld Augustines—there was no end of them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.30#“Don’t let’s talk of monks,” interrupted Grantaire, “it makes one want to cratch one’s self.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.31#Then he exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.32#“Bouh! I’ve just swallowed a bad oyster. Now hypochondria is taking ossession of me again. The oysters are spoiled, the servants are ugly. I hate he human race. I just passed through the Rue Richelieu, in front of the big ublic library. That pile of oyster-shells which is called a library is isgusting even to think of. What paper! What ink! What scrawling! And all that as been written! What rascal was it who said that man was a featherless iped?51 And then, I met a pretty girl of my acquaintance, who is as beautiful s the spring, worthy to be called Floréal, and who is delighted, enraptured, as appy as the angels, because a wretch yesterday, a frightful banker all spotted ith small-pox, deigned to take a fancy to her! Alas! woman keeps on the watch or a protector as much as for a lover; cats chase mice as well as birds. Two onths ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic, she adjusted little brass ings in the eyelet-holes of corsets, what do you call it? She sewed, she had a amp bed, she dwelt beside a pot of flowers, she was contented. Now here she is bankeress. This transformation took place last night. I met the victim this orning in high spirits. The hideous point about it is, that the jade is as retty to-day as she was yesterday. Her financier did not show in her face. oses have this advantage or disadvantage over women, that the traces left upon hem by caterpillars are visible. Ah! there is no morality on earth. I call to itness the myrtle, the symbol of love, the laurel, the symbol of air, the live, that ninny, the symbol of peace, the apple-tree which came nearest angling Adam with its pips, and the fig-tree, the grandfather of petticoats. As or right, do you know what right is? The Gauls covet Clusium, Rome protects lusium, and demands what wrong Clusium has done to them. Brennus answers: ‘The rong that Alba did to you, the wrong that Fidenæ did to you, the wrong that the ques, the Volsci, and the Sabines have done to you. They were your neighbors. he Clusians are ours. We understand neighborliness just as you do. You have tolen Alba, we shall take Clusium.’ Rome said: ‘You shall not take Clusium.’ rennus took Rome. Then he cried: ‘Væ victis!’ That is what right is. Ah! what easts of prey there are in this world! What eagles! It makes my flesh reep.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.33#He held out his glass to Joly, who filled it, then he drank and went on, aving hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine, of which no one, not even imself, had taken any notice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.34#“Brennus, who takes Rome, is an eagle; the banker who takes the grisette s an eagle. There is no more modesty in the one case than in the other. So we elieve in nothing. There is but one reality: drink. Whatever your opinion may e in favor of the lean cock, like the Canton of Uri, or in favor of the fat ock, like the Canton of Glaris, it matters little, drink. You talk to me of the oulevard, of that procession, _et cætera, et cætera_. Come now, is there going o be another revolution? This poverty of means on the part of the good God stounds me. He has to keep greasing the groove of events every moment. There is hitch, it won’t work. Quick, a revolution! The good God has his hands erpetually black with that cart-grease. If I were in his place, I’d be erfectly simple about it, I would not wind up my mechanism every minute, I’d ead the human race in a straightforward way, I’d weave matters mesh by mesh, ithout breaking the thread, I would have no provisional arrangements, I would ave no extraordinary repertory. What the rest of you call progress advances by eans of two motors, men and events. But, sad to say, from time to time, the xceptional becomes necessary. The ordinary troupe suffices neither for event or for men: among men geniuses are required, among events revolutions. Great ccidents are the law; the order of things cannot do without them; and, judging rom the apparition of comets, one would be tempted to think that Heaven itself inds actors needed for its performance. At the moment when one expects it the east, God placards a meteor on the wall of the firmament. Some queer star turns p, underlined by an enormous tail. And that causes the death of Cæsar. Brutus eals him a blow with a knife, and God a blow with a comet. _Crac_, and behold n aurora borealis, behold a revolution, behold a great man; ’93 in big letters, apoleon on guard, the comet of 1811 at the head of the poster. Ah! what a eautiful blue theatre all studded with unexpected flashes! Boum! Boum! xtraordinary show! Raise your eyes, boobies. Everything is in disorder, the tar as well as the drama. Good God, it is too much and not enough. These esources, gathered from exception, seem magnificence and poverty. My friends, rovidence has come down to expedients. What does a revolution prove? That God s in a quandry. He effects a _coup d‘état_ because he, God, has not been able o make both ends meet. In fact, this confirms me in my conjectures as to ehovah’s fortune; and when I see so much distress in heaven and on earth, from he bird who has not a grain of millet to myself without a hundred thousand ivres of income, when I see human destiny, which is very badly worn, and even oyal destiny, which is threadbare, witness the Prince de Condé hung, when I see inter, which is nothing but a rent in the zenith through which the wind blows, hen I see so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning on the rests of hills, when I see the drops of dew, those mock pearls, when I see the rost, that paste, when I see humanity ripped apart and events patched up, and o many spots on the sun and so many holes in the moon, when I see so much isery everywhere, I suspect that God is not rich. The appearance exists, it is rue, but I feel that he is hard up. He gives a revolution as a tradesman whose oney-box is empty gives a ball. God must not be judged from appearances. eneath the gilding of heaven I perceive a poverty-stricken universe. Creation s bankrupt. That is why I am discontented. Here it is the 4th of June, it is lmost night; ever since this morning I have been waiting for daylight to come; t has not come, and I bet that it won’t come all day. This is the inexactness f an ill-paid clerk. Yes, everything is badly arranged, nothing fits anything lse, this old world is all warped, I take my stand on the opposition, verything goes awry; the universe is a tease. It’s like children, those who ant them have none, and those who don’t want them have them. Total: I’m vexed. esides, Laigle de Meaux, that bald-head, offends my sight. It humiliates me to hink that I am of the same age as that baldy. However, I criticise, but I do ot insult. The universe is what it is. I speak here without evil intent and to ase my conscience. Receive, Eternal Father, the assurance of my distinguished onsideration. Ah! by all the saints of Olympus and by all the gods of paradise, was not intended to be a Parisian, that is to say, to rebound forever, like a huttlecock between two battledores, from the group of the loungers to the group f the roysterers. I was made to be a Turk, watching oriental houris all day ong, executing those exquisite Egyptian dances, as sensuous as the dream of a haste man, or a Beauceron peasant, or a Venetian gentleman surrounded by entlewoman, or a petty German prince, furnishing the half of a foot-soldier to he Germanic confederation, and occupying his leisure with drying his breeches n his hedge, that is to say, his frontier. Those are the positions for which I as born! Yes, I have said a Turk, and I will not retract. I do not understand ow people can habitually take Turks in bad part; Mohammed had his good points; espect for the inventor of seraglios with houris and paradises with odalisques! et us not insult Mohammedanism, the only religion which is ornamented with a en-roost! Now, I insist on a drink. The earth is a great piece of stupidity. nd it appears that they are going to fight, all those imbeciles, and to break ach other’s profiles and to massacre each other in the heart of summer, in the onth of June, when they might go off with a creature on their arm, to breathe he immense heaps of new-mown hay in the meadows! Really, people do commit ltogether too many follies. An old broken lantern which I have just seen at a ric-à-brac merchant’s suggests a reflection to my mind; it is time to enlighten he human race. Yes, behold me sad again. That’s what comes of swallowing an yster and a revolution the wrong way! I am growing melancholy once more. Oh! rightful old world. People strive, turn each other out, prostitute themselves, ill each other, and get used to it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.35#And Grantaire, after this fit of eloquence, had a fit of coughing, which as well earned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.36#“À propos of revolution,” said Joly, “it is decidedly abberent that Barius s in lub.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.37#“Does any one know with whom?” demanded Laigle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.38#“Do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.39#“No?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.40#“Do! I tell you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.41#“Marius’ love affairs!” exclaimed Grantaire. “I can imagine it. Marius is fog, and he must have found a vapor. Marius is of the race of poets. He who ays poet, says fool, madman, _Tymbræus Apollo_. Marius and his Marie, or his arion, or his Maria, or his Mariette. They must make a queer pair of lovers. I now just what it is like. Ecstasies in which they forget to kiss. Pure on arth, but joined in heaven. They are souls possessed of senses. They lie among he stars.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.42#Grantaire was attacking his second bottle and, possibly, his second arangue, when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of the stairs. t was a boy less than ten years of age, ragged, very small, yellow, with an odd hiz, a vivacious eye, an enormous amount of hair drenched with rain, and earing a contented air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.43#The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three, addressed imself to Laigle de Meaux.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.44#“Are you Monsieur Bossuet?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.45#“That is my nickname,” replied Laigle. “What do you want with me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.46#“This. A tall blonde fellow on the boulevard said to me: ‘Do you know other Hucheloup?’ I said: ‘Yes, Rue Chanvrerie, the old man’s widow;’ he said o me: ‘Go there. There you will find M. Bossuet. Tell him from me: “A B C”.’ t’s a joke that they’re playing on you, isn’t it. He gave me ten sous.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.47#“Joly, lend me ten sous,” said Laigle; and, turning to Grantaire: Grantaire, lend me ten sous.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.48#This made twenty sous, which Laigle handed to the lad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.49#“Thank you, sir,” said the urchin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.50#“What is your name?” inquired Laigle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.51#“Navet, Gavroche’s friend.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.52#“Stay with us,” said Laigle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.53#“Breakfast with us,” said Grantaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.54#The child replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.55#“I can’t, I belong in the procession, I’m the one to shout ‘Down with olignac!’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.56#And executing a prolonged scrape of his foot behind him, which is the most espectful of all possible salutes, he took his departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.57#The child gone, Grantaire took the word:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.58#“That is the pure-bred gamin. There are a great many varieties of the amin species. The notary’s gamin is called Skip-the-Gutter, the cook’s gamin is alled a scullion, the baker’s gamin is called a _mitron_, the lackey’s gamin is alled a groom, the marine gamin is called the cabin-boy, the soldier’s gamin is alled the drummer-boy, the painter’s gamin is called paint-grinder, the radesman’s gamin is called an errand-boy, the courtesan gamin is called the inion, the kingly gamin is called the dauphin, the god gamin is called the ambino.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.59#In the meantime, Laigle was engaged in reflection; he said half loud:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.60#“A B C, that is to say: the burial of Lamarque.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.61#“The tall blonde,” remarked Grantaire, “is Enjolras, who is sending you a arning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.62#“Shall we go?” ejaculated Bossuet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.63#“It’s raiding,” said Joly. “I have sworn to go through fire, but not hrough water. I don’t wand to ged a gold.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.64#“I shall stay here,” said Grantaire. “I prefer a breakfast to a earse.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.65#“Conclusion: we remain,” said Laigle. “Well, then, let us drink. Besides, e might miss the funeral without missing the riot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.66#“Ah! the riot, I am with you!” cried Joly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.67#Laigle rubbed his hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.68#“Now we’re going to touch up the revolution of 1830. As a matter of fact, t does hurt the people along the seams.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.69#“I don’t think much of your revolution,” said Grantaire. “I don’t execrate his Government. It is the crown tempered by the cotton night-cap. It is a ceptre ending in an umbrella. In fact, I think that to-day, with the present eather, Louis Philippe might utilize his royalty in two directions, he might xtend the tip of the sceptre end against the people, and open the umbrella end gainst heaven.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.70#The room was dark, large clouds had just finished the extinction of aylight. There was no one in the wine-shop, or in the street, every one having one off “to watch events.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.71#“Is it midday or midnight?” cried Bossuet. “You can’t see your hand before our face. Gibelotte, fetch a light.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.72#Grantaire was drinking in a melancholy way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.73#“Enjolras disdains me,” he muttered. “Enjolras said: ‘Joly is ill, rantaire is drunk.’ It was to Bossuet that he sent Navet. If he had come for e, I would have followed him. So much the worse for Enjolras! I won’t go to his uneral.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.74#This resolution once arrived at, Bossuet, Joly, and Grantaire did not stir rom the wine-shop. By two o’clock in the afternoon, the table at which they sat as covered with empty bottles. Two candles were burning on it, one in a flat opper candlestick which was perfectly green, the other in the neck of a cracked arafe. Grantaire had seduced Joly and Bossuet to wine; Bossuet and Joly had onducted Grantaire back towards cheerfulness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.75#As for Grantaire, he had got beyond wine, that merely moderate inspirer of reams, ever since midday. Wine enjoys only a conventional popularity with erious drinkers. There is, in fact, in the matter of inebriety, white magic and lack magic; wine is only white magic. Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams. he blackness of a terrible fit of drunkenness yawning before him, far from rresting him, attracted him. He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the eerglass. The beer-glass is the abyss. Having neither opium nor hashish on and, and being desirous of filling his brain with twilight, he had had recourse o that fearful mixture of brandy, stout, absinthe, which produces the most errible of lethargies. It is of these three vapors, beer, brandy, and absinthe, hat the lead of the soul is composed. They are three grooms; the celestial utterfly is drowned in them; and there are formed there in a membranous smoke, aguely condensed into the wing of the bat, three mute furies, Nightmare, Night, nd Death, which hover about the slumbering Psyche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.76#Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase; far from it. He was remendously gay, and Bossuet and Joly retorted. They clinked glasses. Grantaire dded to the eccentric accentuation of words and ideas, a peculiarity of esture; he rested his left fist on his knee with dignity, his arm forming a ight angle, and, with cravat untied, seated astride a stool, his full glass in is right hand, he hurled solemn words at the big maid-servant Matelote:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.77#“Let the doors of the palace be thrown open! Let every one be a member of he French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup. Let us rink.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.78#And turning to Madame Hucheloup, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.79#“Woman ancient and consecrated by use, draw near that I may contemplate hee!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.80#And Joly exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.81#“Matelote and Gibelotte, dod’t gib Grantaire anything more to drink. He as already devoured, since this bording, in wild prodigality, two francs and inety-five centibes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.82#And Grantaire began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.83#“Who has been unhooking the stars without my permission, and putting them n the table in the guise of candles?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.84#Bossuet, though very drunk, preserved his equanimity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.85#He was seated on the sill of the open window, wetting his back in the alling rain, and gazing at his two friends.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.86#All at once, he heard a tumult behind him, hurried footsteps, cries of “To rms!” He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis, at the end of the Rue de a Chanvrerie, Enjolras passing, gun in hand, and Gavroche with his pistol, euilly with his sword, Courfeyrac with his sword, and Jean Prouvaire with his lunderbuss, Combeferre with his gun, Bahorel with his gun, and the whole armed nd stormy rabble which was following them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.87#The Rue de la Chanvrerie was not more than a gunshot long. Bossuet mprovised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his mouth, and houted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.88#“Courfeyrac! Courfeyrac! Hohée!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.89#Courfeyrac heard the shout, caught sight of Bossuet, and advanced a few aces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie, shouting: “What do you want?” which crossed “Where are you going?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.90#“To make a barricade,” replied Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.91#“Well, here! This is a good place! Make it here!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.92#“That’s true, Aigle,” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.2.93#And at a signal from Courfeyrac, the mob flung themselves into the Rue de a Chanvrerie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.head#CHAPTER III—NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.1#The spot was, in fact, admirably adapted, the entrance to the street idened out, the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket without exit. orinthe created an obstacle, the Rue Mondétour was easily barricaded on the ight and the left, no attack was possible except from the Rue Saint-Denis, that s to say, in front, and in full sight. Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of fasting Hannibal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.2#Terror had seized on the whole street at the irruption of the mob. There as not a passer-by who did not get out of sight. In the space of a flash of ightning, in the rear, to right and left, shops, stables, area-doors, windows, linds, attic skylights, shutters of every description were closed, from the round floor to the roof. A terrified old woman fixed a mattress in front of her indow on two clothes-poles for drying linen, in order to deaden the effect of usketry. The wine-shop alone remained open; and that for a very good reason, hat the mob had rushed into it.—“Ah my God! Ah my God!” sighed Mame ucheloup.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.3#Bossuet had gone down to meet Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.4#Joly, who had placed himself at the window, exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.5#“Courfeyrac, you ought to have brought an umbrella. You will gatch old.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.6#In the meantime, in the space of a few minutes, twenty iron bars had been renched from the grated front of the wine-shop, ten fathoms of street had been npaved; Gavroche and Bahorel had seized in its passage, and overturned, the ray of a lime-dealer named Anceau; this dray contained three barrels of lime, hich they placed beneath the piles of paving-stones: Enjolras raised the cellar rap, and all the widow Hucheloup’s empty casks were used to flank the barrels f lime; Feuilly, with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks of ans, had backed up the barrels and the dray with two massive heaps of blocks of ough stone. Blocks which were improvised like the rest and procured no one nows where. The beams which served as props were torn from the neighboring ouse-fronts and laid on the casks. When Bossuet and Courfeyrac turned round, alf the street was already barred with a rampart higher than a man. There is othing like the hand of the populace for building everything that is built by emolishing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.7#Matelote and Gibelotte had mingled with the workers. Gibelotte went and ame loaded with rubbish. Her lassitude helped on the barricade. She served the arricade as she would have served wine, with a sleepy air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.8#An omnibus with two white horses passed the end of the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.9#Bossuet strode over the paving-stones, ran to it, stopped the driver, made he passengers alight, offered his hand to “the ladies,” dismissed the onductor, and returned, leading the vehicle and the horses by the bridle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.10#“Omnibuses,” said he, “do not pass the Corinthe. _Non licet omnibus adire orinthum_.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.11#An instant later, the horses were unharnessed and went off at their will, hrough the Rue Mondétour, and the omnibus lying on its side completed the bar cross the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.12#Mame Hucheloup, quite upset, had taken refuge in the first story.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.13#Her eyes were vague, and stared without seeing anything, and she cried in low tone. Her terrified shrieks did not dare to emerge from her throat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.14#“The end of the world has come,” she muttered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.15#Joly deposited a kiss on Mame Hucheloup’s fat, red, wrinkled neck, and aid to Grantaire: “My dear fellow, I have always regarded a woman’s neck as an nfinitely delicate thing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.16#But Grantaire attained to the highest regions of dithryamb. Matelote had ounted to the first floor once more, Grantaire seized her round her waist, and ave vent to long bursts of laughter at the window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.17#“Matelote is homely!” he cried: “Matelote is of a dream of ugliness! atelote is a chimæra. This is the secret of her birth: a Gothic Pygmalion, who as making gargoyles for cathedrals, fell in love with one of them, the most orrible, one fine morning. He besought Love to give it life, and this produced atelote. Look at her, citizens! She has chromate-of-lead-colored hair, like itian’s mistress, and she is a good girl. I guarantee that she will fight well. very good girl contains a hero. As for Mother Hucheloup, she’s an old warrior. ook at her moustaches! She inherited them from her husband. A hussar indeed! he will fight too. These two alone will strike terror to the heart of the anlieue. Comrades, we shall overthrow the government as true as there are ifteen intermediary acids between margaric acid and formic acid; however, that s a matter of perfect indifference to me. Gentlemen, my father always detested e because I could not understand mathematics. I understand only love and iberty. I am Grantaire, the good fellow. Having never had any money, I never cquired the habit of it, and the result is that I have never lacked it; but, if had been rich, there would have been no more poor people! You would have seen! h, if the kind hearts only had fat purses, how much better things would go! I icture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild’s fortune! How much good he would o! Matelote, embrace me! You are voluptuous and timid! You have cheeks which nvite the kiss of a sister, and lips which claim the kiss of a lover.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.18#“Hold your tongue, you cask!” said Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.19#Grantaire retorted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.20#“I am the capitoul52 and the master of the floral games!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.21#Enjolras, who was standing on the crest of the barricade, gun in hand, aised his beautiful, austere face. Enjolras, as the reader knows, had something f the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition. He would have perished at hermopylæ with Leonidas, and burned at Drogheda with Cromwell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.22#“Grantaire,” he shouted, “go get rid of the fumes of your wine somewhere lse than here. This is the place for enthusiasm, not for drunkenness. Don’t isgrace the barricade!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.23#This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire. One would have aid that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face. He seemed to be endered suddenly sober.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.24#He sat down, put his elbows on a table near the window, looked at Enjolras ith indescribable gentleness, and said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.25#“Let me sleep here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.26#“Go and sleep somewhere else,” cried Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.27#But Grantaire, still keeping his tender and troubled eyes fixed on him, eplied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.28#“Let me sleep here,—until I die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.29#Enjolras regarded him with disdainful eyes:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.30#“Grantaire, you are incapable of believing, of thinking, of willing, of iving, and of dying.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.31#Grantaire replied in a grave tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.32#“You will see.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.3.33#He stammered a few more unintelligible words, then his head fell heavily n the table, and, as is the usual effect of the second period of inebriety, nto which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him, an instant later he had allen asleep.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.head#CHAPTER IV—AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.1#Bahorel, in ecstasies over the barricade, shouted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.2#“Here’s the street in its low-necked dress! How well it looks!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.3#Courfeyrac, as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent, sought to onsole the widowed proprietress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.4#“Mother Hucheloup, weren’t you complaining the other day because you had ad a notice served on you for infringing the law, because Gibelotte shook a ounterpane out of your window?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.5#“Yes, my good Monsieur Courfeyrac. Ah! good Heavens, are you going to put hat table of mine in your horror, too? And it was for the counterpane, and also or a pot of flowers which fell from the attic window into the street, that the overnment collected a fine of a hundred francs. If that isn’t an abomination, hat is!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.6#“Well, Mother Hucheloup, we are avenging you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.7#Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefit hich she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account. She was atisfied after the manner of that Arab woman, who, having received a box on the ar from her husband, went to complain to her father, and cried for vengeance, aying: “Father, you owe my husband affront for affront.” The father asked: “On hich cheek did you receive the blow?” “On the left cheek.” The father slapped er right cheek and said: “Now you are satisfied. Go tell your husband that he oxed my daughter’s ears, and that I have accordingly boxed his wife’s.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.8#The rain had ceased. Recruits had arrived. Workmen had brought under their louses a barrel of powder, a basket containing bottles of vitriol, two or three arnival torches, and a basket filled with fire-pots, “left over from the King’s estival.” This festival was very recent, having taken place on the 1st of May. t was said that these munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg aint-Antoine named Pépin. They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la hanvrerie, the lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis, and all the anterns in the surrounding streets, de Mondétour, du Cygne, des Prêcheurs, and e la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.9#Enjolras, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac directed everything. Two barricades ere now in process of construction at once, both of them resting on the orinthe house and forming a right angle; the larger shut off the Rue de la hanvrerie, the other closed the Rue Mondétour, on the side of the Rue de Cygne. his last barricade, which was very narrow, was constructed only of casks and aving-stones. There were about fifty workers on it; thirty were armed with uns; for, on their way, they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer’s hop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.10#Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley than this roop. One had a round-jacket, a cavalry sabre, and two holster-pistols, another as in his shirt-sleeves, with a round hat, and a powder-horn slung at his side, third wore a plastron of nine sheets of gray paper and was armed with a addler’s awl. There was one who was shouting: “Let us exterminate them to the ast man and die at the point of our bayonet.” This man had no bayonet. Another pread out over his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National uardsman, the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscription n red worsted: _Public Order_. There were a great many guns bearing the numbers f the legions, few hats, no cravats, many bare arms, some pikes. Add to this, ll ages, all sorts of faces, small, pale young men, and bronzed longshoremen. ll were in haste; and as they helped each other, they discussed the possible hances. That they would receive succor about three o’clock in the morning—that hey were sure of one regiment, that Paris would rise. Terrible sayings with hich was mingled a sort of cordial joviality. One would have pronounced them rothers, but they did not know each other’s names. Great perils have this fine haracteristic, that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers. A fire had een lighted in the kitchen, and there they were engaged in moulding into ullets, pewter mugs, spoons, forks, and all the brass table-ware of the stablishment. In the midst of it all, they drank. Caps and buckshot were mixed ell-mell on the tables with glasses of wine. In the billiard-hall, Mame ucheloup, Matelote, and Gibelotte, variously modified by terror, which had tupefied one, rendered another breathless, and roused the third, were tearing p old dish-cloths and making lint; three insurgents were assisting them, three ushy-haired, jolly blades with beards and moustaches, who plucked away at the inen with the fingers of seamstresses and who made them tremble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.11#The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac, Combeferre, and Enjolras had bserved at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Rue des illettes, was at work on the smaller barricade and was making himself useful here. Gavroche was working on the larger one. As for the young man who had been aiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings, and who had inquired for M. Marius, he ad disappeared at about the time when the omnibus had been overturned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.12#Gavroche, completely carried away and radiant, had undertaken to get verything in readiness. He went, came, mounted, descended, re-mounted, histled, and sparkled. He seemed to be there for the encouragement of all. Had e any incentive? Yes, certainly, his poverty; had he wings? yes, certainly, his oy. Gavroche was a whirlwind. He was constantly visible, he was incessantly udible. He filled the air, as he was everywhere at once. He was a sort of lmost irritating ubiquity; no halt was possible with him. The enormous arricade felt him on its haunches. He troubled the loungers, he excited the dle, he reanimated the weary, he grew impatient over the thoughtful, he nspired gayety in some, and breath in others, wrath in others, movement in all, ow pricking a student, now biting an artisan; he alighted, paused, flew off gain, hovered over the tumult, and the effort, sprang from one party to nother, murmuring and humming, and harassed the whole company; a fly on the mmense revolutionary coach.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.13#Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in his little ungs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.14#“Courage! more paving-stones! more casks! more machines! Where are you ow? A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with! Your barricade is very mall. It must be carried up. Put everything on it, fling everything there, tick it all in. Break down the house. A barricade is Mother Gibou’s tea. Hullo, ere’s a glass door.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.15#This elicited an exclamation from the workers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.16#“A glass door? what do you expect us to do with a glass door, ubercle?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.17#“Hercules yourselves!” retorted Gavroche. “A glass door is an excellent hing in a barricade. It does not prevent an attack, but it prevents the enemy aking it. So you’ve never prigged apples over a wall where there were broken ottles? A glass door cuts the corns of the National Guard when they try to ount on the barricade. Pardi! glass is a treacherous thing. Well, you haven’t a ery wildly lively imagination, comrades.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.18#However, he was furious over his triggerless pistol. He went from one to nother, demanding: “A gun, I want a gun! Why don’t you give me a gun?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.19#“Give you a gun!” said Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.20#“Come now!” said Gavroche, “why not? I had one in 1830 when we had a ispute with Charles X.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.21#Enjolras shrugged his shoulders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.22#“When there are enough for the men, we will give some to the hildren.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.23#Gavroche wheeled round haughtily, and answered:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.24#“If you are killed before me, I shall take yours.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.25#“Gamin!” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.26#“Greenhorn!” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.27#A dandy who had lost his way and who lounged past the end of the street reated a diversion! Gavroche shouted to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.28#“Come with us, young fellow! well now, don’t we do anything for this old ountry of ours?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.4.29#The dandy fled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.head#CHAPTER V—PREPARATIONS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.1#The journals of the day which said that that _nearly impregnable tructure_, of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, as they call it, eached to the level of the first floor, were mistaken. The fact is, that it did ot exceed an average height of six or seven feet. It was built in such a manner hat the combatants could, at their will, either disappear behind it or dominate he barrier and even scale its crest by means of a quadruple row of aving-stones placed on top of each other and arranged as steps in the interior. n the outside, the front of the barricade, composed of piles of paving-stones nd casks bound together by beams and planks, which were entangled in the wheels f Anceau’s dray and of the overturned omnibus, had a bristling and inextricable spect.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.2#An aperture large enough to allow a man to pass through had been made etween the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade which was urthest from the wine-shop, so that an exit was possible at this point. The ole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with ropes, and a red flag, astened to this pole, floated over the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.3#The little Mondétour barricade, hidden behind the wine-shop building, was ot visible. The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt. Enjolras and ourfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other fragment of the Rue ondétour which opens through the Rue des Prêcheurs an issue into the Halles, ishing, no doubt, to preserve a possible communication with the outside, and ot entertaining much fear of an attack through the dangerous and difficult treet of the Rue des Prêcheurs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.4#With the exception of this issue which was left free, and which constituted hat Folard in his strategical style would have termed a branch and taking into ccount, also, the narrow cutting arranged on the Rue de la Chanvrerie, the nterior of the barricade, where the wine-shop formed a salient angle, presented n irregular square, closed on all sides. There existed an interval of twenty aces between the grand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background f the street, so that one might say that the barricade rested on these houses, ll inhabited, but closed from top to bottom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.5#All this work was performed without any hindrance, in less than an hour, nd without this handful of bold men seeing a single bear-skin cap or a single ayonet make their appearance. The very bourgeois who still ventured at this our of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a glance at the Rue de la hanvrerie, caught sight of the barricade, and redoubled their pace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.6#The two barricades being finished, and the flag run up, a table was dragged ut of the wine-shop; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table. Enjolras brought the quare coffer, and Courfeyrac opened it. This coffer was filled with cartridges. hen the mob saw the cartridges, a tremor ran through the bravest, and a omentary silence ensued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.7#Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.8#Each one received thirty cartridges. Many had powder, and set about making thers with the bullets which they had run. As for the barrel of powder, it tood on a table on one side, near the door, and was held in reserve.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.9#The alarm beat which ran through all Paris, did not cease, but it had inally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which they no longer aid any attention. This noise retreated at times, and again drew near, with elancholy undulations.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.10#They loaded the guns and carbines, all together, without haste, with olemn gravity. Enjolras went and stationed three sentinels outside the arricades, one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, the second in the Rue des rêcheurs, the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.5.11#Then, the barricades having been built, the posts assigned, the guns oaded, the sentinels stationed, they waited, alone in those redoubtable streets hrough which no one passed any longer, surrounded by those dumb houses which eemed dead and in which no human movement palpitated, enveloped in the eepening shades of twilight which was drawing on, in the midst of that silence hrough which something could be felt advancing, and which had about it omething tragic and terrifying, isolated, armed, determined, and tranquil.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.head#CHAPTER VI—WAITING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.1#During those hours of waiting, what did they do?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.2#We must needs tell, since this is a matter of history.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.3#While the men made bullets and the women lint, while a large saucepan of elted brass and lead, destined to the bullet-mould smoked over a glowing razier, while the sentinels watched, weapon in hand, on the barricade, while njolras, whom it was impossible to divert, kept an eye on the sentinels, ombeferre, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, Feuilly, Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and ome others, sought each other out and united as in the most peaceful days of heir conversations in their student life, and, in one corner of this wine-shop hich had been converted into a casement, a couple of paces distant from the edoubt which they had built, with their carbines loaded and primed resting gainst the backs of their chairs, these fine young fellows, so close to a upreme hour, began to recite love verses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.4#What verses? These:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.5#Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie, Lorsque nous étions si jeunes tous eux, Et que nous n’avions au cœur d’autre envie Que d‘être bien mis et d‘être moureux,
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.6#Lorsqu’en ajoutant votre âge à mon âge, Nous ne comptions pas à deux uarante ans, Et que, dans notre humble et petit ménage, Tout, même l’hiver, ous était printemps?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.7#Beaux jours! Manuel était fier et sage, Paris s’asseyait à de saints anquets, Foy lançait la foudre, et votre corsage Avait une épingle où je me iquais.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.8#Tout vous contemplait. Avocat sans causes, Quand je vous menais au Prado îner, Vous étiez jolie au point que les roses Me faisaient l’effet de se etourner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.9#Je les entendais dire: Est elle belle! Comme elle sent bon! Quels cheveux à lots! Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile, Son bonnet charmant est à peine clos.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.10#J’errais avec toi, pressant ton bras souple. Les passants croyaient que ’amour charmé Avait marié, dans notre heureux couple, Le doux mois d’avril au eau mois de mai.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.11#Nous vivions cachés, contents, porte close, Dévorant l’amour, bon fruit éfendu, Ma bouche n’avait pas dit une chose Que déjà ton cœur avait épondu.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.12#La Sorbonne était l’endroit bucolique Où je t’adorais du soir au matin. ’est ainsi qu’une âme amoureuse applique La carte du Tendre au pays Latin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.13#O place Maubert! O place Dauphine! Quand, dans le taudis frais et rintanier, Tu tirais ton bas sur ta jambe fine, Je voyais un astre au fond du renier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.14#J’ai fort lu Platon, mais rien ne m’en reste; Mieux que Malebranche et que amennais, Tu me démontrais la bonté céleste Avec une fleur que tu me onnais.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.15#Je t’obéissais, tu m‘étais soumise; O grenier doré! te lacer! te voir ller et venir dès l’aube en chemise, Mirant ton jeune front à ton vieux iroir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.16#Et qui donc pourrait perdre la mémoire De ces temps d’aurore et de irmament, De rubans, de fleurs, de gaze et de moire, Où l’amour bégaye un argot harmant?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.17#Nos jardins étaient un pot de tulipe; Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon; e prenais le bol de terre de pipe, Et je te donnais le tasse en japon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.18#Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire! Ton manchon brûlé, ton boa erdu! Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare Qu’un soir pour souper nons vons vendu!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.19#J‘étais mendiant et toi charitable. Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et onds. Dante in folio nous servait de table Pour manger gaîment un cent de arrons.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.20#La première fois qu’en mon joyeux bouge Je pris un baiser à ta lèvre en eu, Quand tu t’en allais décoiffée et rouge, Je restai tout pâle et je crus en ieu!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.21#Te rappelles-tu nos bonheurs sans nombre, Et tous ces fichus changés en hiffons? Oh que de soupirs, de nos cœurs pleins d’ombre, Se sont envolés dans es cieux profonds!53
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.22#The hour, the spot, these souvenirs of youth recalled, a few stars which egan to twinkle in the sky, the funeral repose of those deserted streets, the mminence of the inexorable adventure, which was in preparation, gave a pathetic harm to these verses murmured in a low tone in the dusk by Jean Prouvaire, who, s we have said, was a gentle poet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.23#In the meantime, a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade, and in he large one, one of those wax torches such as are to be met with on hrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks, on their way to la ourtille. These torches, as the reader has seen, came from the Faubourg aint-Antoine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.24#The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving-stones closed on hree sides to shelter it from the wind, and disposed in such a fashion that all he light fell on the flag. The street and the barricade remained sunk in gloom, nd nothing was to be seen except the red flag formidably illuminated as by an normous dark-lantern.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.6.25#This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag, with an indescribable and errible purple.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE MAN RECRUITED IN THE RUE DES BILLETTES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.1#Night was fully come, nothing made its appearance. All that they heard was onfused noises, and at intervals, fusillades; but these were rare, badly ustained and distant. This respite, which was thus prolonged, was a sign that he Government was taking its time, and collecting its forces. These fifty men ere waiting for sixty thousand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.2#Enjolras felt attacked by that impatience which seizes on strong souls on he threshold of redoubtable events. He went in search of Gavroche, who had set o making cartridges in the tap-room, by the dubious light of two candles placed n the counter by way of precaution, on account of the powder which was cattered on the tables. These two candles cast no gleam outside. The insurgents ad, moreover, taken pains not to have any light in the upper stories.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.3#Gavroche was deeply preoccupied at that moment, but not precisely with his artridges. The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered the tap-room and ad seated himself at the table which was the least lighted. A musket of large odel had fallen to his share, and he held it between his legs. Gavroche, who ad been, up to that moment, distracted by a hundred “amusing” things, had not ven seen this man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.4#When he entered, Gavroche followed him mechanically with his eyes, admiring is gun; then, all at once, when the man was seated, the street urchin sprang to is feet. Any one who had spied upon that man up to that moment, would have seen hat he was observing everything in the barricade and in the band of insurgents, ith singular attention; but, from the moment when he had entered this room, he ad fallen into a sort of brown study, and no longer seemed to see anything that as going on. The gamin approached this pensive personage, and began to step round him on tiptoe, as one walks in the vicinity of a person whom one is fraid of waking. At the same time, over his childish countenance which was, at nce so impudent and so serious, so giddy and so profound, so gay and so eart-breaking, passed all those grimaces of an old man which signify: Ah bah! mpossible! My sight is bad! I am dreaming! can this be? no, it is not! but yes! hy, no! etc. Gavroche balanced on his heels, clenched both fists in his ockets, moved his neck around like a bird, expended in a gigantic pout all the agacity of his lower lip. He was astounded, uncertain, incredulous, convinced, azzled. He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart, iscovering a Venus among the blowsy females, and the air of an amateur ecognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs. His whole being was at work, the nstinct which scents out, and the intelligence which combines. It was evident hat a great event had happened in Gavroche’s life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.5#It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolras ccosted him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.6#“You are small,” said Enjolras, “you will not be seen. Go out of the arricade, slip along close to the houses, skirmish about a bit in the streets, nd come back and tell me what is going on.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.7#Gavroche raised himself on his haunches.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.8#“So the little chaps are good for something! that’s very lucky! I’ll go! In he meanwhile, trust to the little fellows, and distrust the big ones.” And avroche, raising his head and lowering his voice, added, as he indicated the an of the Rue des Billettes: “Do you see that big fellow there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.9#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.10#“He’s a police spy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.11#“Are you sure of it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.12#“It isn’t two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the Port Royal, here I was taking the air, by my ear.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.13#Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a very low one to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at hand. The man eft the room, and returned almost immediately, accompanied by three others. The our men, four porters with broad shoulders, went and placed themselves without oing anything to attract his attention, behind the table on which the man of he Rue des Billettes was leaning with his elbows. They were evidently ready to url themselves upon him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.14#Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.15#“Who are you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.16#At this abrupt query, the man started. He plunged his gaze deep into njolras’ clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter’s meaning. He smiled with smile than which nothing more disdainful, more energetic, and more resolute ould be seen in the world, and replied with haughty gravity:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.17#“I see what it is. Well, yes!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.18#“You are a police spy?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.19#“I am an agent of the authorities.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.20#“And your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.21#“Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.22#Enjolras made a sign to the four men. In the twinkling of an eye, before avert had time to turn round, he was collared, thrown down, pinioned and earched.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.23#They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces of glass, nd bearing on one side the arms of France, engraved, and with this motto: Supervision and vigilance_, and on the other this note: “JAVERT, inspector of olice, aged fifty-two,” and the signature of the Prefect of Police of that day, . Gisquet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.24#Besides this, he had his watch and his purse, which contained several gold ieces. They left him his purse and his watch. Under the watch, at the bottom of is fob, they felt and seized a paper in an envelope, which Enjolras unfolded, nd on which he read these five lines, written in the very hand of the Prefect f Police:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.25#“As soon as his political mission is accomplished, Inspector Javert will ake sure, by special supervision, whether it is true that the malefactors have nstituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine, near the Jena bridge.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.26#The search ended, they lifted Javert to his feet, bound his arms behind is back, and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of the room hich had formerly given the wine-shop its name.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.27#Gavroche, who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approved of verything with a silent toss of his head, stepped up to Javert and said to im:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.28#“It’s the mouse who has caught the cat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.29#All this was so rapidly executed, that it was all over when those about he wine-shop noticed it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.30#Javert had not uttered a single cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.31#At the sight of Javert bound to the post, Courfeyrac, Bossuet, Joly, ombeferre, and the men scattered over the two barricades came running up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.32#Javert, with his back to the post, and so surrounded with ropes that he ould not make a movement, raised his head with the intrepid serenity of the man ho has never lied.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.33#“He is a police spy,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.34#And turning to Javert: “You will be shot ten minutes before the barricade s taken.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.35#Javert replied in his most imperious tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.36#“Why not at once?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.37#“We are saving our powder.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.38#“Then finish the business with a blow from a knife.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.39#“Spy,” said the handsome Enjolras, “we are judges and not assassins.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.40#Then he called Gavroche:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.41#“Here you! go about your business! Do what I told you!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.42#“I’m going!” cried Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.43#And halting as he was on the point of setting out:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.44#“By the way, you will give me his gun!” and he added: “I leave you the usician, but I want the clarinet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.7.45#The gamin made the military salute and passed gayly through the opening in he large barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—MANY INTERROGATION POINTS WITH REGARD TO A CERTAIN LE ABUC WHOSE NAME MAY NOT HAVE BEEN LE CABUC
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.1#The tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete, the eader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a evolutionary birth, which contain convulsion mingled with effort, in their xact and real relief, were we to omit, in the sketch here outlined, an incident ull of epic and savage horror which occurred almost immediately after avroche’s departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.2#Mobs, as the reader knows, are like a snowball, and collect as they roll long, a throng of tumultuous men. These men do not ask each other whence they ome. Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led by Enjolras, ombeferre, and Courfeyrac, there had been a person wearing the jacket of a treet porter, which was very threadbare on the shoulders, who gesticulated and ociferated, and who had the look of a drunken savage. This man, whose name or ickname was Le Cabuc, and who was, moreover, an utter stranger to those who retended to know him, was very drunk, or assumed the appearance of being so, nd had seated himself with several others at a table which they had dragged utside of the wine-shop. This Cabuc, while making those who vied with him drunk eemed to be examining with a thoughtful air the large house at the extremity of he barricade, whose five stories commanded the whole street and faced the Rue aint-Denis. All at once he exclaimed:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.3#“Do you know, comrades, it is from that house yonder that we must fire. hen we are at the windows, the deuce is in it if any one can advance into the treet!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.4#“Yes, but the house is closed,” said one of the drinkers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.5#“Let us knock!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.6#“They will not open.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.7#“Let us break in the door!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.8#Le Cabuc runs to the door, which had a very massive knocker, and knocks. he door opens not. He strikes a second blow. No one answers. A third stroke. he same silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.9#“Is there any one here?” shouts Cabuc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.10#Nothing stirs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.11#Then he seizes a gun and begins to batter the door with the butt end.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.12#It was an ancient alley door, low, vaulted, narrow, solid, entirely of ak, lined on the inside with a sheet of iron and iron stays, a genuine prison ostern. The blows from the butt end of the gun made the house tremble, but did ot shake the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.13#Nevertheless, it is probable that the inhabitants were disturbed, for a iny, square window was finally seen to open on the third story, and at this perture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-haired old man, who as the porter, and who held a candle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.14#The man who was knocking paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.15#“Gentlemen,” said the porter, “what do you want?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.16#“Open!” said Cabuc.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.17#“That cannot be, gentlemen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.18#“Open, nevertheless.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.19#“Impossible, gentlemen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.20#Le Cabuc took his gun and aimed at the porter; but as he was below, and as t was very dark, the porter did not see him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.21#“Will you open, yes or no?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.22#“No, gentlemen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.23#“Do you say no?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.24#“I say no, my goo—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.25#The porter did not finish. The shot was fired; the ball entered under his hin and came out at the nape of his neck, after traversing the jugular ein.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.26#The old man fell back without a sigh. The candle fell and was xtinguished, and nothing more was to be seen except a motionless head lying on he sill of the small window, and a little whitish smoke which floated off owards the roof.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.27#“There!” said Le Cabuc, dropping the butt end of his gun to the avement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.28#He had hardly uttered this word, when he felt a hand laid on his shoulder ith the weight of an eagle’s talon, and he heard a voice saying to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.29#“On your knees.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.30#The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras’ cold, white ace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.31#Enjolras held a pistol in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.32#He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.33#He had seized Cabuc’s collar, blouse, shirt, and suspender with his left and.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.34#“On your knees!” he repeated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.35#And, with an imperious motion, the frail young man of twenty years bent he thickset and sturdy porter like a reed, and brought him to his knees in the ire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.36#Le Cabuc attempted to resist, but he seemed to have been seized by a uperhuman hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.37#Enjolras, pale, with bare neck and dishevelled hair, and his woman’s face, ad about him at that moment something of the antique Themis. His dilated ostrils, his downcast eyes, gave to his implacable Greek profile that xpression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which, as the ancient world iewed the matter, befit Justice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.38#The whole barricade hastened up, then all ranged themselves in a circle at distance, feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the presence of he thing which they were about to behold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.39#Le Cabuc, vanquished, no longer tried to struggle, and trembled in every imb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.40#Enjolras released him and drew out his watch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.41#“Collect yourself,” said he. “Think or pray. You have one minute.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.42#“Mercy!” murmured the murderer; then he dropped his head and stammered a ew inarticulate oaths.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.43#Enjolras never took his eyes off of him: he allowed a minute to pass, then e replaced his watch in his fob. That done, he grasped Le Cabuc by the hair, as he latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees and shrieked, and placed the uzzle of the pistol to his ear. Many of those intrepid men, who had so ranquilly entered upon the most terrible of adventures, turned aside their eads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.44#An explosion was heard, the assassin fell to the pavement face ownwards.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.45#Enjolras straightened himself up, and cast a convinced and severe glance round him. Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.46#“Throw that outside.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.47#Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch, which was still agitated y the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled, and flung it over he little barricade into the Rue Mondétour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.48#Enjolras was thoughtful. It is impossible to say what grandiose shadows lowly spread over his redoubtable serenity. All at once he raised his oice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.49#A silence fell upon them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.50#“Citizens,” said Enjolras, “what that man did is frightful, what I have one is horrible. He killed, therefore I killed him. I had to do it, because nsurrection must have its discipline. Assassination is even more of a crime ere than elsewhere; we are under the eyes of the Revolution, we are the priests f the Republic, we are the victims of duty, and must not be possible to slander ur combat. I have, therefore, tried that man, and condemned him to death. As or myself, constrained as I am to do what I have done, and yet abhorring it, I ave judged myself also, and you shall soon see to what I have condemned yself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.51#Those who listened to him shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.52#“We will share thy fate,” cried Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.53#“So be it,” replied Enjolras. “One word more. In executing this man, I ave obeyed necessity; but necessity is a monster of the old world, necessity’s ame is Fatality. Now, the law of progress is, that monsters shall disappear efore the angels, and that Fatality shall vanish before Fraternity. It is a bad oment to pronounce the word love. No matter, I do pronounce it. And I glorify t. Love, the future is thine. Death, I make use of thee, but I hate thee. itizens, in the future there will be neither darkness nor thunderbolts; neither erocious ignorance, nor bloody retaliation. As there will be no more Satan, here will be no more Michael. In the future no one will kill any one else, the arth will beam with radiance, the human race will love. The day will come, itizens, when all will be concord, harmony, light, joy and life; it will come, nd it is in order that it may come that we are about to die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.54#Enjolras ceased. His virgin lips closed; and he remained for some time tanding on the spot where he had shed blood, in marble immobility. His staring ye caused those about him to speak in low tones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.55#Jean Prouvaire and Combeferre pressed each other’s hands silently, and, eaning against each other in an angle of the barricade, they watched with an dmiration in which there was some compassion, that grave young man, executioner nd priest, composed of light, like crystal, and also of rock.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.56#Let us say at once that later on, after the action, when the bodies were aken to the morgue and searched, a police agent’s card was found on Le Cabuc. he author of this book had in his hands, in 1848, the special report on this ubject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.57#We will add, that if we are to believe a tradition of the police, which is trange but probably well founded, Le Cabuc was Claquesous. The fact is, that ating from the death of Le Cabuc, there was no longer any question of laquesous. Claquesous had nowhere left any trace of his disappearance; he would eem to have amalgamated himself with the invisible. His life had been all hadows, his end was night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.58#The whole insurgent group was still under the influence of the emotion of hat tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quickly terminated, when ourfeyrac again beheld on the barricade, the small young man who had inquired f him that morning for Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.12.8.59#This lad, who had a bold and reckless air, had come by night to join the nsurgents.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.head#BOOK THIRTEENTH—MARIUS ENTERS THE SHADOW
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.head#CHAPTER I—FROM THE RUE PLUMET TO THE QUARTIER SAINT-DENIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.1#The voice which had summoned Marius through the twilight to the barricade f the Rue de la Chanvrerie, had produced on him the effect of the voice of estiny. He wished to die; the opportunity presented itself; he knocked at the oor of the tomb, a hand in the darkness offered him the key. These melancholy penings which take place in the gloom before despair, are tempting. Marius hrust aside the bar which had so often allowed him to pass, emerged from the arden, and said: “I will go.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.2#Mad with grief, no longer conscious of anything fixed or solid in his rain, incapable of accepting anything thenceforth of fate after those two onths passed in the intoxication of youth and love, overwhelmed at once by all he reveries of despair, he had but one desire remaining, to make a speedy end f all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.3#He set out at rapid pace. He found himself most opportunely armed, as he ad Javert’s pistols with him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.4#The young man of whom he thought that he had caught a glimpse, had vanished rom his sight in the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.5#Marius, who had emerged from the Rue Plumet by the boulevard, traversed the splanade and the bridge of the Invalides, the Champs-Élysées, the Place Louis V., and reached the Rue de Rivoli. The shops were open there, the gas was urning under the arcades, women were making their purchases in the stalls, eople were eating ices in the Café Laiter, and nibbling small cakes at the nglish pastry-cook’s shop. Only a few posting-chaises were setting out at a allop from the Hôtel des Princes and the Hôtel Meurice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.6#Marius entered the Rue Saint-Honoré through the Passage Delorme. There the hops were closed, the merchants were chatting in front of their half-open oors, people were walking about, the street lanterns were lighted, beginning ith the first floor, all the windows were lighted as usual. There was cavalry n the Place du Palais-Royal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.7#Marius followed the Rue Saint-Honoré. In proportion as he left the alais-Royal behind him, there were fewer lighted windows, the shops were fast hut, no one was chatting on the thresholds, the street grew sombre, and, at the ame time, the crowd increased in density. For the passers-by now amounted to a rowd. No one could be seen to speak in this throng, and yet there arose from it dull, deep murmur.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.8#Near the fountain of the Arbre-Sec, there were “assemblages”, motionless nd gloomy groups which were to those who went and came as stones in the midst f running water.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.9#At the entrance to the Rue des Prouvaires, the crowd no longer walked. It ormed a resisting, massive, solid, compact, almost impenetrable block of people ho were huddled together, and conversing in low tones. There were hardly any lack coats or round hats now, but smock frocks, blouses, caps, and bristling nd cadaverous heads. This multitude undulated confusedly in the nocturnal loom. Its whisperings had the hoarse accent of a vibration. Although not one of hem was walking, a dull trampling was audible in the mire. Beyond this dense ortion of the throng, in the Rue du Roule, in the Rue des Prouvaires, and in he extension of the Rue Saint-Honoré, there was no longer a single window in hich a candle was burning. Only the solitary and diminishing rows of lanterns ould be seen vanishing into the street in the distance. The lanterns of that ate resembled large red stars, hanging to ropes, and shed upon the pavement a hadow which had the form of a huge spider. These streets were not deserted. here could be descried piles of guns, moving bayonets, and troops bivouacking. o curious observer passed that limit. There circulation ceased. There the abble ended and the army began.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.10#Marius willed with the will of a man who hopes no more. He had been ummoned, he must go. He found a means to traverse the throng and to pass the ivouac of the troops, he shunned the patrols, he avoided the sentinels. He made circuit, reached the Rue de Béthisy, and directed his course towards the alles. At the corner of the Rue des Bourdonnais, there were no longer any anterns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.11#After having passed the zone of the crowd, he had passed the limits of the roops; he found himself in something startling. There was no longer a asser-by, no longer a soldier, no longer a light, there was no one; solitude, ilence, night, I know not what chill which seized hold upon one. Entering a treet was like entering a cellar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.12#He continued to advance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.13#He took a few steps. Some one passed close to him at a run. Was it a man? r a woman? Were there many of them? he could not have told. It had passed and anished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.14#Proceeding from circuit to circuit, he reached a lane which he judged to e the Rue de la Poterie; near the middle of this street, he came in contact ith an obstacle. He extended his hands. It was an overturned wagon; his foot ecognized pools of water, gullies, and paving-stones scattered and piled up. A arricade had been begun there and abandoned. He climbed over the stones and ound himself on the other side of the barrier. He walked very near the treet-posts, and guided himself along the walls of the houses. A little beyond he barricade, it seemed to him that he could make out something white in front f him. He approached, it took on a form. It was two white horses; the horses of he omnibus harnessed by Bossuet in the morning, who had been straying at random ll day from street to street, and had finally halted there, with the weary atience of brutes who no more understand the actions of men, than man nderstands the actions of Providence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.15#Marius left the horses behind him. As he was approaching a street which eemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social, a shot coming no one knows hence, and traversing the darkness at random, whistled close by him, and the ullet pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended above his head over a airdresser’s shop. This pierced shaving-dish was still to be seen in 1848, in he Rue du Contrat-Social, at the corner of the pillars of the market.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.16#This shot still betokened life. From that instant forth he encountered othing more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.17#The whole of this itinerary resembled a descent of black steps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.1.18#Nevertheless, Marius pressed forward.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.head#CHAPTER II—AN OWL’S VIEW OF PARIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.1#A being who could have hovered over Paris that night with the wing of the at or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.2#All that old quarter of the Halles, which is like a city within a city, hrough which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin, where a thousand lanes ross, and of which the insurgents had made their redoubt and their stronghold, ould have appeared to him like a dark and enormous cavity hollowed out in the entre of Paris. There the glance fell into an abyss. Thanks to the broken anterns, thanks to the closed windows, there all radiance, all life, all sound, ll movement ceased. The invisible police of the insurrection were on the watch verywhere, and maintained order, that is to say, night. The necessary tactics f insurrection are to drown small numbers in a vast obscurity, to multiply very combatant by the possibilities which that obscurity contains. At dusk, very window where a candle was burning received a shot. The light was xtinguished, sometimes the inhabitant was killed. Hence nothing was stirring. here was nothing but fright, mourning, stupor in the houses; and in the treets, a sort of sacred horror. Not even the long rows of windows and stores, he indentations of the chimneys, and the roofs, and the vague reflections which re cast back by the wet and muddy pavements, were visible. An eye cast upward t that mass of shadows might, perhaps, have caught a glimpse here and there, at ntervals, of indistinct gleams which brought out broken and eccentric lines, nd profiles of singular buildings, something like the lights which go and come n ruins; it was at such points that the barricades were situated. The rest was lake of obscurity, foggy, heavy, and funereal, above which, in motionless and elancholy outlines, rose the tower of Saint-Jacques, the church of Saint-Merry, nd two or three more of those grand edifices of which man makes giants and the ight makes phantoms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.3#All around this deserted and disquieting labyrinth, in the quarters where he Parisian circulation had not been annihilated, and where a few street anterns still burned, the aerial observer might have distinguished the metallic leam of swords and bayonets, the dull rumble of artillery, and the swarming of ilent battalions whose ranks were swelling from minute to minute; a formidable irdle which was slowly drawing in and around the insurrection.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.4#The invested quarter was no longer anything more than a monstrous cavern; verything there appeared to be asleep or motionless, and, as we have just seen, ny street which one might come to offered nothing but darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.5#A wild darkness, full of traps, full of unseen and formidable shocks, into hich it was alarming to penetrate, and in which it was terrible to remain, here those who entered shivered before those whom they awaited, where those who aited shuddered before those who were coming. Invisible combatants were ntrenched at every corner of the street; snares of the sepulchre concealed in he density of night. All was over. No more light was to be hoped for, enceforth, except the lightning of guns, no further encounter except the abrupt nd rapid apparition of death. Where? How? When? No one knew, but it was certain nd inevitable. In this place which had been marked out for the struggle, the overnment and the insurrection, the National Guard, and popular societies, the ourgeois and the uprising, groping their way, were about to come into contact. he necessity was the same for both. The only possible issue thenceforth was to merge thence killed or conquerors. A situation so extreme, an obscurity so owerful, that the most timid felt themselves seized with resolution, and the ost daring with terror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.6#Moreover, on both sides, the fury, the rage, and the determination were qual. For the one party, to advance meant death, and no one dreamed of etreating; for the other, to remain meant death, and no one dreamed of light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.7#It was indispensable that all should be ended on the following day, that riumph should rest either here or there, that the insurrection should prove tself a revolution or a skirmish. The Government understood this as well as the arties; the most insignificant bourgeois felt it. Hence a thought of anguish hich mingled with the impenetrable gloom of this quarter where all was at the oint of being decided; hence a redoubled anxiety around that silence whence a atastrophe was on the point of emerging. Here only one sound was audible, a ound as heart-rending as the death rattle, as menacing as a malediction, the ocsin of Saint-Merry. Nothing could be more blood-curdling than the clamor of hat wild and desperate bell, wailing amid the shadows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.8#As it often happens, nature seemed to have fallen into accord with what men ere about to do. Nothing disturbed the harmony of the whole effect. The stars ad disappeared, heavy clouds filled the horizon with their melancholy folds. A lack sky rested on these dead streets, as though an immense winding-sheet were eing outspread over this immense tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.9#While a battle that was still wholly political was in preparation in the ame locality which had already witnessed so many revolutionary events, while outh, the secret associations, the schools, in the name of principles, and the iddle classes, in the name of interests, were approaching preparatory to ashing themselves together, clasping and throwing each other, while each one astened and invited the last and decisive hour of the crisis, far away and uite outside of this fatal quarter, in the most profound depths of the nfathomable cavities of that wretched old Paris which disappears under the plendor of happy and opulent Paris, the sombre voice of the people could be eard giving utterance to a dull roar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.2.10#A fearful and sacred voice which is composed of the roar of the brute and f the word of God, which terrifies the weak and which warns the wise, which omes both from below like the voice of the lion, and from on high like the oice of the thunder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE EXTREME EDGE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.1#Marius had reached the Halles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.2#There everything was still calmer, more obscure and more motionless than in he neighboring streets. One would have said that the glacial peace of the epulchre had sprung forth from the earth and had spread over the heavens.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.3#Nevertheless, a red glow brought out against this black background the ofty roofs of the houses which barred the Rue de la Chanvrerie on the aint-Eustache side. It was the reflection of the torch which was burning in the orinthe barricade. Marius directed his steps towards that red light. It had rawn him to the Marché-aux-Poirées, and he caught a glimpse of the dark mouth f the Rue des Prêcheurs. He entered it. The insurgents’ sentinel, who was uarding the other end, did not see him. He felt that he was very close to that hich he had come in search of, and he walked on tiptoe. In this manner he eached the elbow of that short section of the Rue Mondétour which was, as the eader will remember, the only communication which Enjolras had preserved with he outside world. At the corner of the last house, on his left, he thrust his ead forward, and looked into the fragment of the Rue Mondétour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.4#A little beyond the angle of the lane and the Rue de la Chanvrerie which ast a broad curtain of shadow, in which he was himself engulfed, he perceived ome light on the pavement, a bit of the wine-shop, and beyond, a flickering amp within a sort of shapeless wall, and men crouching down with guns on their nees. All this was ten fathoms distant from him. It was the interior of the arricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.5#The houses which bordered the lane on the right concealed the rest of the ine-shop, the large barricade, and the flag from him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.6#Marius had but a step more to take.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.7#Then the unhappy young man seated himself on a post, folded his arms, and ell to thinking about his father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.8#He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy, who had been so proud a oldier, who had guarded the frontier of France under the Republic, and had ouched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon, who had beheld Genoa, Alexandria, ilan, Turin, Madrid, Vienna, Dresden, Berlin, Moscow, who had left on all the ictorious battle-fields of Europe drops of that same blood, which he, Marius, ad in his veins, who had grown gray before his time in discipline and command, ho had lived with his sword-belt buckled, his epaulets falling on his breast, is cockade blackened with powder, his brow furrowed with his helmet, in arracks, in camp, in the bivouac, in ambulances, and who, at the expiration of wenty years, had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek, a smiling ountenance, tranquil, admirable, pure as a child, having done everything for rance and nothing against her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.9#He said to himself that his day had also come now, that his hour had truck, that following his father, he too was about to show himself brave, ntrepid, bold, to run to meet the bullets, to offer his breast to bayonets, to hed his blood, to seek the enemy, to seek death, that he was about to wage war n his turn and descend to the field of battle, and that the field of battle pon which he was to descend was the street, and that the war in which he was bout to engage was civil war!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.10#He beheld civil war laid open like a gulf before him, and into this he was bout to fall. Then he shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.11#He thought of his father’s sword, which his grandfather had sold to a econd-hand dealer, and which he had so mournfully regretted. He said to himself hat that chaste and valiant sword had done well to escape from him, and to epart in wrath into the gloom; that if it had thus fled, it was because it was ntelligent and because it had foreseen the future; that it had had a resentiment of this rebellion, the war of the gutters, the war of the avements, fusillades through cellar-windows, blows given and received in the ear; it was because, coming from Marengo and Friedland, it did not wish to go o the Rue de la Chanvrerie; it was because, after what it had done with the ather, it did not wish to do this for the son! He told himself that if that word were there, if after taking possession of it at his father’s pillow, he ad dared to take it and carry it off for this combat of darkness between renchmen in the streets, it would assuredly have scorched his hands and burst ut aflame before his eyes, like the sword of the angel! He told himself that it as fortunate that it was not there and that it had disappeared, that that was ell, that that was just, that his grandfather had been the true guardian of his ather’s glory, and that it was far better that the colonel’s sword should be old at auction, sold to the old-clothes man, thrown among the old junk, than hat it should, to-day, wound the side of his country.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.12#And then he fell to weeping bitterly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.13#This was horrible. But what was he to do? Live without Cosette he could ot. Since she was gone, he must needs die. Had he not given her his word of onor that he would die? She had gone knowing that; this meant that it pleased er that Marius should die. And then, it was clear that she no longer loved him, ince she had departed thus without warning, without a word, without a letter, lthough she knew his address! What was the good of living, and why should he ive now? And then, what! should he retreat after going so far? should he flee rom danger after having approached it? should he slip away after having come nd peeped into the barricade? slip away, all in a tremble, saying: “After all, have had enough of it as it is. I have seen it, that suffices, this is civil ar, and I shall take my leave!” Should he abandon his friends who were xpecting him? Who were in need of him possibly! who were a mere handful against n army! Should he be untrue at once to his love, to country, to his word? hould he give to his cowardice the pretext of patriotism? But this was mpossible, and if the phantom of his father was there in the gloom, and beheld im retreating, he would beat him on the loins with the flat of his sword, and hout to him: “March on, you poltroon!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.14#Thus a prey to the conflicting movements of his thoughts, he dropped his ead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.15#All at once he raised it. A sort of splendid rectification had just been ffected in his mind. There is a widening of the sphere of thought which is eculiar to the vicinity of the grave; it makes one see clearly to be near eath. The vision of the action into which he felt that he was, perhaps, on the oint of entering, appeared to him no more as lamentable, but as superb. The war f the street was suddenly transfigured by some unfathomable inward working of is soul, before the eye of his thought. All the tumultuous interrogation points f reverie recurred to him in throngs, but without troubling him. He left none f them unanswered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.16#Let us see, why should his father be indignant? Are there not cases where nsurrection rises to the dignity of duty? What was there that was degrading for he son of Colonel Pontmercy in the combat which was about to begin? It is no onger Montmirail nor Champaubert; it is something quite different. The question s no longer one of sacred territory,—but of a holy idea. The country wails, hat may be, but humanity applauds. But is it true that the country does wail? rance bleeds, but liberty smiles; and in the presence of liberty’s smile, rance forgets her wound. And then if we look at things from a still more lofty oint of view, why do we speak of civil war?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.17#Civil war—what does that mean? Is there a foreign war? Is not all war etween men, war between brothers? War is qualified only by its object. There is o such thing as foreign or civil war; there is only just and unjust war. Until hat day when the grand human agreement is concluded, war, that at least which s the effort of the future, which is hastening on against the past, which is agging in the rear, may be necessary. What have we to reproach that war with? ar does not become a disgrace, the sword does not become a disgrace, except hen it is used for assassinating the right, progress, reason, civilization, ruth. Then war, whether foreign or civil, is iniquitous; it is called crime. utside the pale of that holy thing, justice, by what right does one form of man espise another? By what right should the sword of Washington disown the pike of amille Desmoulins? Leonidas against the stranger, Timoleon against the tyrant, hich is the greater? the one is the defender, the other the liberator. Shall we rand every appeal to arms within a city’s limits without taking the object into consideration? Then note the infamy of Brutus, Marcel, Arnould von lankenheim, Coligny, Hedgerow war? War of the streets? Why not? That was the ar of Ambiorix, of Artevelde, of Marnix, of Pelagius. But Ambiorix fought gainst Rome, Artevelde against France, Marnix against Spain, Pelagius against he Moors; all against the foreigner. Well, the monarchy is a foreigner; ppression is a stranger; the right divine is a stranger. Despotism violates the oral frontier, an invasion violates the geographical frontier. Driving out the yrant or driving out the English, in both cases, regaining possession of one’s wn territory. There comes an hour when protestation no longer suffices; after hilosophy, action is required; live force finishes what the idea has sketched ut; Prometheus chained begins, Arostogeiton ends; the encyclopedia enlightens ouls, the 10th of August electrifies them. After Æschylus, Thrasybulus; after iderot, Danton. Multitudes have a tendency to accept the master. Their mass ears witness to apathy. A crowd is easily led as a whole to obedience. Men must e stirred up, pushed on, treated roughly by the very benefit of their eliverance, their eyes must be wounded by the true, light must be hurled at hem in terrible handfuls. They must be a little thunderstruck themselves at heir own well-being; this dazzling awakens them. Hence the necessity of tocsins nd wars. Great combatants must rise, must enlighten nations with audacity, and hake up that sad humanity which is covered with gloom by the right divine, æsarian glory, force, fanaticism, irresponsible power, and absolute majesty; a abble stupidly occupied in the contemplation, in their twilight splendor, of hese sombre triumphs of the night. Down with the tyrant! Of whom are you peaking? Do you call Louis Philippe the tyrant? No; no more than Louis XVI. oth of them are what history is in the habit of calling good kings; but rinciples are not to be parcelled out, the logic of the true is rectilinear, he peculiarity of truth is that it lacks complaisance; no concessions, then; ll encroachments on man should be repressed. There is a divine right in Louis VI., there is _because a Bourbon_ in Louis Philippe; both represent in a ertain measure the confiscation of right, and, in order to clear away universal nsurrection, they must be combated; it must be done, France being always the ne to begin. When the master falls in France, he falls everywhere. In short, hat cause is more just, and consequently, what war is greater, than that which e-establishes social truth, restores her throne to liberty, restores the people o the people, restores sovereignty to man, replaces the purple on the head of rance, restores equity and reason in their plenitude, suppresses every germ of ntagonism by restoring each one to himself, annihilates the obstacle which oyalty presents to the whole immense universal concord, and places the human ace once more on a level with the right? These wars build up peace. An enormous ortress of prejudices, privileges, superstitions, lies, exactions, abuses, iolences, iniquities, and darkness still stands erect in this world, with its owers of hatred. It must be cast down. This monstrous mass must be made to rumble. To conquer at Austerlitz is grand; to take the Bastille is immense.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.18#There is no one who has not noticed it in his own case—the soul,—and herein lies the marvel of its unity complicated with ubiquity, has a strange ptitude for reasoning almost coldly in the most violent extremities, and it ften happens that heartbroken passion and profound despair in the very agony of heir blackest monologues, treat subjects and discuss theses. Logic is mingled ith convulsion, and the thread of the syllogism floats, without breaking, in he mournful storm of thought. This was the situation of Marius’ mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.13.3.19#As he meditated thus, dejected but resolute, hesitating in every irection, and, in short, shuddering at what he was about to do, his glance trayed to the interior of the barricade. The insurgents were here conversing in low voice, without moving, and there was perceptible that quasi-silence which arks the last stage of expectation. Overhead, at the small window in the third tory Marius descried a sort of spectator who appeared to him to be singularly ttentive. This was the porter who had been killed by Le Cabuc. Below, by the ights of the torch, which was thrust between the paving-stones, this head could e vaguely distinguished. Nothing could be stranger, in that sombre and ncertain gleam, than that livid, motionless, astonished face, with its ristling hair, its eyes fixed and staring, and its yawning mouth, bent over the treet in an attitude of curiosity. One would have said that the man who was ead was surveying those who were about to die. A long trail of blood which had lowed from that head, descended in reddish threads from the window to the eight of the first floor, where it stopped.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.head#BOOK FOURTEENTH—THE GRANDEURS OF DESPAIR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE FLAG: ACT FIRST
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.1#As yet, nothing had come. Ten o’clock had sounded from Saint-Merry. njolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves, carbines in hand, near he outlet of the grand barricade. They no longer addressed each other, they istened, seeking to catch even the faintest and most distant sound of arching.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.2#Suddenly, in the midst of the dismal calm, a clear, gay, young voice, which eemed to come from the Rue Saint-Denis, rose and began to sing distinctly, to he old popular air of “By the Light of the Moon,” this bit of poetry, erminated by a cry like the crow of a cock:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.3#Mon nez est en larmes, Mon ami Bugeaud, Prête moi tes gendarmes Pour leur ire un mot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.4#En capote bleue, La poule au shako, Voici la banlieue! Co-cocorico!54
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.5#They pressed each other’s hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.6#“That is Gavroche,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.7#“He is warning us,” said Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.8#A hasty rush troubled the deserted street; they beheld a being more agile han a clown climb over the omnibus, and Gavroche bounded into the barricade, ll breathless, saying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.9#“My gun! Here they are!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.10#An electric quiver shot through the whole barricade, and the sound of ands seeking their guns became audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.11#“Would you like my carbine?” said Enjolras to the lad.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.12#“I want a big gun,” replied Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.13#And he seized Javert’s gun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.14#Two sentinels had fallen back, and had come in almost at the same moment s Gavroche. They were the sentinels from the end of the street, and the vidette f the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie. The vidette of the Lane des Prêcheurs had emained at his post, which indicated that nothing was approaching from the irection of the bridges and Halles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.15#The Rue de la Chanvrerie, of which a few paving-stones alone were dimly isible in the reflection of the light projected on the flag, offered to the nsurgents the aspect of a vast black door vaguely opened into a smoke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.16#Each man had taken up his position for the conflict.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.17#Forty-three insurgents, among whom were Enjolras, Combeferre, Courfeyrac, ossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and Gavroche, were kneeling inside the large barricade, ith their heads on a level with the crest of the barrier, the barrels of their uns and carbines aimed on the stones as though at loop-holes, attentive, mute, eady to fire. Six, commanded by Feuilly, had installed themselves, with their uns levelled at their shoulders, at the windows of the two stories of orinthe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.18#Several minutes passed thus, then a sound of footsteps, measured, heavy, nd numerous, became distinctly audible in the direction of Saint-Leu. This ound, faint at first, then precise, then heavy and sonorous, approached slowly, ithout halt, without intermission, with a tranquil and terrible continuity. othing was to be heard but this. It was that combined silence and sound, of the tatue of the commander, but this stony step had something indescribably normous and multiple about it which awakened the idea of a throng, and, at the ame time, the idea of a spectre. One thought one heard the terrible statue egion marching onward. This tread drew near; it drew still nearer, and stopped. t seemed as though the breathing of many men could be heard at the end of the treet. Nothing was to be seen, however, but at the bottom of that dense bscurity there could be distinguished a multitude of metallic threads, as fine s needles and almost imperceptible, which moved about like those indescribable hosphoric networks which one sees beneath one’s closed eyelids, in the first ists of slumber at the moment when one is dropping off to sleep. These were ayonets and gun-barrels confusedly illuminated by the distant reflection of the orch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.19#A pause ensued, as though both sides were waiting. All at once, from the epths of this darkness, a voice, which was all the more sinister, since no one as visible, and which appeared to be the gloom itself speaking, shouted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.20#“Who goes there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.21#At the same time, the click of guns, as they were lowered into position, as heard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.22#Enjolras replied in a haughty and vibrating tone:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.23#“The French Revolution!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.24#“Fire!” shouted the voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.25#A flash empurpled all the façades in the street as though the door of a urnace had been flung open, and hastily closed again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.26#A fearful detonation burst forth on the barricade. The red flag fell. The ischarge had been so violent and so dense that it had cut the staff, that is to ay, the very tip of the omnibus pole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.27#Bullets which had rebounded from the cornices of the houses penetrated the arricade and wounded several men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.28#The impression produced by this first discharge was freezing. The attack ad been rough, and of a nature to inspire reflection in the boldest. It was vident that they had to deal with an entire regiment at the very least.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.29#“Comrades!” shouted Courfeyrac, “let us not waste our powder. Let us wait ntil they are in the street before replying.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.30#“And, above all,” said Enjolras, “let us raise the flag again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.31#He picked up the flag, which had fallen precisely at his feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.32#Outside, the clatter of the ramrods in the guns could be heard; the troops ere re-loading their arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.33#Enjolras went on:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.34#“Who is there here with a bold heart? Who will plant the flag on the arricade again?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.35#Not a man responded. To mount on the barricade at the very moment when, ithout any doubt, it was again the object of their aim, was simply death. The ravest hesitated to pronounce his own condemnation. Enjolras himself felt a hrill. He repeated:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.1.36#“Does no one volunteer?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE FLAG: ACT SECOND
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.1#Since they had arrived at Corinthe, and had begun the construction of the arricade, no attention had been paid to Father Mabeuf. M. Mabeuf had not uitted the mob, however; he had entered the ground floor of the wine-shop and ad seated himself behind the counter. There he had, so to speak, retreated into imself. He no longer seemed to look or to think. Courfeyrac and others had ccosted him two or three times, warning him of his peril, beseeching him to ithdraw, but he did not hear them. When they were not speaking to him, his outh moved as though he were replying to some one, and as soon as he was ddressed, his lips became motionless and his eyes no longer had the appearance f being alive.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.2#Several hours before the barricade was attacked, he had assumed an attitude hich he did not afterwards abandon, with both fists planted on his knees and is head thrust forward as though he were gazing over a precipice. Nothing had een able to move him from this attitude; it did not seem as though his mind ere in the barricade. When each had gone to take up his position for the ombat, there remained in the tap-room where Javert was bound to the post, only single insurgent with a naked sword, watching over Javert, and himself, abeuf. At the moment of the attack, at the detonation, the physical shock had eached him and had, as it were, awakened him; he started up abruptly, crossed he room, and at the instant when Enjolras repeated his appeal: “Does no one olunteer?” the old man was seen to make his appearance on the threshold of the ine-shop. His presence produced a sort of commotion in the different groups. A hout went up:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.3#“It is the voter! It is the member of the Convention! It is the epresentative of the people!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.4#It is probable that he did not hear them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.5#He strode straight up to Enjolras, the insurgents withdrawing before him ith a religious fear; he tore the flag from Enjolras, who recoiled in amazement nd then, since no one dared to stop or to assist him, this old man of eighty, ith shaking head but firm foot, began slowly to ascend the staircase of aving-stones arranged in the barricade. This was so melancholy and so grand hat all around him cried: “Off with your hats!” At every step that he mounted, t was a frightful spectacle; his white locks, his decrepit face, his lofty, ald, and wrinkled brow, his amazed and open mouth, his aged arm upholding the ed banner, rose through the gloom and were enlarged in the bloody light of the orch, and the bystanders thought that they beheld the spectre of ’93 emerging rom the earth, with the flag of terror in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.6#When he had reached the last step, when this trembling and terrible hantom, erect on that pile of rubbish in the presence of twelve hundred nvisible guns, drew himself up in the face of death and as though he were more owerful than it, the whole barricade assumed amid the darkness, a supernatural nd colossal form.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.7#There ensued one of those silences which occur only in the presence of rodigies. In the midst of this silence, the old man waved the red flag and houted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.8#“Long live the Revolution! Long live the Republic! Fraternity! Equality! nd Death!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.9#Those in the barricade heard a low and rapid whisper, like the murmur of a riest who is despatching a prayer in haste. It was probably the commissary of olice who was making the legal summons at the other end of the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.10#Then the same piercing voice which had shouted: “Who goes there?” houted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.11#“Retire!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.12#M. Mabeuf, pale, haggard, his eyes lighted up with the mournful flame of berration, raised the flag above his head and repeated:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.13#“Long live the Republic!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.14#“Fire!” said the voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.15#A second discharge, similar to the first, rained down upon the arricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.16#The old man fell on his knees, then rose again, dropped the flag and fell ackwards on the pavement, like a log, at full length, with outstretched rms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.17#Rivulets of blood flowed beneath him. His aged head, pale and sad, seemed o be gazing at the sky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.18#One of those emotions which are superior to man, which make him forget ven to defend himself, seized upon the insurgents, and they approached the body ith respectful awe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.19#“What men these regicides were!” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.20#Courfeyrac bent down to Enjolras’ ear:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.21#“This is for yourself alone, I do not wish to dampen the enthusiasm. But his man was anything rather than a regicide. I knew him. His name was Father abeuf. I do not know what was the matter with him to-day. But he was a brave lockhead. Just look at his head.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.22#“The head of a blockhead and the heart of a Brutus,” replied Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.23#Then he raised his voice:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.24#“Citizens! This is the example which the old give to the young. We esitated, he came! We were drawing back, he advanced! This is what those who re trembling with age teach to those who tremble with fear! This aged man is ugust in the eyes of his country. He has had a long life and a magnificent eath! Now, let us place the body under cover, that each one of us may defend his old man dead as he would his father living, and may his presence in our idst render the barricade impregnable!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.25#A murmur of gloomy and energetic assent followed these words.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.26#Enjolras bent down, raised the old man’s head, and fierce as he was, he issed him on the brow, then, throwing wide his arms, and handling this dead man ith tender precaution, as though he feared to hurt it, he removed his coat, howed the bloody holes in it to all, and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.2.27#“This is our flag now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.head#CHAPTER III—GAVROCHE WOULD HAVE DONE BETTER TO ACCEPT ENJOLRAS’ ARBINE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.1#They threw a long black shawl of Widow Hucheloup’s over Father Mabeuf. Six en made a litter of their guns; on this they laid the body, and bore it, with ared heads, with solemn slowness, to the large table in the tap-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.2#These men, wholly absorbed in the grave and sacred task in which they were ngaged, thought no more of the perilous situation in which they stood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.3#When the corpse passed near Javert, who was still impassive, Enjolras said o the spy:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.4#“It will be your turn presently!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.5#During all this time, Little Gavroche, who alone had not quitted his post, ut had remained on guard, thought he espied some men stealthily approaching the arricade. All at once he shouted:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.6#“Look out!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.7#Courfeyrac, Enjolras, Jean Prouvaire, Combeferre, Joly, Bahorel, Bossuet, nd all the rest ran tumultuously from the wine-shop. It was almost too late. hey saw a glistening density of bayonets undulating above the barricade. unicipal guards of lofty stature were making their way in, some striding over he omnibus, others through the cut, thrusting before them the urchin, who etreated, but did not flee.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.8#The moment was critical. It was that first, redoubtable moment of nundation, when the stream rises to the level of the levee and when the water egins to filter through the fissures of dike. A second more and the barricade ould have been taken.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.9#Bahorel dashed upon the first municipal guard who was entering, and killed im on the spot with a blow from his gun; the second killed Bahorel with a blow rom his bayonet. Another had already overthrown Courfeyrac, who was shouting: Follow me!” The largest of all, a sort of colossus, marched on Gavroche with is bayonet fixed. The urchin took in his arms Javert’s immense gun, levelled it esolutely at the giant, and fired. No discharge followed. Javert’s gun was not oaded. The municipal guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at the hild.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.10#Before the bayonet had touched Gavroche, the gun slipped from the oldier’s grasp, a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in the centre of he forehead, and he fell over on his back. A second bullet struck the other uard, who had assaulted Courfeyrac in the breast, and laid him low on the avement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.3.11#This was the work of Marius, who had just entered the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE BARREL OF POWDER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.1#Marius, still concealed in the turn of the Rue Mondétour, had witnessed, huddering and irresolute, the first phase of the combat. But he had not long een able to resist that mysterious and sovereign vertigo which may be esignated as the call of the abyss. In the presence of the imminence of the eril, in the presence of the death of M. Mabeuf, that melancholy enigma, in the resence of Bahorel killed, and Courfeyrac shouting: “Follow me!” of that child hreatened, of his friends to succor or to avenge, all hesitation had vanished, nd he had flung himself into the conflict, his two pistols in hand. With his irst shot he had saved Gavroche, and with the second delivered Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.2#Amid the sound of the shots, amid the cries of the assaulted guards, the ssailants had climbed the entrenchment, on whose summit Municipal Guards, oldiers of the line and National Guards from the suburbs could now be seen, gun n hand, rearing themselves to more than half the height of their bodies.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.3#They already covered more than two-thirds of the barrier, but they did not eap into the enclosure, as though wavering in the fear of some trap. They gazed nto the dark barricade as one would gaze into a lion’s den. The light of the orch illuminated only their bayonets, their bear-skin caps, and the upper part f their uneasy and angry faces.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.4#Marius had no longer any weapons; he had flung away his discharged pistols fter firing them; but he had caught sight of the barrel of powder in the ap-room, near the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.5#As he turned half round, gazing in that direction, a soldier took aim at im. At the moment when the soldier was sighting Marius, a hand was laid on the uzzle of the gun and obstructed it. This was done by some one who had darted orward,—the young workman in velvet trousers. The shot sped, traversed the hand nd possibly, also, the workman, since he fell, but the ball did not strike arius. All this, which was rather to be apprehended than seen through the moke, Marius, who was entering the tap-room, hardly noticed. Still, he had, in confused way, perceived that gun-barrel aimed at him, and the hand which had locked it, and he had heard the discharge. But in moments like this, the things hich one sees vacillate and are precipitated, and one pauses for nothing. One eels obscurely impelled towards more darkness still, and all is cloud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.6#The insurgents, surprised but not terrified, had rallied. Enjolras had houted: “Wait! Don’t fire at random!” In the first confusion, they might, in act, wound each other. The majority of them had ascended to the window on the irst story and to the attic windows, whence they commanded the assailants.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.7#The most determined, with Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, and ombeferre, had proudly placed themselves with their backs against the houses at he rear, unsheltered and facing the ranks of soldiers and guards who crowned he barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.8#All this was accomplished without haste, with that strange and threatening ravity which precedes engagements. They took aim, point blank, on both sides: hey were so close that they could talk together without raising their oices.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.9#When they had reached this point where the spark is on the brink of darting orth, an officer in a gorget extended his sword and said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.10#“Lay down your arms!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.11#“Fire!” replied Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.12#The two discharges took place at the same moment, and all disappeared in moke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.13#An acrid and stifling smoke in which dying and wounded lay with weak, dull roans. When the smoke cleared away, the combatants on both sides could be seen o be thinned out, but still in the same positions, reloading in silence. All at nce, a thundering voice was heard, shouting:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.14#“Be off with you, or I’ll blow up the barricade!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.15#All turned in the direction whence the voice proceeded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.16#Marius had entered the tap-room, and had seized the barrel of powder, then e had taken advantage of the smoke, and the sort of obscure mist which filled he entrenched enclosure, to glide along the barricade as far as that cage of aving-stones where the torch was fixed. To tear it from the torch, to replace t by the barrel of powder, to thrust the pile of stones under the barrel, which as instantly staved in, with a sort of horrible obedience,—all this had cost arius but the time necessary to stoop and rise again; and now all, National uards, Municipal Guards, officers, soldiers, huddled at the other extremity of he barricade, gazed stupidly at him, as he stood with his foot on the stones, is torch in his hand, his haughty face illuminated by a fatal resolution, rooping the flame of the torch towards that redoubtable pile where they could ake out the broken barrel of powder, and giving vent to that startling ry:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.17#“Be off with you, or I’ll blow up the barricade!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.18#Marius on that barricade after the octogenarian was the vision of the oung revolution after the apparition of the old.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.19#“Blow up the barricade!” said a sergeant, “and yourself with it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.20#Marius retorted: “And myself also.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.21#And he dropped the torch towards the barrel of powder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.22#But there was no longer any one on the barrier. The assailants, abandoning heir dead and wounded, flowed back pell-mell and in disorder towards the xtremity of the street, and there were again lost in the night. It was a eadlong flight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.4.23#The barricade was free.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.head#CHAPTER V—END OF THE VERSES OF JEAN PROUVAIRE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.1#All flocked around Marius. Courfeyrac flung himself on his neck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.2#“Here you are!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.3#“What luck!” said Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.4#“You came in opportunely!” ejaculated Bossuet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.5#“If it had not been for you, I should have been dead!” began Courfeyrac gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.6#“If it had not been for you, I should have been gobbled up!” added avroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.7#Marius asked:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.8#“Where is the chief?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.9#“You are he!” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.10#Marius had had a furnace in his brain all day long; now it was a hirlwind. This whirlwind which was within him, produced on him the effect of eing outside of him and of bearing him away. It seemed to him that he was lready at an immense distance from life. His two luminous months of joy and ove, ending abruptly at that frightful precipice, Cosette lost to him, that arricade, M. Mabeuf getting himself killed for the Republic, himself the leader f the insurgents,—all these things appeared to him like a tremendous nightmare. e was obliged to make a mental effort to recall the fact that all that urrounded him was real. Marius had already seen too much of life not to know hat nothing is more imminent than the impossible, and that what it is always ecessary to foresee is the unforeseen. He had looked on at his own drama as a iece which one does not understand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.11#In the mists which enveloped his thoughts, he did not recognize Javert, ho, bound to his post, had not so much as moved his head during the whole of he attack on the barricade, and who had gazed on the revolt seething around him ith the resignation of a martyr and the majesty of a judge. Marius had not even een him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.12#In the meanwhile, the assailants did not stir, they could be heard arching and swarming through at the end of the street but they did not venture nto it, either because they were awaiting orders or because they were awaiting einforcements before hurling themselves afresh on this impregnable redoubt. The nsurgents had posted sentinels, and some of them, who were medical students, et about caring for the wounded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.13#They had thrown the tables out of the wine-shop, with the exception of the wo tables reserved for lint and cartridges, and of the one on which lay Father abeuf; they had added them to the barricade, and had replaced them in the ap-room with mattresses from the bed of the widow Hucheloup and her servants. n these mattresses they had laid the wounded. As for the three poor creatures ho inhabited Corinthe, no one knew what had become of them. They were finally ound, however, hidden in the cellar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.14#A poignant emotion clouded the joy of the disencumbered barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.15#The roll was called. One of the insurgents was missing. And who was it? ne of the dearest. One of the most valiant. Jean Prouvaire. He was sought among he wounded, he was not there. He was sought among the dead, he was not there. e was evidently a prisoner. Combeferre said to Enjolras:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.16#“They have our friend; we have their agent. Are you set on the death of hat spy?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.17#“Yes,” replied Enjolras; “but less so than on the life of Jean rouvaire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.18#This took place in the tap-room near Javert’s post.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.19#“Well,” resumed Combeferre, “I am going to fasten my handkerchief to my ane, and go as a flag of truce, to offer to exchange our man for theirs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.20#“Listen,” said Enjolras, laying his hand on Combeferre’s arm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.21#At the end of the street there was a significant clash of arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.22#They heard a manly voice shout:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.23#“Vive la France! Long live France! Long live the future!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.24#They recognized the voice of Prouvaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.25#A flash passed, a report rang out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.26#Silence fell again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.27#“They have killed him,” exclaimed Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.28#Enjolras glanced at Javert, and said to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.5.29#“Your friends have just shot you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE AGONY OF DEATH AFTER THE AGONY OF LIFE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.1#A peculiarity of this species of war is, that the attack of the barricades s almost always made from the front, and that the assailants generally abstain rom turning the position, either because they fear ambushes, or because they re afraid of getting entangled in the tortuous streets. The insurgents’ whole ttention had been directed, therefore, to the grand barricade, which was, vidently, the spot always menaced, and there the struggle would infallibly ecommence. But Marius thought of the little barricade, and went thither. It was eserted and guarded only by the fire-pot which trembled between the aving-stones. Moreover, the Mondétour alley, and the branches of the Rue de la etite Truanderie and the Rue du Cygne were profoundly calm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.2#As Marius was withdrawing, after concluding his inspection, he heard his ame pronounced feebly in the darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.3#“Monsieur Marius!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.4#He started, for he recognized the voice which had called to him two hours efore through the gate in the Rue Plumet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.5#Only, the voice now seemed to be nothing more than a breath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.6#He looked about him, but saw no one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.7#Marius thought he had been mistaken, that it was an illusion added by his ind to the extraordinary realities which were clashing around him. He advanced step, in order to quit the distant recess where the barricade lay.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.8#“Monsieur Marius!” repeated the voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.9#This time he could not doubt that he had heard it distinctly; he looked and aw nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.10#“At your feet,” said the voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.11#He bent down, and saw in the darkness a form which was dragging itself owards him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.12#It was crawling along the pavement. It was this that had spoken to im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.13#The fire-pot allowed him to distinguish a blouse, torn trousers of coarse elvet, bare feet, and something which resembled a pool of blood. Marius ndistinctly made out a pale head which was lifted towards him and which was aying to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.14#“You do not recognize me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.15#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.16#“Éponine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.17#Marius bent hastily down. It was, in fact, that unhappy child. She was ressed in men’s clothes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.18#“How come you here? What are you doing here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.19#“I am dying,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.20#There are words and incidents which arouse dejected beings. Marius cried ut with a start:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.21#“You are wounded! Wait, I will carry you into the room! They will attend o you there. Is it serious? How must I take hold of you in order not to hurt ou? Where do you suffer? Help! My God! But why did you come hither?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.22#And he tried to pass his arm under her, in order to raise her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.23#She uttered a feeble cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.24#“Have I hurt you?” asked Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.25#“A little.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.26#“But I only touched your hand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.27#She raised her hand to Marius, and in the middle of that hand Marius saw a lack hole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.28#“What is the matter with your hand?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.29#“It is pierced.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.30#“Pierced?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.31#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.32#“What with?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.33#“A bullet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.34#“How?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.35#“Did you see a gun aimed at you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.36#“Yes, and a hand stopping it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.37#“It was mine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.38#Marius was seized with a shudder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.39#“What madness! Poor child! But so much the better, if that is all, it is othing, let me carry you to a bed. They will dress your wound; one does not die f a pierced hand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.40#She murmured:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.41#“The bullet traversed my hand, but it came out through my back. It is seless to remove me from this spot. I will tell you how you can care for me etter than any surgeon. Sit down near me on this stone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.42#He obeyed; she laid her head on Marius’ knees, and, without looking at im, she said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.43#“Oh! How good this is! How comfortable this is! There; I no longer uffer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.44#She remained silent for a moment, then she turned her face with an effort, nd looked at Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.45#“Do you know what, Monsieur Marius? It puzzled me because you entered that arden; it was stupid, because it was I who showed you that house; and then, I ught to have said to myself that a young man like you—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.46#She paused, and overstepping the sombre transitions that undoubtedly xisted in her mind, she resumed with a heartrending smile:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.47#“You thought me ugly, didn’t you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.48#She continued:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.49#“You see, you are lost! Now, no one can get out of the barricade. It was I ho led you here, by the way! You are going to die, I count upon that. And yet, hen I saw them taking aim at you, I put my hand on the muzzle of the gun. How ueer it is! But it was because I wanted to die before you. When I received that ullet, I dragged myself here, no one saw me, no one picked me up, I was waiting or you, I said: ‘So he is not coming!’ Oh, if you only knew. I bit my blouse, I uffered so! Now I am well. Do you remember the day I entered your chamber and hen I looked at myself in your mirror, and the day when I came to you on the oulevard near the washerwomen? How the birds sang! That was a long time ago. ou gave me a hundred sous, and I said to you: ‘I don’t want your money.’ I hope ou picked up your coin? You are not rich. I did not think to tell you to pick t up. The sun was shining bright, and it was not cold. Do you remember, onsieur Marius? Oh! How happy I am! Every one is going to die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.50#She had a mad, grave, and heart-breaking air. Her torn blouse disclosed er bare throat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.51#As she talked, she pressed her pierced hand to her breast, where there was nother hole, and whence there spurted from moment to moment a stream of blood, ike a jet of wine from an open bung-hole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.52#Marius gazed at this unfortunate creature with profound compassion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.53#“Oh!” she resumed, “it is coming again, I am stifling!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.54#She caught up her blouse and bit it, and her limbs stiffened on the avement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.55#At that moment the young cock’s crow executed by little Gavroche resounded hrough the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.56#The child had mounted a table to load his gun, and was singing gayly the ong then so popular:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.57#“En voyant Lafayette, “On beholding Lafayette, Le gendarme répète:— The endarme repeats:— Sauvons nous! sauvons nous! Let us flee! let us flee! sauvons ous!” let us flee!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.58#Éponine raised herself and listened; then she murmured:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.59#“It is he.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.60#And turning to Marius:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.61#“My brother is here. He must not see me. He would scold me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.62#“Your brother?” inquired Marius, who was meditating in the most bitter and orrowful depths of his heart on the duties to the Thénardiers which his father ad bequeathed to him; “who is your brother?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.63#“That little fellow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.64#“The one who is singing?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.65#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.66#Marius made a movement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.67#“Oh! don’t go away,” said she, “it will not be long now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.68#She was sitting almost upright, but her voice was very low and broken by iccoughs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.69#At intervals, the death rattle interrupted her. She put her face as near hat of Marius as possible. She added with a strange expression:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.70#“Listen, I do not wish to play you a trick. I have a letter in my pocket or you. I was told to put it in the post. I kept it. I did not want to have it each you. But perhaps you will be angry with me for it when we meet again resently? Take your letter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.71#She grasped Marius’ hand convulsively with her pierced hand, but she no onger seemed to feel her sufferings. She put Marius’ hand in the pocket of her louse. There, in fact, Marius felt a paper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.72#“Take it,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.73#Marius took the letter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.74#She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.75#“Now, for my trouble, promise me—”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.76#And she stopped.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.77#“What?” asked Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.78#“Promise me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.79#“I promise.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.80#“Promise to give me a kiss on my brow when I am dead.—I shall feel t.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.81#She dropped her head again on Marius’ knees, and her eyelids closed. He hought the poor soul had departed. Éponine remained motionless. All at once, at he very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever, she slowly opened her yes in which appeared the sombre profundity of death, and said to him in a tone hose sweetness seemed already to proceed from another world:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.82#“And by the way, Monsieur Marius, I believe that I was a little bit in ove with you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.6.83#She tried to smile once more and expired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.head#CHAPTER VII—GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.1#Marius kept his promise. He dropped a kiss on that livid brow, where the cy perspiration stood in beads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.2#This was no infidelity to Cosette; it was a gentle and pensive farewell to n unhappy soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.3#It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Éponine had iven him. He had immediately felt that it was an event of weight. He was mpatient to read it. The heart of man is so constituted that the unhappy child ad hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think of unfolding this aper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.4#He laid her gently on the ground, and went away. Something told him that he ould not peruse that letter in the presence of that body.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.5#He drew near to a candle in the tap-room. It was a small note, folded and ealed with a woman’s elegant care. The address was in a woman’s hand and an:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.6#“To Monsieur, Monsieur Marius Pontmercy, at M. Courfeyrac’s, Rue de la errerie, No. 16.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.7#He broke the seal and read:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.8#“My dearest, alas! my father insists on our setting out immediately. We hall be this evening in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7. In a week we shall be n England. COSETTE. June 4th.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.9#Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not even acquainted ith Cosette’s handwriting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.10#What had taken place may be related in a few words. Éponine had been the ause of everything. After the evening of the 3d of June she had cherished a ouble idea, to defeat the projects of her father and the ruffians on the house f the Rue Plumet, and to separate Marius and Cosette. She had exchanged rags ith the first young scamp she came across who had thought it amusing to dress ike a woman, while Éponine disguised herself like a man. It was she who had onveyed to Jean Valjean in the Champ de Mars the expressive warning: “Leave our house.” Jean Valjean had, in fact, returned home, and had said to Cosette: We set out this evening and we go to the Rue de l’Homme Armé with Toussaint. ext week, we shall be in London.” Cosette, utterly overwhelmed by this nexpected blow, had hastily penned a couple of lines to Marius. But how was she o get the letter to the post? She never went out alone, and Toussaint, urprised at such a commission, would certainly show the letter to M. auchelevent. In this dilemma, Cosette had caught sight through the fence of ponine in man’s clothes, who now prowled incessantly around the garden. Cosette ad called to “this young workman” and had handed him five francs and the etter, saying: “Carry this letter immediately to its address.” Éponine had put he letter in her pocket. The next day, on the 5th of June, she went to ourfeyrac’s quarters to inquire for Marius, not for the purpose of delivering he letter, but,—a thing which every jealous and loving soul will omprehend,—“to see.” There she had waited for Marius, or at least for ourfeyrac, still for the purpose of _seeing_. When Courfeyrac had told her: “We re going to the barricades,” an idea flashed through her mind, to fling herself nto that death, as she would have done into any other, and to thrust Marius nto it also. She had followed Courfeyrac, had made sure of the locality where he barricade was in process of construction; and, quite certain, since Marius ad received no warning, and since she had intercepted the letter, that he would o at dusk to his trysting place for every evening, she had betaken herself to he Rue Plumet, had there awaited Marius, and had sent him, in the name of his riends, the appeal which would, she thought, lead him to the barricade. She eckoned on Marius’ despair when he should fail to find Cosette; she was not istaken. She had returned to the Rue de la Chanvrerie herself. What she did here the reader has just seen. She died with the tragic joy of jealous hearts ho drag the beloved being into their own death, and who say: “No one shall have im!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.11#Marius covered Cosette’s letter with kisses. So she loved him! For one oment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now. Then he said to imself: “She is going away. Her father is taking her to England, and my randfather refuses his consent to the marriage. Nothing is changed in our ates.” Dreamers like Marius are subject to supreme attacks of dejection, and esperate resolves are the result. The fatigue of living is insupportable; death s sooner over with. Then he reflected that he had still two duties to fulfil: o inform Cosette of his death and send her a final farewell, and to save from he impending catastrophe which was in preparation, that poor child, Éponine’s rother and Thénardier’s son.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.12#He had a pocket-book about him; the same one which had contained the ote-book in which he had inscribed so many thoughts of love for Cosette. He ore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.13#“Our marriage was impossible. I asked my grandfather, he refused; I have o fortune, neither hast thou. I hastened to thee, thou wert no longer there. hou knowest the promise that I gave thee, I shall keep it. I die. I love thee. hen thou readest this, my soul will be near thee, and thou wilt smile.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.14#Having nothing wherewith to seal this letter, he contented himself with olding the paper in four, and added the address:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.15#“To Mademoiselle Cosette Fauchelevent, at M. Fauchelevent’s, Rue de ’Homme Armé, No. 7.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.16#Having folded the letter, he stood in thought for a moment, drew out his ocket-book again, opened it, and wrote, with the same pencil, these four lines n the first page:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.17#“My name is Marius Pontmercy. Carry my body to my grandfather, M. illenormand, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the Marais.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.18#He put his pocketbook back in his pocket, then he called Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.19#The gamin, at the sound of Marius’ voice, ran up to him with his merry and evoted air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.20#“Will you do something for me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.21#“Anything,” said Gavroche. “Good God! if it had not been for you, I should ave been done for.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.22#“Do you see this letter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.23#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.24#“Take it. Leave the barricade instantly” (Gavroche began to scratch his ar uneasily) “and to-morrow morning, you will deliver it at its address to ademoiselle Cosette, at M. Fauchelevent’s, Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.25#The heroic child replied
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.26#“Well, but! in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken, and I shall not e there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.27#“The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak, according to all ppearances, and will not be taken before to-morrow noon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.28#The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricade had, n fact, been prolonged. It was one of those intermissions which frequently ccur in nocturnal combats, which are always followed by an increase of age.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.29#“Well,” said Gavroche, “what if I were to go and carry your letter o-morrow?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.30#“It will be too late. The barricade will probably be blockaded, all the treets will be guarded, and you will not be able to get out. Go at once.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.31#Gavroche could think of no reply to this, and stood there in indecision, cratching his ear sadly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.32#All at once, he took the letter with one of those birdlike movements which ere common with him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.33#“All right,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.34#And he started off at a run through Mondétour lane.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.35#An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision, but e had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer some objection to t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.36#This was the idea:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.14.7.37#“It is barely midnight, the Rue de l’Homme Armé is not far off; I will go nd deliver the letter at once, and I shall get back in time.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.head#BOOK FIFTEENTH—THE RUE DE L’HOMME ARMÉ
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.head#CHAPTER I—A DRINKER IS A BABBLER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.1#What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections of he soul? Man is a depth still greater than the people. Jean Valjean at that ery moment was the prey of a terrible upheaval. Every sort of gulf had opened gain within him. He also was trembling, like Paris, on the brink of an obscure nd formidable revolution. A few hours had sufficed to bring this about. His estiny and his conscience had suddenly been covered with gloom. Of him also, as ell as of Paris, it might have been said: “Two principles are face to face. The hite angel and the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of he abyss. Which of the two will hurl the other over? Who will carry the ay?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.2#On the evening preceding this same 5th of June, Jean Valjean, accompanied y Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue de l’Homme Armé. A hange awaited him there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.3#Cosette had not quitted the Rue Plumet without making an effort at esistance. For the first time since they had lived side by side, Cosette’s will nd the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct, and had been in pposition, at least, if they had not clashed. There had been objections on one ide and inflexibility on the other. The abrupt advice: “Leave your house,” urled at Jean Valjean by a stranger, had alarmed him to the extent of rendering im peremptory. He thought that he had been traced and followed. Cosette had een obliged to give way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.4#Both had arrived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé without opening their lips, and ithout uttering a word, each being absorbed in his own personal preoccupation; ean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette’s sadness, Cosette so sad hat she did not notice Jean Valjean’s uneasiness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.5#Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him, a thing which he had never done n his previous absences. He perceived the possibility of not returning to the ue Plumet, and he could neither leave Toussaint behind nor confide his secret o her. Besides, he felt that she was devoted and trustworthy. Treachery between aster and servant begins in curiosity. Now Toussaint, as though she had been estined to be Jean Valjean’s servant, was not curious. She stammered in her easant dialect of Barneville: “I am made so; I do my work; the rest is no ffair of mine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.6#In this departure from the Rue Plumet, which had been almost a flight, Jean aljean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise, baptized by osette “the inseparable.” Full trunks would have required porters, and porters re witnesses. A fiacre had been summoned to the door on the Rue de Babylone, nd they had taken their departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.7#It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to pack up a ittle linen and clothes and a few toilet articles. Cosette had taken only her ortfolio and her blotting-book.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.8#Jean Valjean, with a view to augmenting the solitude and the mystery of his departure, had arranged to quit the pavilion of the Rue Plumet only at usk, which had allowed Cosette time to write her note to Marius. They had rrived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé after night had fully fallen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.9#They had gone to bed in silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.10#The lodgings in the Rue de l’Homme Armé were situated on a back court, on he second floor, and were composed of two sleeping-rooms, a dining-room and a itchen adjoining the dining-room, with a garret where there was a folding-bed, nd which fell to Toussaint’s share. The dining-room was an antechamber as well, nd separated the two bedrooms. The apartment was provided with all necessary tensils.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.11#People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it; human nature is o constituted. Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l’Homme Armé when his nxiety was lightened and by degrees dissipated. There are soothing spots which ct in some sort mechanically on the mind. An obscure street, peaceable nhabitants. Jean Valjean experienced an indescribable contagion of tranquillity n that alley of ancient Paris, which is so narrow that it is barred against arriages by a transverse beam placed on two posts, which is deaf and dumb in he midst of the clamorous city, dimly lighted at midday, and is, so to speak, ncapable of emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old, which hold heir peace like ancients as they are. There was a touch of stagnant oblivion in hat street. Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there. How could he be found here?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.12#His first care was to place _the inseparable_ beside him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.13#He slept well. Night brings wisdom; we may add, night soothes. On the ollowing morning he awoke in a mood that was almost gay. He thought the ining-room charming, though it was hideous, furnished with an old round table, long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror, a dilapidated armchair, and everal plain chairs which were encumbered with Toussaint’s packages. In one of hese packages Jean Valjean’s uniform of a National Guard was visible through a ent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.14#As for Cosette, she had had Toussaint take some broth to her room, and did ot make her appearance until evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.15#About five o’clock, Toussaint, who was going and coming and busying erself with the tiny establishment, set on the table a cold chicken, which osette, out of deference to her father, consented to glance at.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.16#That done, Cosette, under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache, had ade Jean Valjean good night and had shut herself up in her chamber. Jean aljean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a good appetite, and with his lbows on the table, having gradually recovered his serenity, had regained ossession of his sense of security.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.17#While he was discussing this modest dinner, he had, twice or thrice, oticed in a confused way, Toussaint’s stammering words as she said to him: Monsieur, there is something going on, they are fighting in Paris.” But bsorbed in a throng of inward calculations, he had paid no heed to it. To tell he truth, he had not heard her. He rose and began to pace from the door to the indow and from the window to the door, growing ever more serene.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.18#With this calm, Cosette, his sole anxiety, recurred to his thoughts. Not hat he was troubled by this headache, a little nervous crisis, a young girl’s it of sulks, the cloud of a moment, there would be nothing left of it in a day r two; but he meditated on the future, and, as was his habit, he thought of it ith pleasure. After all, he saw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its ourse. At certain hours, everything seems impossible, at others everything ppears easy; Jean Valjean was in the midst of one of these good hours. They enerally succeed the bad ones, as day follows night, by virtue of that law of uccession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature, and hich superficial minds call antithesis. In this peaceful street where he had aken refuge, Jean Valjean got rid of all that had been troubling him for some ime past. This very fact, that he had seen many shadows, made him begin to erceive a little azure. To have quitted the Rue Plumet without complications or ncidents was one good step already accomplished. Perhaps it would be wise to go broad, if only for a few months, and to set out for London. Well, they would o. What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or in England, rovided he had Cosette beside him? Cosette was his nation. Cosette sufficed for is happiness; the idea that he, perhaps, did not suffice for Cosette’s appiness, that idea which had formerly been the cause of his fever and leeplessness, did not even present itself to his mind. He was in a state of ollapse from all his past sufferings, and he was fully entered on optimism. osette was by his side, she seemed to be his; an optical illusion which every ne has experienced. He arranged in his own mind, with all sorts of felicitous evices, his departure for England with Cosette, and he beheld his felicity econstituted wherever he pleased, in the perspective of his reverie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.19#As he paced to and fro with long strides, his glance suddenly encountered omething strange.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.20#In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard, he saw he four lines which follow:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.21#“My dearest, alas! my father insists on our setting out immediately. We hall be this evening in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7. In a week we shall be n England. COSETTE. June 4th.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.22#Jean Valjean halted, perfectly haggard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.23#Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard in ront of the mirror, and, utterly absorbed in her agony of grief, had forgotten t and left it there, without even observing that she had left it wide open, and pen at precisely the page on which she had laid to dry the four lines which she ad penned, and which she had given in charge of the young workman in the Rue lumet. The writing had been printed off on the blotter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.24#The mirror reflected the writing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.25#The result was, what is called in geometry, _the symmetrical image_; so hat the writing, reversed on the blotter, was righted in the mirror and resented its natural appearance; and Jean Valjean had beneath his eyes the etter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.26#It was simple and withering.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.27#Jean Valjean stepped up to the mirror. He read the four lines again, but e did not believe them. They produced on him the effect of appearing in a flash f lightning. It was a hallucination, it was impossible. It was not so.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.28#Little by little, his perceptions became more precise; he looked at osette’s blotting-book, and the consciousness of the reality returned to him. e caught up the blotter and said: “It comes from there.” He feverishly examined he four lines imprinted on the blotter, the reversal of the letters converted nto an odd scrawl, and he saw no sense in it. Then he said to himself: “But his signifies nothing; there is nothing written here.” And he drew a long reath with inexpressible relief. Who has not experienced those foolish joys in orrible instants? The soul does not surrender to despair until it has exhausted ll illusions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.29#He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight, lmost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the dupe. All at nce his eyes fell upon the mirror again, and again he beheld the vision. There ere the four lines outlined with inexorable clearness. This time it was no irage. The recurrence of a vision is a reality; it was palpable, it was the riting restored in the mirror. He understood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.30#Jean Valjean tottered, dropped the blotter, and fell into the old armchair eside the buffet, with drooping head, and glassy eyes, in utter bewilderment. e told himself that it was plain, that the light of the world had been eclipsed orever, and that Cosette had written that to some one. Then he heard his soul, hich had become terrible once more, give vent to a dull roar in the gloom. Try hen the effect of taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.31#Strange and sad to say, at that very moment, Marius had not yet received osette’s letter; chance had treacherously carried it to Jean Valjean before elivering it to Marius. Up to that day, Jean Valjean had not been vanquished by rial. He had been subjected to fearful proofs; no violence of bad fortune had een spared him; the ferocity of fate, armed with all vindictiveness and all ocial scorn, had taken him for her prey and had raged against him. He had ccepted every extremity when it had been necessary; he had sacrificed his nviolability as a reformed man, had yielded up his liberty, risked his head, ost everything, suffered everything, and he had remained disinterested and toical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absent from imself like a martyr. His conscience inured to every assault of destiny, might ave appeared to be forever impregnable. Well, any one who had beheld his piritual self would have been obliged to concede that it weakened at that oment. It was because, of all the tortures which he had undergone in the course f this long inquisition to which destiny had doomed him, this was the most errible. Never had such pincers seized him hitherto. He felt the mysterious tirring of all his latent sensibilities. He felt the plucking at the strange hord. Alas! the supreme trial, let us say rather, the only trial, is the loss f the beloved being.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.32#Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than as a ather; but we have already remarked, above, that into this paternity the idowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love; he loved Cosette as is daughter, and he loved her as his mother, and he loved her as his sister; nd, as he had never had either a woman to love or a wife, as nature is a reditor who accepts no protest, that sentiment also, the most impossible to ose, was mingled with the rest, vague, ignorant, pure with the purity of lindness, unconscious, celestial, angelic, divine; less like a sentiment than ike an instinct, less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and invisible ut real attraction; and love, properly speaking, was, in his immense tenderness or Cosette, like the thread of gold in the mountain, concealed and virgin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.33#Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have already ndicated. No marriage was possible between them; not even that of souls; and et, it is certain that their destinies were wedded. With the exception of osette, that is to say, with the exception of a childhood, Jean Valjean had ever, in the whole of his long life, known anything of that which may be loved. he passions and loves which succeed each other had not produced in him those uccessive green growths, tender green or dark green, which can be seen in oliage which passes through the winter and in men who pass fifty. In short, and e have insisted on it more than once, all this interior fusion, all this whole, f which the sum total was a lofty virtue, ended in rendering Jean Valjean a ather to Cosette. A strange father, forged from the grandfather, the son, the rother, and the husband, that existed in Jean Valjean; a father in whom there as included even a mother; a father who loved Cosette and adored her, and who eld that child as his light, his home, his family, his country, his aradise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.34#Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come, that she was escaping rom him, that she was slipping from his hands, that she was gliding from him, ike a cloud, like water, when he had before his eyes this crushing proof: another is the goal of her heart, another is the wish of her life; there is a earest one, I am no longer anything but her father, I no longer exist”; when he ould no longer doubt, when he said to himself: “She is going away from me!” the rief which he felt surpassed the bounds of possibility. To have done all that e had done for the purpose of ending like this! And the very idea of being othing! Then, as we have just said, a quiver of revolt ran through him from ead to foot. He felt, even in the very roots of his hair, the immense eawakening of egotism, and the _I_ in this man’s abyss howled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.35#There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil. A espairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrusting aside nd breaking certain profound elements which, in some cases, are the very man imself. Grief, when it attains this shape, is a headlong flight of all the orces of the conscience. These are fatal crises. Few among us emerge from them till like ourselves and firm in duty. When the limit of endurance is verstepped, the most imperturbable virtue is disconcerted. Jean Valjean took he blotter again, and convinced himself afresh; he remained bowed and as though etrified and with staring eyes, over those four unobjectionable lines; and here arose within him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything n this soul was crumbling away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.36#He examined this revelation, athwart the exaggerations of reverie, with an pparent and terrifying calmness, for it is a fearful thing when a man’s almness reaches the coldness of the statue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.37#He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without his aving a suspicion of the fact; he recalled his fears of the preceding summer, o foolishly dissipated; he recognized the precipice, it was still the same; nly, Jean Valjean was no longer on the brink, he was at the bottom of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.38#The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he had fallen ithout perceiving it. All the light of his life had departed, while he still ancied that he beheld the sun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.39#His instinct did not hesitate. He put together certain circumstances, ertain dates, certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette’s part, and he aid to himself: “It is he.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.40#The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which never misses ts aim. He struck Marius with his first conjecture. He did not know the name, ut he found the man instantly. He distinctly perceived, in the background of he implacable conjuration of his memories, the unknown prowler of the uxembourg, that wretched seeker of love adventures, that idler of romance, that diot, that coward, for it is cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who ave beside them a father who loves them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.41#After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was at the ottom of this situation, and that everything proceeded from that quarter, he, ean Valjean, the regenerated man, the man who had so labored over his soul, the an who had made so many efforts to resolve all life, all misery, and all nhappiness into love, looked into his own breast and there beheld a spectre, ate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.42#Great griefs contain something of dejection. They discourage one with xistence. The man into whom they enter feels something within him withdraw from im. In his youth, their visits are lugubrious; later on they are sinister. las, if despair is a fearful thing when the blood is hot, when the hair is lack, when the head is erect on the body like the flame on the torch, when the oll of destiny still retains its full thickness, when the heart, full of esirable love, still possesses beats which can be returned to it, when one has ime for redress, when all women and all smiles and all the future and all the orizon are before one, when the force of life is complete, what is it in old ge, when the years hasten on, growing ever paler, to that twilight hour when ne begins to behold the stars of the tomb?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.43#While he was meditating, Toussaint entered. Jean Valjean rose and asked er:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.44#“In what quarter is it? Do you know?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.45#Toussaint was struck dumb, and could only answer him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.46#“What is it, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.47#Jean Valjean began again: “Did you not tell me that just now that there is ighting going on?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.48#“Ah! yes, sir,” replied Toussaint. “It is in the direction of aint-Merry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.49#There is a mechanical movement which comes to us, unconsciously, from the ost profound depths of our thought. It was, no doubt, under the impulse of a ovement of this sort, and of which he was hardly conscious, that Jean Valjean, ive minutes later, found himself in the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.50#Bareheaded, he sat upon the stone post at the door of his house. He seemed o be listening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.1.51#Night had come.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.1#How long did he remain thus? What was the ebb and flow of this tragic editation? Did he straighten up? Did he remain bowed? Had he been bent to reaking? Could he still rise and regain his footing in his conscience upon omething solid? He probably would not have been able to tell himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.2#The street was deserted. A few uneasy bourgeois, who were rapidly returning ome, hardly saw him. Each one for himself in times of peril. The lamp-lighter ame as usual to light the lantern which was situated precisely opposite the oor of No. 7, and then went away. Jean Valjean would not have appeared like a iving man to any one who had examined him in that shadow. He sat there on the ost of his door, motionless as a form of ice. There is congealment in despair. he alarm bells and a vague and stormy uproar were audible. In the midst of all hese convulsions of the bell mingled with the revolt, the clock of Saint-Paul truck eleven, gravely and without haste; for the tocsin is man; the hour is od. The passage of the hour produced no effect on Jean Valjean; Jean Valjean id not stir. Still, at about that moment, a brusque report burst forth in the irection of the Halles, a second yet more violent followed; it was probably hat attack on the barricade in the Rue de la Chanvrerie which we have just seen epulsed by Marius. At this double discharge, whose fury seemed augmented by the tupor of the night, Jean Valjean started; he rose, turning towards the quarter hence the noise proceeded; then he fell back upon the post again, folded his rms, and his head slowly sank on his bosom again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.3#He resumed his gloomy dialogue with himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.4#All at once, he raised his eyes; some one was walking in the street, he eard steps near him. He looked, and by the light of the lanterns, in the irection of the street which ran into the Rue-aux-Archives, he perceived a oung, livid, and beaming face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.5#Gavroche had just arrived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.6#Gavroche was staring into the air, apparently in search of something. He aw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.7#Gavroche after staring into the air, stared below; he raised himself on iptoe, and felt of the doors and windows of the ground floor; they were all hut, bolted, and padlocked. After having authenticated the fronts of five or ix barricaded houses in this manner, the urchin shrugged his shoulders, and ook himself to task in these terms:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.8#“Pardi!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.9#Then he began to stare into the air again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.10#Jean Valjean, who, an instant previously, in his then state of mind, would ot have spoken to or even answered any one, felt irresistibly impelled to ccost that child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.11#“What is the matter with you, my little fellow?” he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.12#“The matter with me is that I am hungry,” replied Gavroche frankly. And he dded: “Little fellow yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.13#Jean Valjean fumbled in his fob and pulled out a five-franc piece.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.14#But Gavroche, who was of the wagtail species, and who skipped vivaciously rom one gesture to another, had just picked up a stone. He had caught sight of he lantern.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.15#“See here,” said he, “you still have your lanterns here. You are isobeying the regulations, my friend. This is disorderly. Smash that for e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.16#And he flung the stone at the lantern, whose broken glass fell with such a latter that the bourgeois in hiding behind their curtains in the opposite house ried: “There is ‘Ninety-three’ come again.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.17#The lantern oscillated violently, and went out. The street had suddenly ecome black.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.18#“That’s right, old street,” ejaculated Gavroche, “put on your ight-cap.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.19#And turning to Jean Valjean:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.20#“What do you call that gigantic monument that you have there at the end of he street? It’s the Archives, isn’t it? I must crumble up those big stupids of illars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.21#Jean Valjean stepped up to Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.22#“Poor creature,” he said in a low tone, and speaking to himself, “he is ungry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.23#And he laid the hundred-sou piece in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.24#Gavroche raised his face, astonished at the size of this sou; he stared at t in the darkness, and the whiteness of the big sou dazzled him. He knew ive-franc pieces by hearsay; their reputation was agreeable to him; he was elighted to see one close to. He said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.25#“Let us contemplate the tiger.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.26#He gazed at it for several minutes in ecstasy; then, turning to Jean aljean, he held out the coin to him, and said majestically to him:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.27#“Bourgeois, I prefer to smash lanterns. Take back your ferocious beast. ou can’t bribe me. That has got five claws; but it doesn’t scratch me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.28#“Have you a mother?” asked Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.29#Gavroche replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.30#“More than you have, perhaps.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.31#“Well,” returned Jean Valjean, “keep the money for your mother!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.32#Gavroche was touched. Moreover, he had just noticed that the man who was ddressing him had no hat, and this inspired him with confidence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.33#“Truly,” said he, “so it wasn’t to keep me from breaking the anterns?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.34#“Break whatever you please.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.35#“You’re a fine man,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.36#And he put the five-franc piece into one of his pockets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.37#His confidence having increased, he added:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.38#“Do you belong in this street?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.39#“Yes, why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.40#“Can you tell me where No. 7 is?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.41#“What do you want with No. 7?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.42#Here the child paused, he feared that he had said too much; he thrust his ails energetically into his hair and contented himself with replying:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.43#“Ah! Here it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.44#An idea flashed through Jean Valjean’s mind. Anguish does have these leams. He said to the lad:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.45#“Are you the person who is bringing a letter that I am expecting?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.46#“You?” said Gavroche. “You are not a woman.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.47#“The letter is for Mademoiselle Cosette, is it not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.48#“Cosette,” muttered Gavroche. “Yes, I believe that is the queer name.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.49#“Well,” resumed Jean Valjean, “I am the person to whom you are to deliver he letter. Give it here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.50#“In that case, you must know that I was sent from the barricade.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.51#“Of course,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.52#Gavroche engulfed his hand in another of his pockets and drew out a paper olded in four.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.53#Then he made the military salute.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.54#“Respect for despatches,” said he. “It comes from the Provisional overnment.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.55#“Give it to me,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.56#Gavroche held the paper elevated above his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.57#“Don’t go and fancy it’s a love letter. It is for a woman, but it’s for he people. We men fight and we respect the fair sex. We are not as they are in ine society, where there are lions who send chickens55 to camels.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.58#“Give it to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.59#“After all,” continued Gavroche, “you have the air of an honest man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.60#“Give it to me quick.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.61#“Catch hold of it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.62#And he handed the paper to Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.63#“And make haste, Monsieur What’s-your-name, for Mamselle Cosette is aiting.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.64#Gavroche was satisfied with himself for having produced this remark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.65#Jean Valjean began again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.66#“Is it to Saint-Merry that the answer is to be sent?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.67#“There you are making some of those bits of pastry vulgarly called brioches_ [blunders]. This letter comes from the barricade of the Rue de la hanvrerie, and I’m going back there. Good evening, citizen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.2.68#That said, Gavroche took himself off, or, to describe it more exactly, luttered away in the direction whence he had come with a flight like that of an scaped bird. He plunged back into the gloom as though he made a hole in it, ith the rigid rapidity of a projectile; the alley of l’Homme Armé became silent nd solitary once more; in a twinkling, that strange child, who had about him omething of the shadow and of the dream, had buried himself in the mists of the ows of black houses, and was lost there, like smoke in the dark; and one might ave thought that he had dissipated and vanished, had there not taken place, a ew minutes after his disappearance, a startling shiver of glass, and had not he magnificent crash of a lantern rattling down on the pavement once more bruptly awakened the indignant bourgeois. It was Gavroche upon his way through he Rue du Chaume.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.head#CHAPTER III—WHILE COSETTE AND TOUSSAINT ARE ASLEEP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.1#Jean Valjean went into the house with Marius’ letter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.2#He groped his way up the stairs, as pleased with the darkness as an owl who rips his prey, opened and shut his door softly, listened to see whether he ould hear any noise,—made sure that, to all appearances, Cosette and Toussaint ere asleep, and plunged three or four matches into the bottle of the Fumade ighter before he could evoke a spark, so greatly did his hand tremble. What he ad just done smacked of theft. At last the candle was lighted; he leaned his lbows on the table, unfolded the paper, and read.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.3#In violent emotions, one does not read, one flings to the earth, so to peak, the paper which one holds, one clutches it like a victim, one crushes it, ne digs into it the nails of one’s wrath, or of one’s joy; one hastens to the nd, one leaps to the beginning; attention is at fever heat; it takes up in the ross, as it were, the essential points; it seizes on one point, and the rest isappears. In Marius’ note to Cosette, Jean Valjean saw only these words:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.4#“I die. When thou readest this, my soul will be near thee.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.5#In the presence of these two lines, he was horribly dazzled; he remained or a moment, crushed, as it were, by the change of emotion which was taking lace within him, he stared at Marius’ note with a sort of intoxicated mazement, he had before his eyes that splendor, the death of a hated ndividual.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.6#He uttered a frightful cry of inward joy. So it was all over. The atastrophe had arrived sooner than he had dared to hope. The being who bstructed his destiny was disappearing. That man had taken himself off of his wn accord, freely, willingly. This man was going to his death, and he, Jean aljean, had had no hand in the matter, and it was through no fault of his. erhaps, even, he is already dead. Here his fever entered into calculations. No, e is not dead yet. The letter had evidently been intended for Cosette to read n the following morning; after the two discharges that were heard between leven o’clock and midnight, nothing more has taken place; the barricade will ot be attacked seriously until daybreak; but that makes no difference, from the oment when “that man” is concerned in this war, he is lost; he is caught in the earing. Jean Valjean felt himself delivered. So he was about to find himself lone with Cosette once more. The rivalry would cease; the future was beginning gain. He had but to keep this note in his pocket. Cosette would never know what ad become of that man. All that there requires to be done is to let things take heir own course. This man cannot escape. If he is not already dead, it is ertain that he is about to die. What good fortune!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.7#Having said all this to himself, he became gloomy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.8#Then he went downstairs and woke up the porter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.9#About an hour later, Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of a ational Guard, and with his arms. The porter had easily found in the eighborhood the wherewithal to complete his equipment. He had a loaded gun and cartridge-box filled with cartridges.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.3.10#He strode off in the direction of the markets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.head#CHAPTER IV—GAVROCHE’S EXCESS OF ZEAL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.1#In the meantime, Gavroche had had an adventure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.2#Gavroche, after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue du haume, entered the Rue des Vieilles-Haudriettes, and not seeing “even a cat” here, he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up all the song of which e was capable. His march, far from being retarded by his singing, was ccelerated by it. He began to sow along the sleeping or terrified houses these ncendiary couplets:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.3#“L’oiseau médit dans les charmilles, Et prétend qu’hier Atala Avec un Russe ’en alla. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.4#“Mon ami Pierrot, tu babilles, Parce que l’autre jour Mila Cogna sa vitre t m’appela, Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.5#“Les drôlesses sont fort gentilles, Leur poison qui m’ensorcela Griserait onsieur Orfila. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.6#“J’aime l’amour et les bisbilles, J’aime Agnès, j’aime Paméla, Lise en ’allumant se brûla. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.7#“Jadis, quand je vis les mantilles De Suzette et de Zéila, Mon âme à leurs lis se mêla, Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.8#“Amour, quand dans l’ombre où tu brilles, Tu coiffes de roses Lola, Je me amnerais pour cela. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.9#“Jeanne à ton miroir tu t’habilles! Mon cœur un beau jour s’envola. Je rois que c’est Jeanne qui l’a. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.10#“Le soir, en sortant des quadrilles, Je montre aux étoiles Stella, Et je eur dis: ‘Regardez-la.’ Où vont les belles filles, Lon la."56
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.11#Gavroche, as he sang, was lavish of his pantomime. Gesture is the strong oint of the refrain. His face, an inexhaustible repertory of masks, produced rimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than the rents of a cloth torn in a igh gale. Unfortunately, as he was alone, and as it was night, this was neither een nor even visible. Such wastes of riches do occur.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.12#All at once, he stopped short.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.13#“Let us interrupt the romance,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.14#His feline eye had just descried, in the recess of a carriage door, what s called in painting, an _ensemble_, that is to say, a person and a thing; the hing was a hand-cart, the person was a man from Auvergene who was sleeping herein.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.15#The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement, and the Auvergnat’s head as supported against the front of the cart. His body was coiled up on this nclined plane and his feet touched the ground.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.16#Gavroche, with his experience of the things of this world, recognized a runken man. He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much and was leeping too much.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.17#“There now,” thought Gavroche, “that’s what the summer nights are good or. We’ll take the cart for the Republic, and leave the Auvergnat for the onarchy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.18#His mind had just been illuminated by this flash of light:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.19#“How bully that cart would look on our barricade!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.20#The Auvergnat was snoring.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.21#Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind, and at the Auvergnat from he front, that is to say, by the feet, and at the expiration of another minute he imperturbable Auvergnat was reposing flat on the pavement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.22#The cart was free.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.23#Gavroche, habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters, had verything about him. He fumbled in one of his pockets, and pulled from it a crap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some carpenter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.24#He wrote:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.25#_“French Republic.”_
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.26#“Received thy cart.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.27#And he signed it: “GAVROCHE.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.28#That done, he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoring Auvergnat’s elvet vest, seized the cart shafts in both hands, and set off in the direction f the Halles, pushing the cart before him at a hard gallop with a glorious and riumphant uproar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.29#This was perilous. There was a post at the Royal Printing Establishment. avroche did not think of this. This post was occupied by the National Guards of he suburbs. The squad began to wake up, and heads were raised from camp beds. wo street lanterns broken in succession, that ditty sung at the top of the ungs. This was a great deal for those cowardly streets, which desire to go to leep at sunset, and which put the extinguisher on their candles at such an arly hour. For the last hour, that boy had been creating an uproar in that eaceable arrondissement, the uproar of a fly in a bottle. The sergeant of the anlieue lent an ear. He waited. He was a prudent man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.30#The mad rattle of the cart, filled to overflowing the possible measure of aiting, and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.31#“There’s a whole band of them there!” said he, “let us proceed ently.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.32#It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box and that t was stalking abroad through the quarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.33#And the sergeant ventured out of the post with cautious tread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.34#All at once, Gavroche, pushing his cart in front of him, and at the very oment when he was about to turn into the Rue des Vieilles-Haudriettes, found imself face to face with a uniform, a shako, a plume, and a gun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.35#For the second time, he stopped short.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.36#“Hullo,” said he, “it’s him. Good day, public order.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.37#Gavroche’s amazement was always brief and speedily thawed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.38#“Where are you going, you rascal?” shouted the sergeant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.39#“Citizen,” retorted Gavroche, “I haven’t called you ‘bourgeois’ yet. Why o you insult me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.40#“Where are you going, you rogue?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.41#“Monsieur,” retorted Gavroche, “perhaps you were a man of wit yesterday, ut you have degenerated this morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.42#“I ask you where are you going, you villain?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.43#Gavroche replied:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.44#“You speak prettily. Really, no one would suppose you as old as you are. ou ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece. That would yield you ive hundred francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.45#“Where are you going? Where are you going? Where are you going, andit?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.46#Gavroche retorted again:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.47#“What villainous words! You must wipe your mouth better the first time hat they give you suck.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.48#The sergeant lowered his bayonet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.49#“Will you tell me where you are going, you wretch?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.50#“General,” said Gavroche “I’m on my way to look for a doctor for my wife ho is in labor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.51#“To arms!” shouted the sergeant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.52#The master-stroke of strong men consists in saving themselves by the very eans that have ruined them; Gavroche took in the whole situation at a glance. t was the cart which had told against him, it was the cart’s place to protect im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.53#At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descent on avroche, the cart, converted into a projectile and launched with all the atter’s might, rolled down upon him furiously, and the sergeant, struck full in he stomach, tumbled over backwards into the gutter while his gun went off in he air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.54#The men of the post had rushed out pell-mell at the sergeant’s shout; the hot brought on a general random discharge, after which they reloaded their eapons and began again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.55#This blind-man’s-buff musketry lasted for a quarter of an hour and killed everal panes of glass.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.56#In the meanwhile, Gavroche, who had retraced his steps at full speed, alted five or six streets distant and seated himself, panting, on the stone ost which forms the corner of the Enfants-Rouges.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.57#He listened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.58#After panting for a few minutes, he turned in the direction where the usillade was raging, lifted his left hand to a level with his nose and thrust t forward three times, as he slapped the back of his head with his right hand; n imperious gesture in which Parisian street-urchindom has condensed French rony, and which is evidently efficacious, since it has already lasted half a entury.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.59#This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.60#“Yes,” said he, “I’m splitting with laughter, I’m twisting with delight, I bound in joy, but I’m losing my way, I shall have to take a roundabout way. If only reach the barricade in season!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.61#Thereupon he set out again on a run.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.62#And as he ran:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.63#“Ah, by the way, where was I?” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.64#And he resumed his ditty, as he plunged rapidly through the streets, and his is what died away in the gloom:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.65#“Mais il reste encore des bastilles, Et je vais mettre le holà Dans ’ordre public que voilà. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.66#“Quelqu’un veut-il jouer aux quilles? Tout l’ancien monde s‘écroula Quand a grosse boule roula. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.67#“Vieux bon peuple, à coups de béquilles, Cassons ce Louvre où s‘étala La onarchie en falbala. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.68#“Nous en avons forcé les grilles, Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour-là, Tenait al et se décolla. Où vont les belles filles, Lon la."57
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.69#The post’s recourse to arms was not without result. The cart was onquered, the drunken man was taken prisoner. The first was put in the pound, he second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils of war as an ccomplice. The public ministry of the day proved its indefatigable zeal in the efence of society, in this instance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.70#Gavroche’s adventure, which has lingered as a tradition in the quarters of he Temple, is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderly bourgeois of he Marais, and is entitled in their memories: “The nocturnal attack by the post f the Royal Printing Establishment.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:4.15.4.71#[THE END OF VOLUME IV “SAINT DENIS”]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.head#VOLUME V—JEAN VALJEAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.head#BOOK FIRST—THE WAR BETWEEN FOUR WALLS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE SCYLLA F THE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.1#The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies can ame do not belong to the period in which the action of this work is laid. These wo barricades, both of them symbols, under two different aspects, of a edoubtable situation, sprang from the earth at the time of the fatal nsurrection of June, 1848, the greatest war of the streets that history has ver beheld.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.2#It sometimes happens that, even contrary to principles, even contrary to iberty, equality, and fraternity, even contrary to the universal vote, even ontrary to the government, by all for all, from the depths of its anguish, of ts discouragements and its destitutions, of its fevers, of its distresses, of ts miasmas, of its ignorances, of its darkness, that great and despairing body, he rabble, protests against, and that the populace wages battle against, the eople.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.3#Beggars attack the common right; the ochlocracy rises against demos.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.4#These are melancholy days; for there is always a certain amount of night ven in this madness, there is suicide in this duel, and those words which are ntended to be insults—beggars, canaille, ochlocracy, populace—exhibit, alas! ather the fault of those who reign than the fault of those who suffer; rather he fault of the privileged than the fault of the disinherited.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.5#For our own part, we never pronounce those words without pain and without espect, for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which they correspond, it ften finds many a grandeur beside these miseries. Athens was an ochlocracy; the eggars were the making of Holland; the populace saved Rome more than once; and he rabble followed Jesus Christ.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.6#There is no thinker who has not at times contemplated the magnificences of he lower classes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.7#It was of this rabble that Saint Jerome was thinking, no doubt, and of all hese poor people and all these vagabonds and all these miserable people whence prang the apostles and the martyrs, when he uttered this mysterious saying: “Fex urbis, lex orbis,”_—the dregs of the city, the law of the earth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.8#The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds, its violences ontrary to all sense, directed against the principles which are its life, its asterful deeds against the right, are its popular _coups d‘état_ and should be epressed. The man of probity sacrifices himself, and out of his very love for his crowd, he combats it. But how excusable he feels it even while holding out gainst it! How he venerates it even while resisting it! This is one of those are moments when, while doing that which it is one’s duty to do, one feels omething which disconcerts one, and which would dissuade one from proceeding urther; one persists, it is necessary, but conscience, though satisfied, is ad, and the accomplishment of duty is complicated with a pain at the heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.9#June, 1848, let us hasten to say, was an exceptional fact, and almost mpossible of classification, in the philosophy of history. All the words which e have just uttered, must be discarded, when it becomes a question of this xtraordinary revolt, in which one feels the holy anxiety of toil claiming its ights. It was necessary to combat it, and this was a duty, for it attacked the epublic. But what was June, 1848, at bottom? A revolt of the people against tself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.10#Where the subject is not lost sight of, there is no digression; may we, hen, be permitted to arrest the reader’s attention for a moment on the two bsolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and which haracterized this insurrection.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.11#One blocked the entrance to the Faubourg Saint Antoine; the other defended he approach to the Faubourg du Temple; those before whom these two fearful asterpieces of civil war reared themselves beneath the brilliant blue sky of une, will never forget them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.12#The Saint-Antoine barricade was tremendous; it was three stories high, and even hundred feet wide. It barred the vast opening of the faubourg, that is to ay, three streets, from angle to angle; ravined, jagged, cut up, divided, renelated, with an immense rent, buttressed with piles that were bastions in hemselves throwing out capes here and there, powerfully backed up by two great romontories of houses of the faubourg, it reared itself like a cyclopean dike t the end of the formidable place which had seen the 14th of July. Nineteen arricades were ranged, one behind the other, in the depths of the streets ehind this principal barricade. At the very sight of it, one felt the agonizing uffering in the immense faubourg, which had reached that point of extremity hen a distress may become a catastrophe. Of what was that barricade made? Of he ruins of three six-story houses demolished expressly, said some. Of the rodigy of all wraths, said others. It wore the lamentable aspect of all onstructions of hatred, ruin. It might be asked: Who built this? It might also e said: Who destroyed this? It was the improvisation of the ebullition. Hold! ake this door! this grating! this penthouse! this chimney-piece! this broken razier! this cracked pot! Give all! cast away all! Push this roll, dig, ismantle, overturn, ruin everything! It was the collaboration of the pavement, he block of stone, the beam, the bar of iron, the rag, the scrap, the broken ane, the unseated chair, the cabbage-stalk, the tatter, the rag, and the alediction. It was grand and it was petty. It was the abyss parodied on the ublic place by hubbub. The mass beside the atom; the strip of ruined wall and he broken bowl,—threatening fraternization of every sort of rubbish. Sisyphus ad thrown his rock there and Job his potsherd. Terrible, in short. It was the cropolis of the barefooted. Overturned carts broke the uniformity of the slope; n immense dray was spread out there crossways, its axle pointing heavenward, nd seemed a scar on that tumultuous façade; an omnibus hoisted gayly, by main orce, to the very summit of the heap, as though the architects of this bit of avagery had wished to add a touch of the street urchin humor to their terror, resented its horseless, unharnessed pole to no one knows what horses of the ir. This gigantic heap, the alluvium of the revolt, figured to the mind an Ossa n Pelion of all revolutions; ’93 on ’89, the 9th of Thermidor on the 10th of ugust, the 18th of Brumaire on the 11th of January, Vendemiaire on Prairial, 848 on 1830. The situation deserved the trouble and this barricade was worthy o figure on the very spot whence the Bastille had disappeared. If the ocean ade dikes, it is thus that it would build. The fury of the flood was stamped pon this shapeless mass. What flood? The crowd. One thought one beheld hubbub etrified. One thought one heard humming above this barricade as though there ad been over their hive, enormous, dark bees of violent progress. Was it a hicket? Was it a bacchanalia? Was it a fortress? Vertigo seemed to have onstructed it with blows of its wings. There was something of the cesspool in hat redoubt and something Olympian in that confusion. One there beheld in a ell-mell full of despair, the rafters of roofs, bits of garret windows with heir figured paper, window sashes with their glass planted there in the ruins waiting the cannon, wrecks of chimneys, cupboards, tables, benches, howling opsyturveydom, and those thousand poverty-stricken things, the very refuse of he mendicant, which contain at the same time fury and nothingness. One would ave said that it was the tatters of a people, rags of wood, of iron, of bronze, f stone, and that the Faubourg Saint Antoine had thrust it there at its door, ith a colossal flourish of the broom making of its misery its barricade. Blocks esembling headsman’s blocks, dislocated chains, pieces of woodwork with rackets having the form of gibbets, horizontal wheels projecting from the ubbish, amalgamated with this edifice of anarchy the sombre figure of the old ortures endured by the people. The barricade Saint Antoine converted everything nto a weapon; everything that civil war could throw at the head of society roceeded thence; it was not combat, it was a paroxysm; the carbines which efended this redoubt, among which there were some blunderbusses, sent bits of arthenware bones, coat-buttons, even the casters from night-stands, dangerous rojectiles on account of the brass. This barricade was furious; it hurled to he clouds an inexpressible clamor; at certain moments, when provoking the army, t was covered with throngs and tempest; a tumultuous crowd of flaming heads rowned it; a swarm filled it; it had a thorny crest of guns, of sabres, of udgels, of axes, of pikes and of bayonets; a vast red flag flapped in the wind; houts of command, songs of attack, the roll of drums, the sobs of women and ursts of gloomy laughter from the starving were to be heard there. It was huge nd living, and, like the back of an electric beast, there proceeded from it ittle flashes of lightning. The spirit of revolution covered with its cloud his summit where rumbled that voice of the people which resembles the voice of od; a strange majesty was emitted by this titanic basket of rubbish. It was a eap of filth and it was Sinai.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.13#As we have said previously, it attacked in the name of the evolution—what? The revolution. It—that barricade, chance, hazard, disorder, error, misunderstanding, the unknown—had facing it the Constituent Assembly, he sovereignty of the people, universal suffrage, the nation, the republic; and t was the Carmagnole bidding defiance to the Marseillaise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.14#Immense but heroic defiance, for the old faubourg is a hero.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.15#The faubourg and its redoubt lent each other assistance. The faubourg houldered the redoubt, the redoubt took its stand under cover of the faubourg. he vast barricade spread out like a cliff against which the strategy of the frican generals dashed itself. Its caverns, its excrescences, its warts, its ibbosities, grimaced, so to speak, and grinned beneath the smoke. The mitraille anished in shapelessness; the bombs plunged into it; bullets only succeeded in aking holes in it; what was the use of cannonading chaos? and the regiments, ccustomed to the fiercest visions of war, gazed with uneasy eyes on that pecies of redoubt, a wild beast in its boar-like bristling and a mountain by ts enormous size.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.16#A quarter of a league away, from the corner of the Rue du Temple which ebouches on the boulevard near the Château-d’Eau, if one thrust one’s head odily beyond the point formed by the front of the Dallemagne shop, one erceived in the distance, beyond the canal, in the street which mounts the lopes of Belleville at the culminating point of the rise, a strange wall eaching to the second story of the house fronts, a sort of hyphen between the ouses on the right and the houses on the left, as though the street had folded ack on itself its loftiest wall in order to close itself abruptly. This wall as built of paving-stones. It was straight, correct, cold, perpendicular, evelled with the square, laid out by rule and line. Cement was lacking, of ourse, but, as in the case of certain Roman walls, without interfering with its igid architecture. The entablature was mathematically parallel with the base. rom distance to distance, one could distinguish on the gray surface, almost nvisible loopholes which resembled black threads. These loopholes were eparated from each other by equal spaces. The street was deserted as far as the ye could reach. All windows and doors were closed. In the background rose this arrier, which made a blind thoroughfare of the street, a motionless and ranquil wall; no one was visible, nothing was audible; not a cry, not a sound, ot a breath. A sepulchre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.17#The dazzling sun of June inundated this terrible thing with light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.18#It was the barricade of the Faubourg of the Temple.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.19#As soon as one arrived on the spot, and caught sight of it, it was mpossible, even for the boldest, not to become thoughtful before this ysterious apparition. It was adjusted, jointed, imbricated, rectilinear, ymmetrical and funereal. Science and gloom met there. One felt that the chief f this barricade was a geometrician or a spectre. One looked at it and spoke ow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.20#From time to time, if some soldier, an officer or representative of the eople, chanced to traverse the deserted highway, a faint, sharp whistle was eard, and the passer-by fell dead or wounded, or, if he escaped the bullet, ometimes a biscaïen was seen to ensconce itself in some closed shutter, in the nterstice between two blocks of stone, or in the plaster of a wall. For the men n the barricade had made themselves two small cannons out of two cast-iron engths of gas-pipe, plugged up at one end with tow and fire-clay. There was no aste of useless powder. Nearly every shot told. There were corpses here and here, and pools of blood on the pavement. I remember a white butterfly which ent and came in the street. Summer does not abdicate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.21#In the neighborhood, the spaces beneath the portes-cochères were ncumbered with wounded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.22#One felt oneself aimed at by some person whom one did not see, and one nderstood that guns were levelled at the whole length of the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.23#Massed behind the sort of sloping ridge which the vaulted canal forms at he entrance to the Faubourg du Temple, the soldiers of the attacking column, ravely and thoughtfully, watched this dismal redoubt, this immobility, this assivity, whence sprang death. Some crawled flat on their faces as far as the rest of the curve of the bridge, taking care that their shakos did not project eyond it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.24#The valiant Colonel Monteynard admired this barricade with a shudder.—“How hat is built!” he said to a Representative. “Not one paving-stone projects eyond its neighbor. It is made of porcelain.”—At that moment, a bullet broke he cross on his breast, and he fell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.25#“The cowards!” people said. “Let them show themselves. Let us see them! hey dare not! They are hiding!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.26#The barricade of the Faubourg du Temple, defended by eighty men, attacked y ten thousand, held out for three days. On the fourth, they did as at Zaatcha, s at Constantine, they pierced the houses, they came over the roofs, the arricade was taken. Not one of the eighty cowards thought of flight, all were illed there with the exception of the leader, Barthélemy, of whom we shall peak presently.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.27#The Saint-Antoine barricade was the tumult of thunders; the barricade of he Temple was silence. The difference between these two redoubts was the ifference between the formidable and the sinister. One seemed a maw; the other mask.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.28#Admitting that the gigantic and gloomy insurrection of June was composed f a wrath and of an enigma, one divined in the first barricade the dragon, and ehind the second the sphinx.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.29#These two fortresses had been erected by two men named, the one, Cournet, he other, Barthélemy. Cournet made the Saint-Antoine barricade; Barthélemy the arricade of the Temple. Each was the image of the man who had built it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.30#Cournet was a man of lofty stature; he had broad shoulders, a red face, a rushing fist, a bold heart, a loyal soul, a sincere and terrible eye. Intrepid, nergetic, irascible, stormy; the most cordial of men, the most formidable of ombatants. War, strife, conflict, were the very air he breathed and put him in good humor. He had been an officer in the navy, and, from his gestures and his oice, one divined that he sprang from the ocean, and that he came from the empest; he carried the hurricane on into battle. With the exception of the enius, there was in Cournet something of Danton, as, with the exception of the ivinity, there was in Danton something of Hercules.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.31#Barthélemy, thin, feeble, pale, taciturn, was a sort of tragic street rchin, who, having had his ears boxed by a policeman, lay in wait for him, and illed him, and at seventeen was sent to the galleys. He came out and made this arricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.1.32#Later on, fatal circumstance, in London, proscribed by all, Barthélemy lew Cournet. It was a funereal duel. Some time afterwards, caught in the earing of one of those mysterious adventures in which passion plays a part, a atastrophe in which French justice sees extenuating circumstances, and in which nglish justice sees only death, Barthélemy was hanged. The sombre social onstruction is so made that, thanks to material destitution, thanks to moral bscurity, that unhappy being who possessed an intelligence, certainly firm, ossibly great, began in France with the galleys, and ended in England with the allows. Barthélemy, on occasion, flew but one flag, the black flag.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.head#CHAPTER II—WHAT IS TO BE DONE IN THE ABYSS IF ONE DOES NOT ONVERSE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.1#Sixteen years count in the subterranean education of insurrection, and une, 1848, knew a great deal more about it than June, 1832. So the barricade of he Rue de la Chanvrerie was only an outline, and an embryo compared to the two olossal barricades which we have just sketched; but it was formidable for that poch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.2#The insurgents under the eye of Enjolras, for Marius no longer looked after nything, had made good use of the night. The barricade had been not only epaired, but augmented. They had raised it two feet. Bars of iron planted in he pavement resembled lances in rest. All sorts of rubbish brought and added rom all directions complicated the external confusion. The redoubt had been leverly made over, into a wall on the inside and a thicket on the outside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.3#The staircase of paving-stones which permitted one to mount it like the all of a citadel had been reconstructed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.4#The barricade had been put in order, the tap-room disencumbered, the itchen appropriated for the ambulance, the dressing of the wounded completed, he powder scattered on the ground and on the tables had been gathered up, ullets run, cartridges manufactured, lint scraped, the fallen weapons e-distributed, the interior of the redoubt cleaned, the rubbish swept up, orpses removed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.5#They laid the dead in a heap in the Mondétour lane, of which they were till the masters. The pavement was red for a long time at that spot. Among the ead there were four National Guardsmen of the suburbs. Enjolras had their niforms laid aside.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.6#Enjolras had advised two hours of sleep. Advice from Enjolras was a ommand. Still, only three or four took advantage of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.7#Feuilly employed these two hours in engraving this inscription on the wall hich faced the tavern:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.8#LONG LIVE THE PEOPLES!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.9#These four words, hollowed out in the rough stone with a nail, could be till read on the wall in 1848.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.10#The three women had profited by the respite of the night to vanish efinitely; which allowed the insurgents to breathe more freely.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.11#They had found means of taking refuge in some neighboring house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.12#The greater part of the wounded were able, and wished, to fight still. On litter of mattresses and trusses of straw in the kitchen, which had been onverted into an ambulance, there were five men gravely wounded, two of whom ere municipal guardsmen. The municipal guardsmen were attended to first.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.13#In the tap-room there remained only Mabeuf under his black cloth and avert bound to his post.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.14#“This is the hall of the dead,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.15#In the interior of this hall, barely lighted by a candle at one end, the ortuary table being behind the post like a horizontal bar, a sort of vast, ague cross resulted from Javert erect and Mabeuf lying prone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.16#The pole of the omnibus, although snapped off by the fusillade, was still ufficiently upright to admit of their fastening the flag to it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.17#Enjolras, who possessed that quality of a leader, of always doing what he aid, attached to this staff the bullet-ridden and bloody coat of the old an’s.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.18#No repast had been possible. There was neither bread nor meat. The fifty en in the barricade had speedily exhausted the scanty provisions of the ine-shop during the sixteen hours which they had passed there. At a given oment, every barricade inevitably becomes the raft of _la Méduse_. They were bliged to resign themselves to hunger. They had then reached the first hours of hat Spartan day of the 6th of June when, in the barricade Saint-Merry, Jeanne, urrounded by the insurgents who demanded bread, replied to all combatants rying: “Something to eat!” with: “Why? It is three o’clock; at four we shall be ead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.19#As they could no longer eat, Enjolras forbade them to drink. He nterdicted wine, and portioned out the brandy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.20#They had found in the cellar fifteen full bottles hermetically sealed. njolras and Combeferre examined them. Combeferre when he came up again aid:—“It’s the old stock of Father Hucheloup, who began business as a rocer.”—“It must be real wine,” observed Bossuet. “It’s lucky that Grantaire is sleep. If he were on foot, there would be a good deal of difficulty in saving hose bottles.”—Enjolras, in spite of all murmurs, placed his veto on the ifteen bottles, and, in order that no one might touch them, he had them placed nder the table on which Father Mabeuf was lying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.21#About two o’clock in the morning, they reckoned up their strength. There ere still thirty-seven of them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.22#The day began to dawn. The torch, which had been replaced in its cavity in he pavement, had just been extinguished. The interior of the barricade, that pecies of tiny courtyard appropriated from the street, was bathed in shadows, nd resembled, athwart the vague, twilight horror, the deck of a disabled ship. he combatants, as they went and came, moved about there like black forms. Above hat terrible nesting-place of gloom the stories of the mute houses were lividly utlined; at the very top, the chimneys stood palely out. The sky was of that harming, undecided hue, which may be white and may be blue. Birds flew about in t with cries of joy. The lofty house which formed the back of the barricade, eing turned to the East, had upon its roof a rosy reflection. The morning reeze ruffled the gray hair on the head of the dead man at the third-story indow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.23#“I am delighted that the torch has been extinguished,” said Courfeyrac to euilly. “That torch flickering in the wind annoyed me. It had the appearance of eing afraid. The light of torches resembles the wisdom of cowards; it gives a ad light because it trembles.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.24#Dawn awakens minds as it does the birds; all began to talk.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.25#Joly, perceiving a cat prowling on a gutter, extracted philosophy from t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.26#“What is the cat?” he exclaimed. “It is a corrective. The good God, having ade the mouse, said: ‘Hullo! I have committed a blunder.’ And so he made the at. The cat is the erratum of the mouse. The mouse, plus the cat, is the proof f creation revised and corrected.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.27#Combeferre, surrounded by students and artisans, was speaking of the dead, f Jean Prouvaire, of Bahorel, of Mabeuf, and even of Cabuc, and of Enjolras’ ad severity. He said:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.28#“Harmodius and Aristogiton, Brutus, Chereas, Stephanus, Cromwell, harlotte Corday, Sand, have all had their moment of agony when it was too late. ur hearts quiver so, and human life is such a mystery that, even in the case of civic murder, even in a murder for liberation, if there be such a thing, the emorse for having struck a man surpasses the joy of having served the human ace.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.29#And, such are the windings of the exchange of speech, that, a moment ater, by a transition brought about through Jean Prouvaire’s verses, Combeferre as comparing the translators of the Georgics, Raux with Cournand, Cournand with elille, pointing out the passages translated by Malfilâtre, particularly the rodigies of Cæsar’s death; and at that word, Cæsar, the conversation reverted o Brutus.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.30#“Cæsar,” said Combeferre, “fell justly. Cicero was severe towards Cæsar, nd he was right. That severity is not diatribe. When Zoïlus insults Homer, when ævius insults Virgil, when Visé insults Molière, when Pope insults Shakspeare, hen Frederic insults Voltaire, it is an old law of envy and hatred which is eing carried out; genius attracts insult, great men are always more or less arked at. But Zoïlus and Cicero are two different persons. Cicero is an arbiter n thought, just as Brutus is an arbiter by the sword. For my own part, I blame hat last justice, the blade; but, antiquity admitted it. Cæsar, the violator of he Rubicon, conferring, as though they came from him, the dignities which manated from the people, not rising at the entrance of the senate, committed he acts of a king and almost of a tyrant, _regia ac pene tyrannica_. He was a reat man; so much the worse, or so much the better; the lesson is but the more xalted. His twenty-three wounds touch me less than the spitting in the face of esus Christ. Cæsar is stabbed by the senators; Christ is cuffed by lackeys. One eels the God through the greater outrage.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.31#Bossuet, who towered above the interlocutors from the summit of a heap of aving-stones, exclaimed, rifle in hand:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.2.32#“Oh Cydathenæum, Oh Myrrhinus, Oh Probalinthus, Oh graces of the Æantides! h! Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like a Greek of Laurium r of Edapteon?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.head#CHAPTER III—LIGHT AND SHADOW
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.1#Enjolras had been to make a reconnaissance. He had made his way out through ondétour lane, gliding along close to the houses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.2#The insurgents, we will remark, were full of hope. The manner in which they ad repulsed the attack of the preceding night had caused them to almost disdain n advance the attack at dawn. They waited for it with a smile. They had no more oubt as to their success than as to their cause. Moreover, succor was, vidently, on the way to them. They reckoned on it. With that facility of riumphant prophecy which is one of the sources of strength in the French ombatant, they divided the day which was at hand into three distinct phases. At ix o’clock in the morning a regiment “which had been labored with,” would turn; t noon, the insurrection of all Paris; at sunset, revolution.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.3#They heard the alarm bell of Saint-Merry, which had not been silent for an nstant since the night before; a proof that the other barricade, the great one, eanne’s, still held out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.4#All these hopes were exchanged between the different groups in a sort of ay and formidable whisper which resembled the warlike hum of a hive of ees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.5#Enjolras reappeared. He returned from his sombre eagle flight into outer arkness. He listened for a moment to all this joy with folded arms, and one and on his mouth. Then, fresh and rosy in the growing whiteness of the dawn, he aid:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.6#“The whole army of Paris is to strike. A third of the army is bearing down pon the barricades in which you now are. There is the National Guard in ddition. I have picked out the shakos of the fifth of the line, and the tandard-bearers of the sixth legion. In one hour you will be attacked. As for he populace, it was seething yesterday, to-day it is not stirring. There is othing to expect; nothing to hope for. Neither from a faubourg nor from a egiment. You are abandoned.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.7#These words fell upon the buzzing of the groups, and produced on them the ffect caused on a swarm of bees by the first drops of a storm. A moment of ndescribable silence ensued, in which death might have been heard flitting y.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.8#This moment was brief.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.9#A voice from the obscurest depths of the groups shouted to Enjolras:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.10#“So be it. Let us raise the barricade to a height of twenty feet, and let s all remain in it. Citizens, let us offer the protests of corpses. Let us show hat, if the people abandon the republicans, the republicans do not abandon the eople.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.11#These words freed the thought of all from the painful cloud of individual nxieties. It was hailed with an enthusiastic acclamation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.12#No one ever has known the name of the man who spoke thus; he was some nknown blouse-wearer, a stranger, a man forgotten, a passing hero, that great nonymous, always mingled in human crises and in social geneses who, at a given oment, utters in a supreme fashion the decisive word, and who vanishes into the hadows after having represented for a minute, in a lightning flash, the people nd God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.13#This inexorable resolution so thoroughly impregnated the air of the 6th of une, 1832, that, almost at the very same hour, on the barricade Saint-Merry, he insurgents were raising that clamor which has become a matter of history and hich has been consigned to the documents in the case:—“What matters it whether hey come to our assistance or not? Let us get ourselves killed here, to the ery last man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.3.14#As the reader sees, the two barricades, though materially isolated, were n communication with each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.head#CHAPTER IV—MINUS FIVE, PLUS ONE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.1#After the man who decreed the “protest of corpses” had spoken, and had iven this formula of their common soul, there issued from all mouths a trangely satisfied and terrible cry, funereal in sense and triumphant in one:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.2#“Long live death! Let us all remain here!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.3#“Why all?” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.4#“All! All!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.5#Enjolras resumed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.6#“The position is good; the barricade is fine. Thirty men are enough. Why acrifice forty?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.7#They replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.8#“Because not one will go away.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.9#“Citizens,” cried Enjolras, and there was an almost irritated vibration in is voice, “this republic is not rich enough in men to indulge in useless xpenditure of them. Vain-glory is waste. If the duty of some is to depart, that uty should be fulfilled like any other.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.10#Enjolras, the man-principle, had over his co-religionists that sort of mnipotent power which emanates from the absolute. Still, great as was this mnipotence, a murmur arose. A leader to the very finger-tips, Enjolras, seeing hat they murmured, insisted. He resumed haughtily:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.11#“Let those who are afraid of not numbering more than thirty say so.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.12#The murmurs redoubled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.13#“Besides,” observed a voice in one group, “it is easy enough to talk about eaving. The barricade is hemmed in.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.14#“Not on the side of the Halles,” said Enjolras. “The Rue Mondétour is ree, and through the Rue des Prêcheurs one can reach the Marché des nnocents.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.15#“And there,” went on another voice, “you would be captured. You would fall n with some grand guard of the line or the suburbs; they will spy a man passing n blouse and cap. ‘Whence come you?’ ‘Don’t you belong to the barricade?’ And hey will look at your hands. You smell of powder. Shot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.16#Enjolras, without making any reply, touched Combeferre’s shoulder, and the wo entered the tap-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.17#They emerged thence a moment later. Enjolras held in his outstretched ands the four uniforms which he had laid aside. Combeferre followed, carrying he shoulder-belts and the shakos.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.18#“With this uniform,” said Enjolras, “you can mingle with the ranks and scape; here is enough for four.” And he flung on the ground, deprived of its avement, the four uniforms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.19#No wavering took place in his stoical audience. Combeferre took the ord.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.20#“Come,” said he, “you must have a little pity. Do you know what the uestion is here? It is a question of women. See here. Are there women or are here not? Are there children or are there not? Are there mothers, yes or no, ho rock cradles with their foot and who have a lot of little ones around them? et that man of you who has never beheld a nurse’s breast raise his hand. Ah! ou want to get yourselves killed, so do I—I, who am speaking to you; but I do ot want to feel the phantoms of women wreathing their arms around me. Die, if ou will, but don’t make others die. Suicides like that which is on the brink of ccomplishment here are sublime; but suicide is narrow, and does not admit of xtension; and as soon as it touches your neighbors, suicide is murder. Think of he little blond heads; think of the white locks. Listen, Enjolras has just told e that he saw at the corner of the Rue du Cygne a lighted casement, a candle in poor window, on the fifth floor, and on the pane the quivering shadow of the ead of an old woman, who had the air of having spent the night in watching. erhaps she is the mother of some one of you. Well, let that man go, and make aste, to say to his mother: ‘Here I am, mother!’ Let him feel at ease, the task ere will be performed all the same. When one supports one’s relatives by one’s oil, one has not the right to sacrifice one’s self. That is deserting one’s amily. And those who have daughters! what are you thinking of? You get ourselves killed, you are dead, that is well. And tomorrow? Young girls without read—that is a terrible thing. Man begs, woman sells. Ah! those charming and racious beings, so gracious and so sweet, who have bonnets of flowers, who fill he house with purity, who sing and prattle, who are like a living perfume, who rove the existence of angels in heaven by the purity of virgins on earth, that eanne, that Lise, that Mimi, those adorable and honest creatures who are your lessings and your pride, ah! good God, they will suffer hunger! What do you ant me to say to you? There is a market for human flesh; and it is not with our shadowy hands, shuddering around them, that you will prevent them from ntering it! Think of the street, think of the pavement covered with passers-by, hink of the shops past which women go and come with necks all bare, and through he mire. These women, too, were pure once. Think of your sisters, those of you ho have them. Misery, prostitution, the police, Saint-Lazare—that is what those eautiful, delicate girls, those fragile marvels of modesty, gentleness and oveliness, fresher than lilacs in the month of May, will come to. Ah! you have ot yourselves killed! You are no longer on hand! That is well; you have wished o release the people from Royalty, and you deliver over your daughters to the olice. Friends, have a care, have mercy. Women, unhappy women, we are not in he habit of bestowing much thought on them. We trust to the women not having eceived a man’s education, we prevent their reading, we prevent their thinking, e prevent their occupying themselves with politics; will you prevent them from oing to the dead-house this evening, and recognizing your bodies? Let us see, hose who have families must be tractable, and shake hands with us and take hemselves off, and leave us here alone to attend to this affair. I know well hat courage is required to leave, that it is hard; but the harder it is, the ore meritorious. You say: ‘I have a gun, I am at the barricade; so much the orse, I shall remain there.’ So much the worse is easily said. My friends, here is a morrow; you will not be here to-morrow, but your families will; and hat sufferings! See, here is a pretty, healthy child, with cheeks like an pple, who babbles, prattles, chatters, who laughs, who smells sweet beneath our kiss,—and do you know what becomes of him when he is abandoned? I have seen ne, a very small creature, no taller than that. His father was dead. Poor eople had taken him in out of charity, but they had bread only for themselves. he child was always hungry. It was winter. He did not cry. You could see him pproach the stove, in which there was never any fire, and whose pipe, you know, as of mastic and yellow clay. His breathing was hoarse, his face livid, his imbs flaccid, his belly prominent. He said nothing. If you spoke to him, he did ot answer. He is dead. He was taken to the Necker Hospital, where I saw him. I as house-surgeon in that hospital. Now, if there are any fathers among you, athers whose happiness it is to stroll on Sundays holding their child’s tiny and in their robust hand, let each one of those fathers imagine that this child s his own. That poor brat, I remember, and I seem to see him now, when he lay ude on the dissecting table, how his ribs stood out on his skin like the graves eneath the grass in a cemetery. A sort of mud was found in his stomach. There ere ashes in his teeth. Come, let us examine ourselves conscientiously and take ounsel with our heart. Statistics show that the mortality among abandoned hildren is fifty-five per cent. I repeat, it is a question of women, it oncerns mothers, it concerns young girls, it concerns little children. Who is alking to you of yourselves? We know well what you are; we know well that you re all brave, parbleu! we know well that you all have in your souls the joy and he glory of giving your life for the great cause; we know well that you feel ourselves elected to die usefully and magnificently, and that each one of you lings to his share in the triumph. Very well. But you are not alone in this orld. There are other beings of whom you must think. You must not be goists.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.21#All dropped their heads with a gloomy air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.22#Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments. ombeferre, who spoke thus, was not an orphan. He recalled the mothers of other en, and forgot his own. He was about to get himself killed. He was “an goist.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.23#Marius, fasting, fevered, having emerged in succession from all hope, and aving been stranded in grief, the most sombre of shipwrecks, and saturated with iolent emotions and conscious that the end was near, had plunged deeper and eeper into that visionary stupor which always precedes the fatal hour oluntarily accepted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.24#A physiologist might have studied in him the growing symptoms of that ebrile absorption known to, and classified by, science, and which is to uffering what voluptuousness is to pleasure. Despair, also, has its ecstasy. arius had reached this point. He looked on at everything as from without; as we ave said, things which passed before him seemed far away; he made out the hole, but did not perceive the details. He beheld men going and coming as hrough a flame. He heard voices speaking as at the bottom of an abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.25#But this moved him. There was in this scene a point which pierced and oused even him. He had but one idea now, to die; and he did not wish to be urned aside from it, but he reflected, in his gloomy somnambulism, that while estroying himself, he was not prohibited from saving some one else.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.26#He raised his voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.27#“Enjolras and Combeferre are right,” said he; “no unnecessary sacrifice. I oin them, and you must make haste. Combeferre has said convincing things to ou. There are some among you who have families, mothers, sisters, wives, hildren. Let such leave the ranks.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.28#No one stirred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.29#“Married men and the supporters of families, step out of the ranks!” epeated Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.30#His authority was great. Enjolras was certainly the head of the barricade, ut Marius was its savior.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.31#“I order it,” cried Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.32#“I entreat you,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.33#Then, touched by Combeferre’s words, shaken by Enjolras’ order, touched by arius’ entreaty, these heroic men began to denounce each other.—“It is true,” aid one young man to a full grown man, “you are the father of a family. o.”—“It is your duty rather,” retorted the man, “you have two sisters whom you aintain.”—And an unprecedented controversy broke forth. Each struggled to etermine which should not allow himself to be placed at the door of the omb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.34#“Make haste,” said Courfeyrac, “in another quarter of an hour it will be oo late.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.35#“Citizens,” pursued Enjolras, “this is the Republic, and universal uffrage reigns. Do you yourselves designate those who are to go.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.36#They obeyed. After the expiration of a few minutes, five were unanimously elected and stepped out of the ranks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.37#“There are five of them!” exclaimed Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.38#There were only four uniforms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.39#“Well,” began the five, “one must stay behind.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.40#And then a struggle arose as to who should remain, and who should find easons for the others not remaining. The generous quarrel began afresh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.41#“You have a wife who loves you.”—“You have your aged mother.”—” You have either father nor mother, and what is to become of your three little rothers?”—“You are the father of five children.”—“You have a right to live, you re only seventeen, it is too early for you to die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.42#These great revolutionary barricades were assembling points for heroism. he improbable was simple there. These men did not astonish each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.43#“Be quick,” repeated Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.44#Men shouted to Marius from the groups:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.45#“Do you designate who is to remain.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.46#“Yes,” said the five, “choose. We will obey you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.47#Marius did not believe that he was capable of another emotion. Still, at his idea, that of choosing a man for death, his blood rushed back to his heart. e would have turned pale, had it been possible for him to become any paler.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.48#He advanced towards the five, who smiled upon him, and each, with his eyes ull of that grand flame which one beholds in the depths of history hovering ver Thermopylæ, cried to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.49#“Me! me! me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.50#And Marius stupidly counted them; there were still five of them! Then his lance dropped to the four uniforms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.51#At that moment, a fifth uniform fell, as if from heaven, upon the other our.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.52#The fifth man was saved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.53#Marius raised his eyes and recognized M. Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.54#Jean Valjean had just entered the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.55#He had arrived by way of Mondétour lane, whither by dint of inquiries ade, or by instinct, or chance. Thanks to his dress of a National Guardsman, he ad made his way without difficulty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.56#The sentinel stationed by the insurgents in the Rue Mondétour had no ccasion to give the alarm for a single National Guardsman, and he had allowed he latter to entangle himself in the street, saying to himself: “Probably it is reinforcement, in any case it is a prisoner.” The moment was too grave to dmit of the sentinel abandoning his duty and his post of observation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.57#At the moment when Jean Valjean entered the redoubt, no one had noticed im, all eyes being fixed on the five chosen men and the four uniforms. Jean aljean also had seen and heard, and he had silently removed his coat and flung t on the pile with the rest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.58#The emotion aroused was indescribable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.59#“Who is this man?” demanded Bossuet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.60#“He is a man who saves others,” replied Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.61#Marius added in a grave voice:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.62#“I know him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.63#This guarantee satisfied every one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.64#Enjolras turned to Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.65#“Welcome, citizen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.66#And he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.67#“You know that we are about to die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.4.68#Jean Valjean, without replying, helped the insurgent whom he was saving to on his uniform.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.5.head#CHAPTER V—THE HORIZON WHICH ONE BEHOLDS FROM THE SUMMIT OF A ARRICADE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.5.1#The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place, had as esult and culminating point Enjolras’ supreme melancholy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.5.2#Enjolras bore within him the plenitude of the revolution; he was ncomplete, however, so far as the absolute can be so; he had too much of aint-Just about him, and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots; still, his mind, in he society of the Friends of the A B C, had ended by undergoing a certain olarization from Combeferre’s ideas; for some time past, he had been gradually merging from the narrow form of dogma, and had allowed himself to incline to he broadening influence of progress, and he had come to accept, as a definitive nd magnificent evolution, the transformation of the great French Republic, into he immense human republic. As far as the immediate means were concerned, a iolent situation being given, he wished to be violent; on that point, he never aried; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school which is summed up n the words: “Eighty-three.” Enjolras was standing erect on the staircase of aving-stones, one elbow resting on the stock of his gun. He was engaged in hought; he quivered, as at the passage of prophetic breaths; places where death s have these effects of tripods. A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes, hich were filled with an inward look. All at once he threw back his head, his lond locks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of tars, they were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of an halo, and njolras cried:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.5.3#“Citizens, do you picture the future to yourselves? The streets of cities nundated with light, green branches on the thresholds, nations sisters, men ust, old men blessing children, the past loving the present, thinkers entirely t liberty, believers on terms of full equality, for religion heaven, God the irect priest, human conscience become an altar, no more hatreds, the fraternity f the workshop and the school, for sole penalty and recompense fame, work for ll, right for all, peace over all, no more bloodshed, no more wars, happy others! To conquer matter is the first step; to realize the ideal is the econd. Reflect on what progress has already accomplished. Formerly, the first uman races beheld with terror the hydra pass before their eyes, breathing on he waters, the dragon which vomited flame, the griffin who was the monster of he air, and who flew with the wings of an eagle and the talons of a tiger; earful beasts which were above man. Man, nevertheless, spread his snares, onsecrated by intelligence, and finally conquered these monsters. We have anquished the hydra, and it is called the locomotive; we are on the point of anquishing the griffin, we already grasp it, and it is called the balloon. On he day when this Promethean task shall be accomplished, and when man shall have efinitely harnessed to his will the triple Chimæra of antiquity, the hydra, the ragon and the griffin, he will be the master of water, fire, and of air, and he ill be for the rest of animated creation that which the ancient gods formerly ere to him. Courage, and onward! Citizens, whither are we going? To science ade government, to the force of things become the sole public force, to the atural law, having in itself its sanction and its penalty and promulgating tself by evidence, to a dawn of truth corresponding to a dawn of day. We are dvancing to the union of peoples; we are advancing to the unity of man. No more ictions; no more parasites. The real governed by the true, that is the goal. ivilization will hold its assizes at the summit of Europe, and, later on, at he centre of continents, in a grand parliament of the intelligence. Something imilar has already been seen. The amphictyons had two sittings a year, one at elphos the seat of the gods, the other at Thermopylæ, the place of heroes. urope will have her amphictyons; the globe will have its amphictyons. France ears this sublime future in her breast. This is the gestation of the nineteenth entury. That which Greece sketched out is worthy of being finished by France. isten to me, you, Feuilly, valiant artisan, man of the people. I revere you. es, you clearly behold the future, yes, you are right. You had neither father or mother, Feuilly; you adopted humanity for your mother and right for your ather. You are about to die, that is to say to triumph, here. Citizens, hatever happens to-day, through our defeat as well as through our victory, it s a revolution that we are about to create. As conflagrations light up a whole ity, so revolutions illuminate the whole human race. And what is the revolution hat we shall cause? I have just told you, the Revolution of the True. From a olitical point of view, there is but a single principle; the sovereignty of man ver himself. This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty. Where wo or three of these sovereignties are combined, the state begins. But in that ssociation there is no abdication. Each sovereignty concedes a certain quantity f itself, for the purpose of forming the common right. This quantity is the ame for all of us. This identity of concession which each makes to all, is alled Equality. Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming n the right of each. This protection of all over each is called Fraternity. The oint of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties is called society. his intersection being a junction, this point is a knot. Hence what is called he social bond. Some say social contract; which is the same thing, the word ontract being etymologically formed with the idea of a bond. Let us come to an nderstanding about equality; for, if liberty is the summit, equality is the ase. Equality, citizens, is not wholly a surface vegetation, a society of great lades of grass and tiny oaks; a proximity of jealousies which render each other ull and void; legally speaking, it is all aptitudes possessed of the same pportunity; politically, it is all votes possessed of the same weight; eligiously, it is all consciences possessed of the same right. Equality has an rgan: gratuitous and obligatory instruction. The right to the alphabet, that is here the beginning must be made. The primary school imposed on all, the econdary school offered to all, that is the law. From an identical school, an dentical society will spring. Yes, instruction! light! light! everything comes rom light, and to it everything returns. Citizens, the nineteenth century is reat, but the twentieth century will be happy. Then, there will be nothing more ike the history of old, we shall no longer, as to-day, have to fear a conquest, n invasion, a usurpation, a rivalry of nations, arms in hand, an interruption f civilization depending on a marriage of kings, on a birth in hereditary yrannies, a partition of peoples by a congress, a dismemberment because of the ailure of a dynasty, a combat of two religions meeting face to face, like two ucks in the dark, on the bridge of the infinite; we shall no longer have to ear famine, farming out, prostitution arising from distress, misery from the ailure of work and the scaffold and the sword, and battles and the ruffianism f chance in the forest of events. One might almost say: There will be no more vents. We shall be happy. The human race will accomplish its law, as the errestrial globe accomplishes its law; harmony will be re-established between he soul and the star; the soul will gravitate around the truth, as the planet round the light. Friends, the present hour in which I am addressing you, is a loomy hour; but these are terrible purchases of the future. A revolution is a oll. Oh! the human race will be delivered, raised up, consoled! We affirm it on his barrier. Whence should proceed that cry of love, if not from the heights of acrifice? Oh my brothers, this is the point of junction, of those who think and f those who suffer; this barricade is not made of paving-stones, nor of joists, or of bits of iron; it is made of two heaps, a heap of ideas, and a heap of oes. Here misery meets the ideal. The day embraces the night, and says to it: I am about to die, and thou shalt be born again with me.’ From the embrace of ll desolations faith leaps forth. Sufferings bring hither their agony and ideas heir immortality. This agony and this immortality are about to join and onstitute our death. Brothers, he who dies here dies in the radiance of the uture, and we are entering a tomb all flooded with the dawn.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.5.4#Enjolras paused rather than became silent; his lips continued to move ilently, as though he were talking to himself, which caused them all to gaze ttentively at him, in the endeavor to hear more. There was no applause; but hey whispered together for a long time. Speech being a breath, the rustling of ntelligences resembles the rustling of leaves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.head#CHAPTER VI—MARIUS HAGGARD, JAVERT LACONIC
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.1#Let us narrate what was passing in Marius’ thoughts.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.2#Let the reader recall the state of his soul. We have just recalled it, verything was a vision to him now. His judgment was disturbed. Marius, let us nsist on this point, was under the shadow of the great, dark wings which are pread over those in the death agony. He felt that he had entered the tomb, it eemed to him that he was already on the other side of the wall, and he no onger beheld the faces of the living except with the eyes of one dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.3#How did M. Fauchelevent come there? Why was he there? What had he come here to do? Marius did not address all these questions to himself. Besides, ince our despair has this peculiarity, that it envelops others as well as urselves, it seemed logical to him that all the world should come thither to ie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.4#Only, he thought of Cosette with a pang at his heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.5#However, M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him, did not look at him, and had ot even the air of hearing him, when Marius raised his voice to say: “I know im.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.6#As far as Marius was concerned, this attitude of M. Fauchelevent was omforting, and, if such a word can be used for such impressions, we should say hat it pleased him. He had always felt the absolute impossibility of addressing hat enigmatical man, who was, in his eyes, both equivocal and imposing. oreover, it had been a long time since he had seen him; and this still further ugmented the impossibility for Marius’ timid and reserved nature.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.7#The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondétour lane; they bore perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard. One of them wept as he ook his leave. Before setting out, they embraced those who remained.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.8#When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure, Enjolras hought of the man who had been condemned to death.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.9#He entered the tap-room. Javert, still bound to the post, was engaged in editation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.10#“Do you want anything?” Enjolras asked him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.11#Javert replied: “When are you going to kill me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.12#“Wait. We need all our cartridges just at present.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.13#“Then give me a drink,” said Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.14#Enjolras himself offered him a glass of water, and, as Javert was inioned, he helped him to drink.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.15#“Is that all?” inquired Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.16#“I am uncomfortable against this post,” replied Javert. “You are not ender to have left me to pass the night here. Bind me as you please, but you urely might lay me out on a table like that other man.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.17#And with a motion of the head, he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.18#There was, as the reader will remember, a long, broad table at the end of he room, on which they had been running bullets and making cartridges. All the artridges having been made, and all the powder used, this table was free.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.19#At Enjolras’ command, four insurgents unbound Javert from the post. While hey were loosing him, a fifth held a bayonet against his breast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.20#Leaving his arms tied behind his back, they placed about his feet a lender but stout whip-cord, as is done to men on the point of mounting the caffold, which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches in length, and ade him walk to the table at the end of the room, where they laid him down, losely bound about the middle of the body.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.21#By way of further security, and by means of a rope fastened to his neck, hey added to the system of ligatures which rendered every attempt at escape mpossible, that sort of bond which is called in prisons a martingale, which, tarting at the neck, forks on the stomach, and meets the hands, after passing etween the legs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.6.22#While they were binding Javert, a man standing on the threshold was urveying him with singular attention. The shadow cast by this man made Javert urn his head. He raised his eyes, and recognized Jean Valjean. He did not even tart, but dropped his lids proudly and confined himself to the remark: “It is erfectly simple.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE SITUATION BECOMES AGGRAVATED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.1#The daylight was increasing rapidly. Not a window was opened, not a door tood ajar; it was the dawn but not the awaking. The end of the Rue de la hanvrerie, opposite the barricade, had been evacuated by the troops, as we have tated, it seemed to be free, and presented itself to passers-by with a sinister ranquillity. The Rue Saint-Denis was as dumb as the avenue of Sphinxes at hebes. Not a living being in the crossroads, which gleamed white in the light f the sun. Nothing is so mournful as this light in deserted streets. Nothing as to be seen, but there was something to be heard. A mysterious movement was oing on at a certain distance. It was evident that the critical moment was pproaching. As on the previous evening, the sentinels had come in; but this ime all had come.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.2#The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack. Since he departure of the five, they had increased its height still further.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.3#On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of the Halles, njolras, for fear of a surprise in the rear, came to a serious decision. He had he small gut of the Mondétour lane, which had been left open up to that time, arricaded. For this purpose, they tore up the pavement for the length of everal houses more. In this manner, the barricade, walled on three streets, in ront on the Rue de la Chanvrerie, to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la etite Truanderie, to the right on the Rue Mondétour, was really almost mpregnable; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there. It had three ronts, but no exit.—“A fortress but a rat hole too,” said Courfeyrac with a augh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.4#Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones “torn up in excess,” said Bossuet, iled up near the door of the wine-shop.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.5#The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack must needs ome, that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.6#An allowance of brandy was doled out to each.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.7#Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault. Each man elects his place as though at the theatre. They jostle, and elbow and crowd ach other. There are some who make stalls of paving-stones. Here is a corner of he wall which is in the way, it is removed; here is a redan which may afford rotection, they take shelter behind it. Left-handed men are precious; they take he places that are inconvenient to the rest. Many arrange to fight in a sitting osture. They wish to be at ease to kill, and to die comfortably. In the sad war f June, 1848, an insurgent who was a formidable marksman, and who was firing rom the top of a terrace upon a roof, had a reclining-chair brought there for is use; a charge of grape-shot found him out there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.8#As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks for action, ll disorderly movements cease; there is no more pulling from one another; there re no more coteries; no more asides, there is no more holding aloof; everything n their spirits converges in, and changes into, a waiting for the assailants. A arricade before the arrival of danger is chaos; in danger, it is discipline tself. Peril produces order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.9#As soon as Enjolras had seized his double-barrelled rifle, and had placed imself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved for himself, all the rest eld their peace. A series of faint, sharp noises resounded confusedly along the all of paving-stones. It was the men cocking their guns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.10#Moreover, their attitudes were prouder, more confident than ever; the xcess of sacrifice strengthens; they no longer cherished any hope, but they had espair, despair,—the last weapon, which sometimes gives victory; Virgil has aid so. Supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions. To embark in death s sometimes the means of escaping a shipwreck; and the lid of the coffin ecomes a plank of safety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.11#As on the preceding evening, the attention of all was directed, we might lmost say leaned upon, the end of the street, now lighted up and visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.12#They had not long to wait. A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leu uarter, but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack. A clashing of hains, the uneasy jolting of a mass, the click of brass skipping along the avement, a sort of solemn uproar, announced that some sinister construction of ron was approaching. There arose a tremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old treets, pierced and built for the fertile circulation of interests and ideas, nd which are not made for the horrible rumble of the wheels of war.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.13#The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of the street ecame ferocious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.14#A cannon made its appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.15#Artillery-men were pushing the piece; it was in firing trim; the ore-carriage had been detached; two upheld the gun-carriage, four were at the heels; others followed with the caisson. They could see the smoke of the urning lint-stock.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.16#“Fire!” shouted Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.17#The whole barricade fired, the report was terrible; an avalanche of smoke overed and effaced both cannon and men; after a few seconds, the cloud ispersed, and the cannon and men reappeared; the gun-crew had just finished olling it slowly, correctly, without haste, into position facing the barricade. ot one of them had been struck. Then the captain of the piece, bearing down pon the breech in order to raise the muzzle, began to point the cannon with the ravity of an astronomer levelling a telescope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.18#“Bravo for the cannoneers!” cried Bossuet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.19#And the whole barricade clapped their hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.20#A moment later, squarely planted in the very middle of the street, astride f the gutter, the piece was ready for action. A formidable pair of jaws yawned n the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.21#“Come, merrily now!” ejaculated Courfeyrac. “That’s the brutal part of it. fter the fillip on the nose, the blow from the fist. The army is reaching out ts big paw to us. The barricade is going to be severely shaken up. The usillade tries, the cannon takes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.22#“It is a piece of eight, new model, brass,” added Combeferre. “Those ieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of tin to one undred of brass is exceeded. The excess of tin renders them too tender. Then it omes to pass that they have caves and chambers when looked at from the vent ole. In order to obviate this danger, and to render it possible to force the harge, it may become necessary to return to the process of the fourteenth entury, hooping, and to encircle the piece on the outside with a series of nwelded steel bands, from the breech to the trunnions. In the meantime, they emedy this defect as best they may; they manage to discover where the holes are ocated in the vent of a cannon, by means of a searcher. But there is a better ethod, with Gribeauval’s movable star.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.23#“In the sixteenth century,” remarked Bossuet, “they used to rifle annon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.24#“Yes,” replied Combeferre, “that augments the projectile force, but iminishes the accuracy of the firing. In firing at short range, the trajectory s not as rigid as could be desired, the parabola is exaggerated, the line of he projectile is no longer sufficiently rectilinear to allow of its striking ntervening objects, which is, nevertheless, a necessity of battle, the mportance of which increases with the proximity of the enemy and the recipitation of the discharge. This defect of the tension of the curve of the rojectile in the rifled cannon of the sixteenth century arose from the mallness of the charge; small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by he ballistic necessities, such, for instance, as the preservation of the un-carriage. In short, that despot, the cannon, cannot do all that it desires; orce is a great weakness. A cannon-ball only travels six hundred leagues an our; light travels seventy thousand leagues a second. Such is the superiority f Jesus Christ over Napoleon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.25#“Reload your guns,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.26#How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under the annon-balls? Would they effect a breach? That was the question. While the nsurgents were reloading their guns, the artillery-men were loading the annon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.27#The anxiety in the redoubt was profound.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.28#The shot sped the report burst forth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.29#“Present!” shouted a joyous voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.30#And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashed gainst it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.31#He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne, and he had nimbly climbed ver the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth of the Rue de la etite Truanderie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.32#Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than the annon-ball.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.33#The ball buried itself in the mass of rubbish. At the most there was an mnibus wheel broken, and the old Anceau cart was demolished. On seeing this, he barricade burst into a laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.7.34#“Go on!” shouted Bossuet to the artillerists.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE ARTILLERY-MEN COMPEL PEOPLE TO TAKE THEM ERIOUSLY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.1#They flocked round Gavroche. But he had no time to tell anything. Marius rew him aside with a shudder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.2#“What are you doing here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.3#“Hullo!” said the child, “what are you doing here yourself?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.4#And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery. His eyes grew arger with the proud light within them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.5#It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.6#“Who told you to come back? Did you deliver my letter at the address?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.7#Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of that letter. In is haste to return to the barricade, he had got rid of it rather than delivered t. He was forced to acknowledge to himself that he had confided it rather ightly to that stranger whose face he had not been able to make out. It is true hat the man was bareheaded, but that was not sufficient. In short, he had been dministering to himself little inward remonstrances and he feared Marius’ eproaches. In order to extricate himself from the predicament, he took the implest course; he lied abominably.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.8#“Citizen, I delivered the letter to the porter. The lady was asleep. She ill have the letter when she wakes up.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.9#Marius had had two objects in sending that letter: to bid farewell to osette and to save Gavroche. He was obliged to content himself with the half of is desire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.10#The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in the arricade, was a coincidence which occurred to him. He pointed out M. auchelevent to Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.11#“Do you know that man?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.12#“No,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.13#Gavroche had, in fact, as we have just mentioned, seen Jean Valjean only t night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.14#The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves in arius’ mind were dissipated. Did he know M. Fauchelevent’s opinions? Perhaps M. auchelevent was a republican. Hence his very natural presence in this ombat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.15#In the meanwhile, Gavroche was shouting, at the other end of the arricade: “My gun!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.16#Courfeyrac had it returned to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.17#Gavroche warned “his comrades” as he called them, that the barricade was locked. He had had great difficulty in reaching it. A battalion of the line hose arms were piled in the Rue de la Petite Truanderie was on the watch on the ide of the Rue du Cygne; on the opposite side, the municipal guard occupied the ue des Prêcheurs. The bulk of the army was facing them in front.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.18#This information given, Gavroche added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.19#“I authorize you to hit ‘em a tremendous whack.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.20#Meanwhile, Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at his mbrasure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.21#The assailants, dissatisfied, no doubt, with their shot, had not repeated t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.22#A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end of the treet behind the piece of ordnance. The soldiers were tearing up the pavement nd constructing with the stones a small, low wall, a sort of side-work not more han eighteen inches high, and facing the barricade. In the angle at the left of his epaulement, there was visible the head of the column of a battalion from he suburbs massed in the Rue Saint-Denis.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.23#Enjolras, on the watch, thought he distinguished the peculiar sound which s produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the caissons, and he aw the commander of the piece change the elevation and incline the mouth of the annon slightly to the left. Then the cannoneers began to load the piece. The hief seized the lint-stock himself and lowered it to the vent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.24#“Down with your heads, hug the wall!” shouted Enjolras, “and all on your nees along the barricade!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.25#The insurgents who were straggling in front of the wine-shop, and who had uitted their posts of combat on Gavroche’s arrival, rushed pell-mell towards he barricade; but before Enjolras’ order could be executed, the discharge took lace with the terrifying rattle of a round of grape-shot. This is what it was, n fact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.26#The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt, and had there ebounded from the wall; and this terrible rebound had produced two dead and hree wounded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.27#If this were continued, the barricade was no longer tenable. The rape-shot made its way in.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.28#A murmur of consternation arose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.29#“Let us prevent the second discharge,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.30#And, lowering his rifle, he took aim at the captain of the gun, who, at hat moment, was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying and efinitely fixing its pointing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.31#The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery, very young, lond, with a very gentle face, and the intelligent air peculiar to that redestined and redoubtable weapon which, by dint of perfecting itself in orror, must end in killing war.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.32#Combeferre, who was standing beside Enjolras, scrutinized this young an.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.33#“What a pity!” said Combeferre. “What hideous things these butcheries are! ome, when there are no more kings, there will be no more war. Enjolras, you are aking aim at that sergeant, you are not looking at him. Fancy, he is a charming oung man; he is intrepid; it is evident that he is thoughtful; those young rtillery-men are very well educated; he has a father, a mother, a family; he is robably in love; he is not more than five and twenty at the most; he might be our brother.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.34#“He is,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.35#“Yes,” replied Combeferre, “he is mine too. Well, let us not kill im.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.36#“Let me alone. It must be done.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.37#And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras’ marble cheek.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.38#At the same moment, he pressed the trigger of his rifle. The flame leaped orth. The artillery-man turned round twice, his arms extended in front of him, is head uplifted, as though for breath, then he fell with his side on the gun, nd lay there motionless. They could see his back, from the centre of which here flowed directly a stream of blood. The ball had traversed his breast from ide to side. He was dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.8.39#He had to be carried away and replaced by another. Several minutes were hus gained, in fact.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.head#CHAPTER IX—EMPLOYMENT OF THE OLD TALENTS OF A POACHER AND THAT NFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.1#Opinions were exchanged in the barricade. The firing from the gun was about o begin again. Against that grape-shot, they could not hold out a quarter of an our longer. It was absolutely necessary to deaden the blows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.2#Enjolras issued this command:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.3#“We must place a mattress there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.4#“We have none,” said Combeferre, “the wounded are lying on them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.5#Jean Valjean, who was seated apart on a stone post, at the corner of the avern, with his gun between his knees, had, up to that moment, taken no part in nything that was going on. He did not appear to hear the combatants saying round him: “Here is a gun that is doing nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.6#At the order issued by Enjolras, he rose.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.7#It will be remembered that, on the arrival of the rabble in the Rue de la hanvrerie, an old woman, foreseeing the bullets, had placed her mattress in ront of her window. This window, an attic window, was on the roof of a ix-story house situated a little beyond the barricade. The mattress, placed ross-wise, supported at the bottom on two poles for drying linen, was upheld at he top by two ropes, which, at that distance, looked like two threads, and hich were attached to two nails planted in the window frames. These ropes were istinctly visible, like hairs, against the sky.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.8#“Can some one lend me a double-barrelled rifle?” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.9#Enjolras, who had just re-loaded his, handed it to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.10#Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.11#One of the mattress ropes was cut.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.12#The mattress now hung by one thread only.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.13#Jean Valjean fired the second charge. The second rope lashed the panes of he attic window. The mattress slipped between the two poles and fell into the treet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.14#The barricade applauded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.15#All voices cried:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.16#“Here is a mattress!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.17#“Yes,” said Combeferre, “but who will go and fetch it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.18#The mattress had, in fact, fallen outside the barricade, between besiegers nd besieged. Now, the death of the sergeant of artillery having exasperated the roop, the soldiers had, for several minutes, been lying flat on their stomachs ehind the line of paving-stones which they had erected, and, in order to supply he forced silence of the piece, which was quiet while its service was in course f reorganization, they had opened fire on the barricade. The insurgents did not eply to this musketry, in order to spare their ammunition. The fusillade broke gainst the barricade; but the street, which it filled, was terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.19#Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut, entered the street, traversed the torm of bullets, walked up to the mattress, hoisted it upon his back, and eturned to the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.20#He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands. He fixed it there gainst the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not see it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.21#That done, they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.22#It was not long in coming.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.23#The cannon vomited forth its package of buckshot with a roar. But there as no rebound. The effect which they had foreseen had been attained. The arricade was saved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.24#“Citizen,” said Enjolras to Jean Valjean, “the Republic thanks you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.25#Bossuet admired and laughed. He exclaimed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.9.26#“It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power. Triumph of that hich yields over that which strikes with lightning. But never mind, glory to he mattress which annuls a cannon!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.head#CHAPTER X—DAWN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.1#At that moment, Cosette awoke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.2#Her chamber was narrow, neat, unobtrusive, with a long sash-window, facing he East on the back court-yard of the house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.3#Cosette knew nothing of what was going on in Paris. She had not been there n the preceding evening, and she had already retired to her chamber when oussaint had said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.4#“It appears that there is a row.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.5#Cosette had slept only a few hours, but soundly. She had had sweet dreams, hich possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was very white. Some one, ho was Marius, had appeared to her in the light. She awoke with the sun in her yes, which, at first, produced on her the effect of being a continuation of her ream. Her first thought on emerging from this dream was a smiling one. Cosette elt herself thoroughly reassured. Like Jean Valjean, she had, a few hours reviously, passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutely will not ear of unhappiness. She began to cherish hope, with all her might, without nowing why. Then she felt a pang at her heart. It was three days since she had een Marius. But she said to herself that he must have received her letter, that e knew where she was, and that he was so clever that he would find means of eaching her.—And that certainly to-day, and perhaps that very morning.—It was road daylight, but the rays of light were very horizontal; she thought that it as very early, but that she must rise, nevertheless, in order to receive arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.6#She felt that she could not live without Marius, and that, consequently, hat was sufficient and that Marius would come. No objection was valid. All this as certain. It was monstrous enough already to have suffered for three days. arius absent three days, this was horrible on the part of the good God. Now, his cruel teasing from on high had been gone through with. Marius was about to rrive, and he would bring good news. Youth is made thus; it quickly dries its yes; it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it. Youth is the smile of the uture in the presence of an unknown quantity, which is itself. It is natural to t to be happy. It seems as though its respiration were made of hope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.7#Moreover, Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on the ubject of this absence which was to last only one day, and what explanation of t he had given her. Every one has noticed with what nimbleness a coin which one as dropped on the ground rolls away and hides, and with what art it renders tself undiscoverable. There are thoughts which play us the same trick; they estle away in a corner of our brain; that is the end of them; they are lost; it s impossible to lay the memory on them. Cosette was somewhat vexed at the seless little effort made by her memory. She told herself, that it was very aughty and very wicked of her, to have forgotten the words uttered by arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.8#She sprang out of bed and accomplished the two ablutions of soul and body, er prayers and her toilet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.9#One may, in a case of exigency, introduce the reader into a nuptial hamber, not into a virginal chamber. Verse would hardly venture it, prose must ot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.10#It is the interior of a flower that is not yet unfolded, it is whiteness n the dark, it is the private cell of a closed lily, which must not be gazed pon by man so long as the sun has not gazed upon it. Woman in the bud is acred. That innocent bud which opens, that adorable half-nudity which is afraid f itself, that white foot which takes refuge in a slipper, that throat which eils itself before a mirror as though a mirror were an eye, that chemise which akes haste to rise up and conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture r a passing vehicle, those cords tied, those clasps fastened, those laces rawn, those tremors, those shivers of cold and modesty, that exquisite affright n every movement, that almost winged uneasiness where there is no cause for larm, the successive phases of dressing, as charming as the clouds of dawn,—it s not fitting that all this should be narrated, and it is too much to have even alled attention to it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.11#The eye of man must be more religious in the presence of the rising of a oung girl than in the presence of the rising of a star. The possibility of urting should inspire an augmentation of respect. The down on the peach, the loom on the plum, the radiated crystal of the snow, the wing of the butterfly owdered with feathers, are coarse compared to that chastity which does not even now that it is chaste. The young girl is only the flash of a dream, and is not et a statue. Her bed-chamber is hidden in the sombre part of the ideal. The ndiscreet touch of a glance brutalizes this vague penumbra. Here, contemplation s profanation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.12#We shall, therefore, show nothing of that sweet little flutter of osette’s rising.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.13#An oriental tale relates how the rose was made white by God, but that Adam ooked upon her when she was unfolding, and she was ashamed and turned crimson. e are of the number who fall speechless in the presence of young girls and lowers, since we think them worthy of veneration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.14#Cosette dressed herself very hastily, combed and dressed her hair, which as a very simple matter in those days, when women did not swell out their curls nd bands with cushions and puffs, and did not put crinoline in their locks. hen she opened the window and cast her eyes around her in every direction, oping to descry some bit of the street, an angle of the house, an edge of avement, so that she might be able to watch for Marius there. But no view of he outside was to be had. The back court was surrounded by tolerably high alls, and the outlook was only on several gardens. Cosette pronounced these ardens hideous: for the first time in her life, she found flowers ugly. The mallest scrap of the gutter of the street would have met her wishes better. She ecided to gaze at the sky, as though she thought that Marius might come from hat quarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.15#All at once, she burst into tears. Not that this was fickleness of soul; ut hopes cut in twain by dejection—that was her case. She had a confused onsciousness of something horrible. Thoughts were rife in the air, in fact. She old herself that she was not sure of anything, that to withdraw herself from ight was to be lost; and the idea that Marius could return to her from heaven ppeared to her no longer charming but mournful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.16#Then, as is the nature of these clouds, calm returned to her, and hope and sort of unconscious smile, which yet indicated trust in God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.17#Every one in the house was still asleep. A country-like silence reigned. ot a shutter had been opened. The porter’s lodge was closed. Toussaint had not isen, and Cosette, naturally, thought that her father was asleep. She must have uffered much, and she must have still been suffering greatly, for she said to erself, that her father had been unkind; but she counted on Marius. The eclipse f such a light was decidedly impossible. Now and then, she heard sharp shocks n the distance, and she said: “It is odd that people should be opening and hutting their carriage gates so early.” They were the reports of the cannon attering the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.10.18#A few feet below Cosette’s window, in the ancient and perfectly black ornice of the wall, there was a martin’s nest; the curve of this nest formed a ittle projection beyond the cornice, so that from above it was possible to look nto this little paradise. The mother was there, spreading her wings like a fan ver her brood; the father fluttered about, flew away, then came back, bearing n his beak food and kisses. The dawning day gilded this happy thing, the great aw, “Multiply,” lay there smiling and august, and that sweet mystery unfolded n the glory of the morning. Cosette, with her hair in the sunlight, her soul bsorbed in chimæras, illuminated by love within and by the dawn without, bent ver mechanically, and almost without daring to avow to herself that she was hinking at the same time of Marius, began to gaze at these birds, at this amily, at that male and female, that mother and her little ones, with the rofound trouble which a nest produces on a virgin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.head#CHAPTER XI—THE SHOT WHICH MISSES NOTHING AND KILLS NO ONE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.1#The assailants’ fire continued. Musketry and grape-shot alternated, but ithout committing great ravages, to tell the truth. The top alone of the orinthe façade suffered; the window on the first floor, and the attic window in he roof, riddled with buckshot and biscaïens, were slowly losing their shape. he combatants who had been posted there had been obliged to withdraw. However, his is according to the tactics of barricades; to fire for a long while, in rder to exhaust the insurgents’ ammunition, if they commit the mistake of eplying. When it is perceived, from the slackening of their fire, that they ave no more powder and ball, the assault is made. Enjolras had not fallen into his trap; the barricade did not reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.2#At every discharge by platoons, Gavroche puffed out his cheek with his ongue, a sign of supreme disdain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.3#“Good for you,” said he, “rip up the cloth. We want some lint.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.4#Courfeyrac called the grape-shot to order for the little effect which it roduced, and said to the cannon:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.5#“You are growing diffuse, my good fellow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.6#One gets puzzled in battle, as at a ball. It is probable that this silence n the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegers uneasy, and to make hem fear some unexpected incident, and that they felt the necessity of getting clear view behind that heap of paving-stones, and of knowing what was going on ehind that impassable wall which received blows without retorting. The nsurgents suddenly perceived a helmet glittering in the sun on a neighboring oof. A fireman had placed his back against a tall chimney, and seemed to be cting as sentinel. His glance fell directly down into the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.7#“There’s an embarrassing watcher,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.8#Jean Valjean had returned Enjolras’ rifle, but he had his own gun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.9#Without saying a word, he took aim at the fireman, and, a second later, the elmet, smashed by a bullet, rattled noisily into the street. The terrified oldier made haste to disappear. A second observer took his place. This one was n officer. Jean Valjean, who had re-loaded his gun, took aim at the newcomer nd sent the officer’s casque to join the soldier’s. The officer did not ersist, and retired speedily. This time the warning was understood. No one made is appearance thereafter on that roof; and the idea of spying on the barricade as abandoned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.10#“Why did you not kill the man?” Bossuet asked Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.11.11#Jean Valjean made no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.head#CHAPTER XII—DISORDER A PARTISAN OF ORDER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.1#Bossuet muttered in Combeferre’s ear:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.2#“He did not answer my question.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.3#“He is a man who does good by gun-shots,” said Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.4#Those who have preserved some memory of this already distant epoch know hat the National Guard from the suburbs was valiant against insurrections. It as particularly zealous and intrepid in the days of June, 1832. A certain good ram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or la Cunette, whose “establishment” had een closed by the riots, became leonine at the sight of his deserted ance-hall, and got himself killed to preserve the order represented by a ea-garden. In that bourgeois and heroic time, in the presence of ideas which ad their knights, interests had their paladins. The prosiness of the riginators detracted nothing from the bravery of the movement. The diminution f a pile of crowns made bankers sing the Marseillaise. They shed their blood yrically for the counting-house; and they defended the shop, that immense iminutive of the fatherland, with Lacedæmonian enthusiasm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.5#At bottom, we will observe, there was nothing in all this that was not xtremely serious. It was social elements entering into strife, while awaiting he day when they should enter into equilibrium.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.6#Another sign of the times was the anarchy mingled with governmentalism [the arbarous name of the correct party]. People were for order in combination with ack of discipline.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.7#The drum suddenly beat capricious calls, at the command of such or such a olonel of the National Guard; such and such a captain went into action through nspiration; such and such National Guardsmen fought, “for an idea,” and on heir own account. At critical moments, on “days” they took counsel less of heir leaders than of their instincts. There existed in the army of order, eritable guerilleros, some of the sword, like Fannicot, others of the pen, like enri Fonfrède.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.8#Civilization, unfortunately, represented at this epoch rather by an ggregation of interests than by a group of principles, was or thought itself, n peril; it set up the cry of alarm; each, constituting himself a centre, efended it, succored it, and protected it with his own head; and the first omer took it upon himself to save society.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.9#Zeal sometimes proceeded to extermination. A platoon of the National Guard ould constitute itself on its own authority a private council of war, and judge nd execute a captured insurgent in five minutes. It was an improvisation of his sort that had slain Jean Prouvaire. Fierce Lynch law, with which no one arty had any right to reproach the rest, for it has been applied by the epublic in America, as well as by the monarchy in Europe. This Lynch law was omplicated with mistakes. On one day of rioting, a young poet, named Paul Aimé arnier, was pursued in the Place Royale, with a bayonet at his loins, and only scaped by taking refuge under the porte-cochère of No. 6. They houted:—“There’s another of those Saint-Simonians!” and they wanted to kill im. Now, he had under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de aint-Simon. A National Guard had read the words _Saint-Simon_ on the book, and ad shouted: “Death!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.10#On the 6th of June, 1832, a company of the National Guards from the uburbs, commanded by the Captain Fannicot, above mentioned, had itself ecimated in the Rue de la Chanvrerie out of caprice and its own good pleasure. his fact, singular though it may seem, was proved at the judicial investigation pened in consequence of the insurrection of 1832. Captain Fannicot, a bold and mpatient bourgeois, a sort of condottiere of the order of those whom we have ust characterized, a fanatical and intractable governmentalist, could not esist the temptation to fire prematurely, and the ambition of capturing the arricade alone and unaided, that is to say, with his company. Exasperated by he successive apparition of the red flag and the old coat which he took for the lack flag, he loudly blamed the generals and chiefs of the corps, who were olding council and did not think that the moment for the decisive assault had rrived, and who were allowing “the insurrection to fry in its own fat,” to use he celebrated expression of one of them. For his part, he thought the barricade ipe, and as that which is ripe ought to fall, he made the attempt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.11#He commanded men as resolute as himself, “raging fellows,” as a witness aid. His company, the same which had shot Jean Prouvaire the poet, was the irst of the battalion posted at the angle of the street. At the moment when hey were least expecting it, the captain launched his men against the arricade. This movement, executed with more good will than strategy, cost the annicot company dear. Before it had traversed two thirds of the street it was eceived by a general discharge from the barricade. Four, the most audacious, ho were running on in front, were mown down point-blank at the very foot of the edoubt, and this courageous throng of National Guards, very brave men but acking in military tenacity, were forced to fall back, after some hesitation, eaving fifteen corpses on the pavement. This momentary hesitation gave the nsurgents time to re-load their weapons, and a second and very destructive ischarge struck the company before it could regain the corner of the street, ts shelter. A moment more, and it was caught between two fires, and it received he volley from the battery piece which, not having received the order, had not iscontinued its firing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.12#The intrepid and imprudent Fannicot was one of the dead from this rape-shot. He was killed by the cannon, that is to say, by order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.13#This attack, which was more furious than serious, irritated Enjolras.—“The ools!” said he. “They are getting their own men killed and they are using up ur ammunition for nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.12.14#Enjolras spoke like the real general of insurrection which he was. nsurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons. Insurrection, which s speedily exhausted, has only a certain number of shots to fire and a certain umber of combatants to expend. An empty cartridge-box, a man killed, cannot be eplaced. As repression has the army, it does not count its men, and, as it has incennes, it does not count its shots. Repression has as many regiments as the arricade has men, and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes. hus they are struggles of one against a hundred, which always end in crushing he barricade; unless the revolution, uprising suddenly, flings into the balance ts flaming archangel’s sword. This does happen sometimes. Then everything ises, the pavements begin to seethe, popular redoubts abound. Paris quivers upremely, the _quid divinum_ is given forth, a 10th of August is in the air, a 9th of July is in the air, a wonderful light appears, the yawning maw of force raws back, and the army, that lion, sees before it, erect and tranquil, that rophet, France.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.head#CHAPTER XIII—PASSING GLEAMS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.1#In the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade, there is little of everything; there is bravery, there is youth, honor, enthusiasm, the deal, conviction, the rage of the gambler, and, above all, intermittences of ope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.2#One of these intermittences, one of these vague quivers of hope suddenly raversed the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie at the moment when it was east expected.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.3#“Listen,” suddenly cried Enjolras, who was still on the watch, “it seems to e that Paris is waking up.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.4#It is certain that, on the morning of the 6th of June, the insurrection roke out afresh for an hour or two, to a certain extent. The obstinacy of the larm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies. Barricades were begun in the ue du Poirier and the Rue des Gravilliers. In front of the Porte Saint-Martin, young man, armed with a rifle, attacked alone a squadron of cavalry. In plain ight, on the open boulevard, he placed one knee on the ground, shouldered his eapon, fired, killed the commander of the squadron, and turned away, saying: There’s another who will do us no more harm.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.5#He was put to the sword. In the Rue Saint-Denis, a woman fired on the ational Guard from behind a lowered blind. The slats of the blind could be seen o tremble at every shot. A child fourteen years of age was arrested in the Rue e la Cossonerie, with his pockets full of cartridges. Many posts were attacked. t the entrance to the Rue Bertin-Poirée, a very lively and utterly unexpected usillade welcomed a regiment of cuirrassiers, at whose head marched Marshal eneral Cavaignac de Barague. In the Rue Planche-Mibray, they threw old pieces f pottery and household utensils down on the soldiers from the roofs; a bad ign; and when this matter was reported to Marshal Soult, Napoleon’s old ieutenant grew thoughtful, as he recalled Suchet’s saying at Saragossa: “We are ost when the old women empty their pots de chambre on our heads.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.6#These general symptoms which presented themselves at the moment when it was hought that the uprising had been rendered local, this fever of wrath, these parks which flew hither and thither above those deep masses of combustibles hich are called the faubourgs of Paris,—all this, taken together, disturbed the ilitary chiefs. They made haste to stamp out these beginnings of onflagration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.7#They delayed the attack on the barricades Maubuée, de la Chanvrerie and aint-Merry until these sparks had been extinguished, in order that they might ave to deal with the barricades only and be able to finish them at one blow. olumns were thrown into the streets where there was fermentation, sweeping the arge, sounding the small, right and left, now slowly and cautiously, now at ull charge. The troops broke in the doors of houses whence shots had been ired; at the same time, manœuvres by the cavalry dispersed the groups on the oulevards. This repression was not effected without some commotion, and without hat tumultuous uproar peculiar to collisions between the army and the people. his was what Enjolras had caught in the intervals of the cannonade and the usketry. Moreover, he had seen wounded men passing the end of the street in itters, and he said to Courfeyrac:—“Those wounded do not come from us.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.8#Their hope did not last long; the gleam was quickly eclipsed. In less than alf an hour, what was in the air vanished, it was a flash of lightning naccompanied by thunder, and the insurgents felt that sort of leaden cope, hich the indifference of the people casts over obstinate and deserted men, fall ver them once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.9#The general movement, which seemed to have assumed a vague outline, had iscarried; and the attention of the minister of war and the strategy of the enerals could now be concentrated on the three or four barricades which still emained standing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.10#The sun was mounting above the horizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.11#An insurgent hailed Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.12#“We are hungry here. Are we really going to die like this, without nything to eat?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.13.13#Enjolras, who was still leaning on his elbows at his embrasure, made an ffirmative sign with his head, but without taking his eyes from the end of the treet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.head#CHAPTER XIV—WHEREIN WILL APPEAR THE NAME OF ENJOLRAS’ MISTRESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.1#Courfeyrac, seated on a paving-stone beside Enjolras, continued to insult he cannon, and each time that that gloomy cloud of projectiles which is called rape-shot passed overhead with its terrible sound he assailed it with a burst f irony.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.2#“You are wearing out your lungs, poor, brutal, old fellow, you pain me, you re wasting your row. That’s not thunder, it’s a cough.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.3#And the bystanders laughed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.4#Courfeyrac and Bossuet, whose brave good humor increased with the peril, ike Madame Scarron, replaced nourishment with pleasantry, and, as wine was acking, they poured out gayety to all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.5#“I admire Enjolras,” said Bossuet. “His impassive temerity astounds me. He ives alone, which renders him a little sad, perhaps; Enjolras complains of his reatness, which binds him to widowhood. The rest of us have mistresses, more or ess, who make us crazy, that is to say, brave. When a man is as much in love as tiger, the least that he can do is to fight like a lion. That is one way of aking our revenge for the capers that mesdames our grisettes play on us. Roland ets himself killed for Angélique; all our heroism comes from our women. A man ithout a woman is a pistol without a trigger; it is the woman that sets the man ff. Well, Enjolras has no woman. He is not in love, and yet he manages to be ntrepid. It is a thing unheard of that a man should be as cold as ice and as old as fire.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.6#Enjolras did not appear to be listening, but had any one been near him, hat person would have heard him mutter in a low voice: “Patria.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.7#Bossuet was still laughing when Courfeyrac exclaimed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.8#“News!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.9#And assuming the tone of an usher making an announcement, he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.10#“My name is Eight-Pounder.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.11#In fact, a new personage had entered on the scene. This was a second piece f ordnance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.12#The artillery-men rapidly performed their manœuvres in force and placed his second piece in line with the first.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.13#This outlined the catastrophe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.14#A few minutes later, the two pieces, rapidly served, were firing oint-blank at the redoubt; the platoon firing of the line and of the soldiers rom the suburbs sustained the artillery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.15#Another cannonade was audible at some distance. At the same time that the wo guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de la Chanvrerie, two ther cannons, trained one from the Rue Saint-Denis, the other from the Rue ubry-le-Boucher, were riddling the Saint-Merry barricade. The four cannons choed each other mournfully.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.16#The barking of these sombre dogs of war replied to each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.17#One of the two pieces which was now battering the barricade on the Rue de a Chanvrerie was firing grape-shot, the other balls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.18#The piece which was firing balls was pointed a little high, and the aim as calculated so that the ball struck the extreme edge of the upper crest of he barricade, and crumbled the stone down upon the insurgents, mingled with ursts of grape-shot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.19#The object of this mode of firing was to drive the insurgents from the ummit of the redoubt, and to compel them to gather close in the interior, that s to say, this announced the assault.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.20#The combatants once driven from the crest of the barricade by balls, and rom the windows of the cabaret by grape-shot, the attacking columns could enture into the street without being picked off, perhaps, even, without being een, could briskly and suddenly scale the redoubt, as on the preceding evening, nd, who knows? take it by surprise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.21#“It is absolutely necessary that the inconvenience of those guns should be iminished,” said Enjolras, and he shouted: “Fire on the artillery-men!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.22#All were ready. The barricade, which had long been silent, poured forth a esperate fire; seven or eight discharges followed, with a sort of rage and joy; he street was filled with blinding smoke, and, at the end of a few minutes, thwart this mist all streaked with flame, two thirds of the gunners could be istinguished lying beneath the wheels of the cannons. Those who were left tanding continued to serve the pieces with severe tranquillity, but the fire ad slackened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.23#“Things are going well now,” said Bossuet to Enjolras. “Success.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.24#Enjolras shook his head and replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.25#“Another quarter of an hour of this success, and there will not be any artridges left in the barricade.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.14.26#It appears that Gavroche overheard this remark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.head#CHAPTER XV—GAVROCHE OUTSIDE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.1#Courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of the barricade, utside in the street, amid the bullets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.2#Gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine-shop, had made his way out hrough the cut, and was quietly engaged in emptying the full cartridge-boxes of he National Guardsmen who had been killed on the slope of the redoubt, into his asket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.3#“What are you doing there?” asked Courfeyrac.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.4#Gavroche raised his face:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.5#“I’m filling my basket, citizen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.6#“Don’t you see the grape-shot?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.7#Gavroche replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.8#“Well, it is raining. What then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.9#Courfeyrac shouted:—“Come in!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.10#“Instanter,” said Gavroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.11#And with a single bound he plunged into the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.12#It will be remembered that Fannicot’s company had left behind it a trail f bodies. Twenty corpses lay scattered here and there on the pavement, through he whole length of the street. Twenty cartouches for Gavroche meant a provision f cartridges for the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.13#The smoke in the street was like a fog. Whoever has beheld a cloud which as fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpments can imagine this moke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rows of lofty houses. It rose radually and was incessantly renewed; hence a twilight which made even the road daylight turn pale. The combatants could hardly see each other from one nd of the street to the other, short as it was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.14#This obscurity, which had probably been desired and calculated on by the ommanders who were to direct the assault on the barricade, was useful to avroche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.15#Beneath the folds of this veil of smoke, and thanks to his small size, he ould advance tolerably far into the street without being seen. He rifled the irst seven or eight cartridge-boxes without much danger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.16#He crawled flat on his belly, galloped on all fours, took his basket in is teeth, twisted, glided, undulated, wound from one dead body to another, and mptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a nut.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.17#They did not dare to shout to him to return from the barricade, which was uite near, for fear of attracting attention to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.18#On one body, that of a corporal, he found a powder-flask.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.19#“For thirst,” said he, putting it in his pocket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.20#By dint of advancing, he reached a point where the fog of the fusillade ecame transparent. So that the sharpshooters of the line ranged on the outlook ehind their paving-stone dike and the sharpshooters of the banlieue massed at he corner of the street suddenly pointed out to each other something moving hrough the smoke.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.21#At the moment when Gavroche was relieving a sergeant, who was lying near a tone door-post, of his cartridges, a bullet struck the body.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.22#“Fichtre!” ejaculated Gavroche. “They are killing my dead men for me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.23#A second bullet struck a spark from the pavement beside him.—A third verturned his basket.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.24#Gavroche looked and saw that this came from the men of the banlieue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.25#He sprang to his feet, stood erect, with his hair flying in the wind, his ands on his hips, his eyes fixed on the National Guardsmen who were firing, and ang:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.26#“On est laid à Nanterre, “Men are ugly at Nanterre, C’est la faute à oltaire; ‘Tis the fault of Voltaire; Et bête à Palaiseau, And dull at alaiseau, C’est la faute à Rousseau.” ‘Tis the fault of Rousseau.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.27#Then he picked up his basket, replaced the cartridges which had fallen rom it, without missing a single one, and, advancing towards the fusillade, set bout plundering another cartridge-box. There a fourth bullet missed him, again. avroche sang:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.28#“Je ne suis pas notaire, “I am not a notary, C’est la faute à Voltaire; Tis the fault of Voltaire; Je suis un petit oiseau, I’m a little bird, C’est la aute à Rousseau.” ‘Tis the fault of Rousseau.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.29#A fifth bullet only succeeded in drawing from him a third couplet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.30#“Joie est mon caractère, “Joy is my character, C’est la faute à Voltaire; Tis the fault of Voltaire; Misère est mon trousseau, Misery is my trousseau, ’est la faute à Rousseau.” ‘Tis the fault of Rousseau.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.31#Thus it went on for some time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.32#It was a charming and terrible sight. Gavroche, though shot at, was easing the fusillade. He had the air of being greatly diverted. It was the parrow pecking at the sportsmen. To each discharge he retorted with a couplet. hey aimed at him constantly, and always missed him. The National Guardsmen and he soldiers laughed as they took aim at him. He lay down, sprang to his feet, id in the corner of a doorway, then made a bound, disappeared, reappeared, campered away, returned, replied to the grape-shot with his thumb at his nose, nd, all the while, went on pillaging the cartouches, emptying the artridge-boxes, and filling his basket. The insurgents, panting with anxiety, ollowed him with their eyes. The barricade trembled; he sang. He was not a hild, he was not a man; he was a strange gamin-fairy. He might have been called he invulnerable dwarf of the fray. The bullets flew after him, he was more imble than they. He played a fearful game of hide and seek with death; every ime that the flat-nosed face of the spectre approached, the urchin administered o it a fillip.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.33#One bullet, however, better aimed or more treacherous than the rest, inally struck the will-o’-the-wisp of a child. Gavroche was seen to stagger, hen he sank to the earth. The whole barricade gave vent to a cry; but there was omething of Antæus in that pygmy; for the gamin to touch the pavement is the ame as for the giant to touch the earth; Gavroche had fallen only to rise gain; he remained in a sitting posture, a long thread of blood streaked his ace, he raised both arms in the air, glanced in the direction whence the shot ad come, and began to sing:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.34#“Je suis tombé par terre, “I have fallen to the earth, C’est la faute à oltaire; ‘Tis the fault of Voltaire; Le nez dans le ruisseau, With my nose in he gutter, C’est la faute à . . . “ ‘Tis the fault of . . . ”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.15.35#He did not finish. A second bullet from the same marksman stopped him hort. This time he fell face downward on the pavement, and moved no more. This rand little soul had taken its flight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.head#CHAPTER XVI—HOW FROM A BROTHER ONE BECOMES A FATHER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.1#At that same moment, in the garden of the Luxembourg,—for the gaze of the rama must be everywhere present,—two children were holding each other by the and. One might have been seven years old, the other five. The rain having oaked them, they were walking along the paths on the sunny side; the elder was eading the younger; they were pale and ragged; they had the air of wild birds. he smaller of them said: “I am very hungry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.2#The elder, who was already somewhat of a protector, was leading his brother ith his left hand and in his right he carried a small stick.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.3#They were alone in the garden. The garden was deserted, the gates had been losed by order of the police, on account of the insurrection. The troops who ad been bivouacking there had departed for the exigencies of combat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.4#How did those children come there? Perhaps they had escaped from some uard-house which stood ajar; perhaps there was in the vicinity, at the Barrière ’Enfer; or on the Esplanade de l’Observatoire, or in the neighboring carrefour, ominated by the pediment on which could be read: _Invenerunt parvulum pannis nvolutum_, some mountebank’s booth from which they had fled; perhaps they had, n the preceding evening, escaped the eye of the inspectors of the garden at the our of closing, and had passed the night in some one of those sentry-boxes here people read the papers? The fact is, they were stray lambs and they seemed ree. To be astray and to seem free is to be lost. These poor little creatures ere, in fact, lost.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.5#These two children were the same over whom Gavroche had been put to some rouble, as the reader will recollect. Children of the Thénardiers, leased out o Magnon, attributed to M. Gillenormand, and now leaves fallen from all these ootless branches, and swept over the ground by the wind. Their clothing, which ad been clean in Magnon’s day, and which had served her as a prospectus with M. illenormand, had been converted into rags.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.6#Henceforth these beings belonged to the statistics as “Abandoned children,” hom the police take note of, collect, mislay and find again on the pavements of aris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.7#It required the disturbance of a day like that to account for these iserable little creatures being in that garden. If the superintendents had aught sight of them, they would have driven such rags forth. Poor little things o not enter public gardens; still, people should reflect that, as children, hey have a right to flowers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.8#These children were there, thanks to the locked gates. They were there ontrary to the regulations. They had slipped into the garden and there they emained. Closed gates do not dismiss the inspectors, oversight is supposed to ontinue, but it grows slack and reposes; and the inspectors, moved by the ublic anxiety and more occupied with the outside than the inside, no longer lanced into the garden, and had not seen the two delinquents.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.9#It had rained the night before, and even a little in the morning. But in une, showers do not count for much. An hour after a storm, it can hardly be een that the beautiful blonde day has wept. The earth, in summer, is as quickly ried as the cheek of a child. At that period of the solstice, the light of full oonday is, so to speak, poignant. It takes everything. It applies itself to the arth, and superposes itself with a sort of suction. One would say that the sun as thirsty. A shower is but a glass of water; a rainstorm is instantly drunk p. In the morning everything was dripping, in the afternoon everything is owdered over.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.10#Nothing is so worthy of admiration as foliage washed by the rain and wiped y the rays of sunlight; it is warm freshness. The gardens and meadows, having ater at their roots, and sun in their flowers, become perfuming-pans of ncense, and smoke with all their odors at once. Everything smiles, sings and ffers itself. One feels gently intoxicated. The springtime is a provisional aradise, the sun helps man to have patience.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.11#There are beings who demand nothing further; mortals, who, having the zure of heaven, say: “It is enough!” dreamers absorbed in the wonderful, ipping into the idolatry of nature, indifferent to good and evil, contemplators f cosmos and radiantly forgetful of man, who do not understand how people can ccupy themselves with the hunger of these, and the thirst of those, with the udity of the poor in winter, with the lymphatic curvature of the little spinal olumn, with the pallet, the attic, the dungeon, and the rags of shivering young irls, when they can dream beneath the trees; peaceful and terrible spirits hey, and pitilessly satisfied. Strange to say, the infinite suffices them. That reat need of man, the finite, which admits of embrace, they ignore. The finite hich admits of progress and sublime toil, they do not think about. The ndefinite, which is born from the human and divine combination of the infinite nd the finite, escapes them. Provided that they are face to face with mmensity, they smile. Joy never, ecstasy forever. Their life lies in urrendering their personality in contemplation. The history of humanity is for hem only a detailed plan. All is not there; the true All remains without; what s the use of busying oneself over that detail, man? Man suffers, that is quite ossible; but look at Aldebaran rising! The mother has no more milk, the ew-born babe is dying. I know nothing about that, but just look at this onderful rosette which a slice of wood-cells of the pine presents under the icroscope! Compare the most beautiful Mechlin lace to that if you can! These hinkers forget to love. The zodiac thrives with them to such a point that it revents their seeing the weeping child. God eclipses their souls. This is a amily of minds which are, at once, great and petty. Horace was one of them; so as Goethe. La Fontaine perhaps; magnificent egoists of the infinite, tranquil pectators of sorrow, who do not behold Nero if the weather be fair, for whom he sun conceals the funeral pile, who would look on at an execution by the uillotine in the search for an effect of light, who hear neither the cry nor he sob, nor the death rattle, nor the alarm peal, for whom everything is well, ince there is a month of May, who, so long as there are clouds of purple and old above their heads, declare themselves content, and who are determined to be appy until the radiance of the stars and the songs of the birds are xhausted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.12#These are dark radiances. They have no suspicion that they are to be itied. Certainly they are so. He who does not weep does not see. They are to be dmired and pitied, as one would both pity and admire a being at once night and ay, without eyes beneath his lashes but with a star on his brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.13#The indifference of these thinkers, is, according to some, a superior hilosophy. That may be; but in this superiority there is some infirmity. One ay be immortal and yet limp: witness Vulcan. One may be more than man and less han man. There is incomplete immensity in nature. Who knows whether the sun is ot a blind man?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.14#But then, what? In whom can we trust? _Solem quis dicere falsum audeat?_ ho shall dare to say that the sun is false? Thus certain geniuses, themselves, ertain Very-Lofty mortals, man-stars, may be mistaken? That which is on high at he summit, at the crest, at the zenith, that which sends down so much light on he earth, sees but little, sees badly, sees not at all? Is not this a desperate tate of things? No. But what is there, then, above the sun? The god.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.15#On the 6th of June, 1832, about eleven o’clock in the morning, the uxembourg, solitary and depopulated, was charming. The quincunxes and lower-beds shed forth balm and dazzling beauty into the sunlight. The branches, ild with the brilliant glow of midday, seemed endeavoring to embrace. In the ycamores there was an uproar of linnets, sparrows triumphed, woodpeckers limbed along the chestnut trees, administering little pecks on the bark. The lower-beds accepted the legitimate royalty of the lilies; the most august of erfumes is that which emanates from whiteness. The peppery odor of the arnations was perceptible. The old crows of Marie de Medici were amorous in the all trees. The sun gilded, empurpled, set fire to and lighted up the tulips, hich are nothing but all the varieties of flame made into flowers. All around he banks of tulips the bees, the sparks of these flame-flowers, hummed. All was race and gayety, even the impending rain; this relapse, by which the lilies of he valley and the honeysuckles were destined to profit, had nothing disturbing bout it; the swallows indulged in the charming threat of flying low. He who was here aspired to happiness; life smelled good; all nature exhaled candor, help, ssistance, paternity, caress, dawn. The thoughts which fell from heaven were as weet as the tiny hand of a baby when one kisses it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.16#The statues under the trees, white and nude, had robes of shadow pierced ith light; these goddesses were all tattered with sunlight; rays hung from them n all sides. Around the great fountain, the earth was already dried up to the oint of being burnt. There was sufficient breeze to raise little insurrections f dust here and there. A few yellow leaves, left over from the autumn, chased ach other merrily, and seemed to be playing tricks on each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.17#This abundance of light had something indescribably reassuring about it. ife, sap, heat, odors overflowed; one was conscious, beneath creation, of the normous size of the source; in all these breaths permeated with love, in this nterchange of reverberations and reflections, in this marvellous expenditure of ays, in this infinite outpouring of liquid gold, one felt the prodigality of he inexhaustible; and, behind this splendor as behind a curtain of flame, one aught a glimpse of God, that millionaire of stars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.18#Thanks to the sand, there was not a speck of mud; thanks to the rain, here was not a grain of ashes. The clumps of blossoms had just been bathed; very sort of velvet, satin, gold and varnish, which springs from the earth in he form of flowers, was irreproachable. This magnificence was cleanly. The rand silence of happy nature filled the garden. A celestial silence that is ompatible with a thousand sorts of music, the cooing of nests, the buzzing of warms, the flutterings of the breeze. All the harmony of the season was omplete in one gracious whole; the entrances and exits of spring took place in roper order; the lilacs ended; the jasmines began; some flowers were tardy, ome insects in advance of their time; the van-guard of the red June butterflies raternized with the rear-guard of the white butterflies of May. The plantain rees were getting their new skins. The breeze hollowed out undulations in the agnificent enormity of the chestnut-trees. It was splendid. A veteran from the eighboring barracks, who was gazing through the fence, said: “Here is the pring presenting arms and in full uniform.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.19#All nature was breakfasting; creation was at table; this was its hour; the reat blue cloth was spread in the sky, and the great green cloth on earth; the un lighted it all up brilliantly. God was serving the universal repast. Each reature had his pasture or his mess. The ring-dove found his hemp-seed, the haffinch found his millet, the goldfinch found chickweed, the red-breast found orms, the green finch found flies, the fly found infusoriæ, the bee found lowers. They ate each other somewhat, it is true, which is the misery of evil ixed with good; but not a beast of them all had an empty stomach.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.20#The two little abandoned creatures had arrived in the vicinity of the rand fountain, and, rather bewildered by all this light, they tried to hide hemselves, the instinct of the poor and the weak in the presence of even mpersonal magnificence; and they kept behind the swans’ hutch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.21#Here and there, at intervals, when the wind blew, shouts, clamor, a sort f tumultuous death rattle, which was the firing, and dull blows, which were ischarges of cannon, struck the ear confusedly. Smoke hung over the roofs in he direction of the Halles. A bell, which had the air of an appeal, was ringing n the distance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.22#These children did not appear to notice these noises. The little one epeated from time to time: “I am hungry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.23#Almost at the same instant with the children, another couple approached he great basin. They consisted of a goodman, about fifty years of age, who was eading by the hand a little fellow of six. No doubt, a father and his son. The ittle man of six had a big brioche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.24#At that epoch, certain houses abutting on the river, in the Rues Madame nd d’Enfer, had keys to the Luxembourg garden, of which the lodgers enjoyed the se when the gates were shut, a privilege which was suppressed later on. This ather and son came from one of these houses, no doubt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.25#The two poor little creatures watched “that gentleman” approaching, and id themselves a little more thoroughly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.26#He was a bourgeois. The same person, perhaps, whom Marius had one day eard, through his love fever, near the same grand basin, counselling his son to avoid excesses.” He had an affable and haughty air, and a mouth which was lways smiling, since it did not shut. This mechanical smile, produced by too uch jaw and too little skin, shows the teeth rather than the soul. The child, ith his brioche, which he had bitten into but had not finished eating, seemed atiated. The child was dressed as a National Guardsman, owing to the nsurrection, and the father had remained clad as a bourgeois out of rudence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.27#Father and son halted near the fountain where two swans were sporting. his bourgeois appeared to cherish a special admiration for the swans. He esembled them in this sense, that he walked like them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.28#For the moment, the swans were swimming, which is their principal talent, nd they were superb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.29#If the two poor little beings had listened and if they had been of an age o understand, they might have gathered the words of this grave man. The father as saying to his son:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.30#“The sage lives content with little. Look at me, my son. I do not love omp. I am never seen in clothes decked with gold lace and stones; I leave that alse splendor to badly organized souls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.31#Here the deep shouts which proceeded from the direction of the Halles urst out with fresh force of bell and uproar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.32#“What is that?” inquired the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.33#The father replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.34#“It is the Saturnalia.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.35#All at once, he caught sight of the two little ragged boys behind the reen swan-hutch.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.36#“There is the beginning,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.37#And, after a pause, he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.38#“Anarchy is entering this garden.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.39#In the meanwhile, his son took a bite of his brioche, spit it out, and, uddenly burst out crying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.40#“What are you crying about?” demanded his father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.41#“I am not hungry any more,” said the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.42#The father’s smile became more accentuated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.43#“One does not need to be hungry in order to eat a cake.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.44#“My cake tires me. It is stale.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.45#“Don’t you want any more of it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.46#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.47#The father pointed to the swans.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.48#“Throw it to those palmipeds.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.49#The child hesitated. A person may not want any more of his cake; but that s no reason for giving it away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.50#The father went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.51#“Be humane. You must have compassion on animals.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.52#And, taking the cake from his son, he flung it into the basin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.53#The cake fell very near the edge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.54#The swans were far away, in the centre of the basin, and busy with some rey. They had seen neither the bourgeois nor the brioche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.55#The bourgeois, feeling that the cake was in danger of being wasted, and oved by this useless shipwreck, entered upon a telegraphic agitation, which inally attracted the attention of the swans.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.56#They perceived something floating, steered for the edge like ships, as hey are, and slowly directed their course toward the brioche, with the stupid ajesty which befits white creatures.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.57#“The swans [_cygnes_] understand signs [_signes_],” said the bourgeois, elighted to make a jest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.58#At that moment, the distant tumult of the city underwent another sudden ncrease. This time it was sinister. There are some gusts of wind which speak ore distinctly than others. The one which was blowing at that moment brought learly defined drum-beats, clamors, platoon firing, and the dismal replies of he tocsin and the cannon. This coincided with a black cloud which suddenly eiled the sun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.59#The swans had not yet reached the brioche.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.60#“Let us return home,” said the father, “they are attacking the uileries.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.61#He grasped his son’s hand again. Then he continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.62#“From the Tuileries to the Luxembourg, there is but the distance which eparates Royalty from the peerage; that is not far. Shots will soon rain own.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.63#He glanced at the cloud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.64#“Perhaps it is rain itself that is about to shower down; the sky is oining in; the younger branch is condemned. Let us return home quickly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.65#“I should like to see the swans eat the brioche,” said the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.66#The father replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.67#“That would be imprudent.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.68#And he led his little bourgeois away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.69#The son, regretting the swans, turned his head back toward the basin until corner of the quincunxes concealed it from him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.70#In the meanwhile, the two little waifs had approached the brioche at the ame time as the swans. It was floating on the water. The smaller of them stared t the cake, the elder gazed after the retreating bourgeois.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.71#Father and son entered the labyrinth of walks which leads to the grand light of steps near the clump of trees on the side of the Rue Madame.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.72#As soon as they had disappeared from view, the elder child hastily flung imself flat on his stomach on the rounding curb of the basin, and clinging to t with his left hand, and leaning over the water, on the verge of falling in, e stretched out his right hand with his stick towards the cake. The swans, erceiving the enemy, made haste, and in so doing, they produced an effect of heir breasts which was of service to the little fisher; the water flowed back efore the swans, and one of these gentle concentric undulations softly floated he brioche towards the child’s wand. Just as the swans came up, the stick ouched the cake. The child gave it a brisk rap, drew in the brioche, frightened way the swans, seized the cake, and sprang to his feet. The cake was wet; but hey were hungry and thirsty. The elder broke the cake into two portions, a arge one and a small one, took the small one for himself, gave the large one to is brother, and said to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.16.73#“Ram that into your muzzle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.head#CHAPTER XVII—MORTUUS PATER FILIUM MORITURUM EXPECTAT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.1#Marius dashed out of the barricade, Combeferre followed him. But he was too ate. Gavroche was dead. Combeferre brought back the basket of cartridges; arius bore the child.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.2#“Alas!” he thought, “that which the father had done for his father, he was equiting to the son; only, Thénardier had brought back his father alive; he was ringing back the child dead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.3#When Marius re-entered the redoubt with Gavroche in his arms, his face, ike the child, was inundated with blood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.4#At the moment when he had stooped to lift Gavroche, a bullet had grazed his ead; he had not noticed it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.5#Courfeyrac untied his cravat and with it bandaged Marius’ brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.6#They laid Gavroche on the same table with Mabeuf, and spread over the two orpses the black shawl. There was enough of it for both the old man and the hild.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.7#Combeferre distributed the cartridges from the basket which he had brought n.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.8#This gave each man fifteen rounds to fire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.9#Jean Valjean was still in the same place, motionless on his stone post. hen Combeferre offered him his fifteen cartridges, he shook his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.10#“Here’s a rare eccentric,” said Combeferre in a low voice to Enjolras. “He inds a way of not fighting in this barricade.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.11#“Which does not prevent him from defending it,” responded Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.12#“Heroism has its originals,” resumed Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.13#And Courfeyrac, who had overheard, added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.14#“He is another sort from Father Mabeuf.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.15#One thing which must be noted is, that the fire which was battering the arricade hardly disturbed the interior. Those who have never traversed the hirlwind of this sort of war can form no idea of the singular moments of ranquillity mingled with these convulsions. Men go and come, they talk, they est, they lounge. Some one whom we know heard a combatant say to him in the idst of the grape-shot: “We are here as at a bachelor breakfast.” The redoubt f the Rue de la Chanvrerie, we repeat, seemed very calm within. All mutations nd all phases had been, or were about to be, exhausted. The position, from ritical, had become menacing, and, from menacing, was probably about to become esperate. In proportion as the situation grew gloomy, the glow of heroism mpurpled the barricade more and more. Enjolras, who was grave, dominated it, in he attitude of a young Spartan sacrificing his naked sword to the sombre enius, Epidotas.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.17.16#Combeferre, wearing an apron, was dressing the wounds: Bossuet and Feuilly ere making cartridges with the powder-flask picked up by Gavroche on the dead orporal, and Bossuet said to Feuilly: “We are soon to take the diligence for nother planet”; Courfeyrac was disposing and arranging on some paving-stones hich he had reserved for himself near Enjolras, a complete arsenal, his word-cane, his gun, two holster pistols, and a cudgel, with the care of a young irl setting a small dunkerque in order. Jean Valjean stared silently at the all opposite him. An artisan was fastening Mother Hucheloup’s big straw hat on is head with a string, “for fear of sun-stroke,” as he said. The young men from he Cougourde d’Aix were chatting merrily among themselves, as though eager to peak patois for the last time. Joly, who had taken Widow Hucheloup’s mirror rom the wall, was examining his tongue in it. Some combatants, having iscovered a few crusts of rather mouldy bread, in a drawer, were eagerly evouring them. Marius was disturbed with regard to what his father was about to ay to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.head#CHAPTER XVIII—THE VULTURE BECOME PREY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.1#We must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades. Nothing hich is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets should be mitted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.2#Whatever may have been the singular inward tranquillity which we have just entioned, the barricade, for those who are inside it, remains, nonetheless, a ision.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.3#There is something of the apocalypse in civil war, all the mists of the nknown are commingled with fierce flashes, revolutions are sphinxes, and any ne who has passed through a barricade thinks he has traversed a dream.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.4#The feelings to which one is subject in these places we have pointed out in he case of Marius, and we shall see the consequences; they are both more and ess than life. On emerging from a barricade, one no longer knows what one has een there. One has been terrible, but one knows it not. One has been surrounded ith conflicting ideas which had human faces; one’s head has been in the light f the future. There were corpses lying prone there, and phantoms standing rect. The hours were colossal and seemed hours of eternity. One has lived in eath. Shadows have passed by. What were they?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.5#One has beheld hands on which there was blood; there was a deafening orror; there was also a frightful silence; there were open mouths which houted, and other open mouths which held their peace; one was in the midst of moke, of night, perhaps. One fancied that one had touched the sinister ooze of nknown depths; one stares at something red on one’s finger nails. One no longer emembers anything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.6#Let us return to the Rue de la Chanvrerie.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.7#All at once, between two discharges, the distant sound of a clock striking he hour became audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.8#“It is midday,” said Combeferre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.9#The twelve strokes had not finished striking when Enjolras sprang to his eet, and from the summit of the barricade hurled this thundering shout:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.10#“Carry stones up into the houses; line the windowsills and the roofs with hem. Half the men to their guns, the other half to the paving-stones. There is ot a minute to be lost.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.11#A squad of sappers and miners, axe on shoulder, had just made their ppearance in battle array at the end of the street.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.12#This could only be the head of a column; and of what column? The attacking olumn, evidently; the sappers charged with the demolition of the barricade must lways precede the soldiers who are to scale it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.13#They were, evidently, on the brink of that moment which M. lermont-Tonnerre, in 1822, called “the tug of war.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.14#Enjolras’ order was executed with the correct haste which is peculiar to hips and barricades, the only two scenes of combat where escape is impossible. n less than a minute, two thirds of the stones which Enjolras had had piled up t the door of Corinthe had been carried up to the first floor and the attic, nd before a second minute had elapsed, these stones, artistically set one upon he other, walled up the sash-window on the first floor and the windows in the oof to half their height. A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly, the rincipal architect, allowed of the passage of the gun-barrels. This armament of he windows could be effected all the more easily since the firing of grape-shot ad ceased. The two cannons were now discharging ball against the centre of the arrier in order to make a hole there, and, if possible, a breach for the ssault.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.15#When the stones destined to the final defence were in place, Enjolras had he bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay, carried to the irst floor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.16#“Who is to drink that?” Bossuet asked him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.17#“They,” replied Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.18#Then they barricaded the window below, and held in readiness the iron ross-bars which served to secure the door of the wine-shop at night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.19#The fortress was complete. The barricade was the rampart, the wine-shop as the dungeon. With the stones which remained they stopped up the outlet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.20#As the defenders of a barricade are always obliged to be sparing of their mmunition, and as the assailants know this, the assailants combine their rrangements with a sort of irritating leisure, expose themselves to fire rematurely, though in appearance more than in reality, and take their ease. The reparations for attack are always made with a certain methodical deliberation; fter which, the lightning strikes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.21#This deliberation permitted Enjolras to take a review of everything and to erfect everything. He felt that, since such men were to die, their death ought o be a masterpiece.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.22#He said to Marius: “We are the two leaders. I will give the last orders nside. Do you remain outside and observe.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.23#Marius posted himself on the lookout upon the crest of the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.24#Enjolras had the door of the kitchen, which was the ambulance, as the eader will remember, nailed up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.25#“No splashing of the wounded,” he said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.26#He issued his final orders in the tap-room in a curt, but profoundly ranquil tone; Feuilly listened and replied in the name of all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.27#“On the first floor, hold your axes in readiness to cut the staircase. ave you them?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.28#“Yes,” said Feuilly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.29#“How many?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.30#“Two axes and a pole-axe.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.31#“That is good. There are now twenty-six combatants of us on foot. How many uns are there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.32#“Thirty-four.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.33#“Eight too many. Keep those eight guns loaded like the rest and at hand. words and pistols in your belts. Twenty men to the barricade. Six ambushed in he attic windows, and at the window on the first floor to fire on the ssailants through the loop-holes in the stones. Let not a single worker remain nactive here. Presently, when the drum beats the assault, let the twenty below tairs rush to the barricade. The first to arrive will have the best laces.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.34#These arrangements made, he turned to Javert and said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.35#“I am not forgetting you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.36#And, laying a pistol on the table, he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.37#“The last man to leave this room will smash the skull of this spy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.38#“Here?” inquired a voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.39#“No, let us not mix their corpses with our own. The little barricade of he Mondétour lane can be scaled. It is only four feet high. The man is well inioned. He shall be taken thither and put to death.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.40#There was some one who was more impassive at that moment than Enjolras, it as Javert. Here Jean Valjean made his appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.41#He had been lost among the group of insurgents. He stepped forth and said o Enjolras:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.42#“You are the commander?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.43#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.44#“You thanked me a while ago.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.45#“In the name of the Republic. The barricade has two saviors, Marius ontmercy and yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.46#“Do you think that I deserve a recompense?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.47#“Certainly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.48#“Well, I request one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.49#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.50#“That I may blow that man’s brains out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.51#Javert raised his head, saw Jean Valjean, made an almost imperceptible ovement, and said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.52#“That is just.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.53#As for Enjolras, he had begun to re-load his rifle; he cut his eyes about im:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.54#“No objections.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.55#And he turned to Jean Valjean:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.56#“Take the spy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.57#Jean Valjean did, in fact, take possession of Javert, by seating himself n the end of the table. He seized the pistol, and a faint click announced that e had cocked it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.58#Almost at the same moment, a blast of trumpets became audible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.59#“Take care!” shouted Marius from the top of the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.60#Javert began to laugh with that noiseless laugh which was peculiar to him, nd gazing intently at the insurgents, he said to them:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.61#“You are in no better case than I am.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.62#“All out!” shouted Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.63#The insurgents poured out tumultuously, and, as they went, received in the ack,—may we be permitted the expression,—this sally of Javert’s:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.18.64#“We shall meet again shortly!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.head#CHAPTER XIX—JEAN VALJEAN TAKES HIS REVENGE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.1#When Jean Valjean was left alone with Javert, he untied the rope which astened the prisoner across the middle of the body, and the knot of which was nder the table. After this he made him a sign to rise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.2#Javert obeyed with that indefinable smile in which the supremacy of nchained authority is condensed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.3#Jean Valjean took Javert by the martingale, as one would take a beast of urden by the breast-band, and, dragging the latter after him, emerged from the ine-shop slowly, because Javert, with his impeded limbs, could take only very hort steps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.4#Jean Valjean had the pistol in his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.5#In this manner they crossed the inner trapezium of the barricade. The nsurgents, all intent on the attack, which was imminent, had their backs turned o these two.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.6#Marius alone, stationed on one side, at the extreme left of the barricade, aw them pass. This group of victim and executioner was illuminated by the epulchral light which he bore in his own soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.7#Jean Valjean with some difficulty, but without relaxing his hold for a ingle instant, made Javert, pinioned as he was, scale the little entrenchment n the Mondétour lane.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.8#When they had crossed this barrier, they found themselves alone in the ane. No one saw them. Among the heap they could distinguish a livid face, treaming hair, a pierced hand and the half nude breast of a woman. It was ponine. The corner of the houses hid them from the insurgents. The corpses arried away from the barricade formed a terrible pile a few paces distant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.9#Javert gazed askance at this body, and, profoundly calm, said in a low one:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.10#“It strikes me that I know that girl.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.11#Then he turned to Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.12#Jean Valjean thrust the pistol under his arm and fixed on Javert a look hich it required no words to interpret: “Javert, it is I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.13#Javert replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.14#“Take your revenge.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.15#Jean Valjean drew from his pocket a knife, and opened it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.16#“A clasp-knife!” exclaimed Javert, “you are right. That suits you etter.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.17#Jean Valjean cut the martingale which Javert had about his neck, then he ut the cords on his wrists, then, stooping down, he cut the cord on his feet; nd, straightening himself up, he said to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.18#“You are free.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.19#Javert was not easily astonished. Still, master of himself though he was, e could not repress a start. He remained open-mouthed and motionless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.20#Jean Valjean continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.21#“I do not think that I shall escape from this place. But if, by chance, I o, I live, under the name of Fauchelevent, in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.22#Javert snarled like a tiger, which made him half open one corner of his outh, and he muttered between his teeth:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.23#“Have a care.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.24#“Go,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.25#Javert began again:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.26#“Thou saidst Fauchelevent, Rue de l’Homme Armé?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.27#“Number 7.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.28#Javert repeated in a low voice:—“Number 7.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.29#He buttoned up his coat once more, resumed the military stiffness between is shoulders, made a half turn, folded his arms and, supporting his chin on one f his hands, he set out in the direction of the Halles. Jean Valjean followed im with his eyes:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.30#A few minutes later, Javert turned round and shouted to Jean Valjean:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.31#“You annoy me. Kill me, rather.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.32#Javert himself did not notice that he no longer addressed Jean Valjean as thou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.33#“Be off with you,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.34#Javert retreated slowly. A moment later he turned the corner of the Rue es Prêcheurs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.35#When Javert had disappeared, Jean Valjean fired his pistol in the air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.36#Then he returned to the barricade and said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.37#“It is done.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.38#In the meanwhile, this is what had taken place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.39#Marius, more intent on the outside than on the interior, had not, up to hat time, taken a good look at the pinioned spy in the dark background of the ap-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.40#When he beheld him in broad daylight, striding over the barricade in order o proceed to his death, he recognized him. Something suddenly recurred to his ind. He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise, and the two pistols hich the latter had handed to him and which he, Marius, had used in this very arricade, and not only did he recall his face, but his name as well.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.41#This recollection was misty and troubled, however, like all his ideas.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.42#It was not an affirmation that he made, but a question which he put to imself:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.43#“Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name was avert?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.44#Perhaps there was still time to intervene in behalf of that man. But, in he first place, he must know whether this was Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.45#Marius called to Enjolras, who had just stationed himself at the other xtremity of the barricade:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.46#“Enjolras!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.47#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.48#“What is the name of yonder man?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.49#“What man?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.50#“The police agent. Do you know his name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.51#“Of course. He told us.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.52#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.53#“Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.54#Marius sprang to his feet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.55#At that moment, they heard the report of the pistol.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.56#Jean Valjean reappeared and cried: “It is done.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.19.57#A gloomy chill traversed Marius’ heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.head#CHAPTER XX—THE DEAD ARE IN THE RIGHT AND THE LIVING ARE NOT IN THE RONG
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.1#The death agony of the barricade was about to begin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.2#Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment; a housand mysterious crashes in the air, the breath of armed masses set in ovement in the streets which were not visible, the intermittent gallop of avalry, the heavy shock of artillery on the march, the firing by squads, and he cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth of Paris, the smokes of attle mounting all gilded above the roofs, indescribable and vaguely terrible ries, lightnings of menace everywhere, the tocsin of Saint-Merry, which now had he accents of a sob, the mildness of the weather, the splendor of the sky illed with sun and clouds, the beauty of the day, and the alarming silence of he houses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.3#For, since the preceding evening, the two rows of houses in the Rue de la hanvrerie had become two walls; ferocious walls, doors closed, windows closed, hutters closed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.4#In those days, so different from those in which we live, when the hour was ome, when the people wished to put an end to a situation, which had lasted too ong, with a charter granted or with a legal country, when universal wrath was iffused in the atmosphere, when the city consented to the tearing up of the avements, when insurrection made the bourgeoisie smile by whispering its assword in its ear, then the inhabitant, thoroughly penetrated with the revolt, o to speak, was the auxiliary of the combatant, and the house fraternized with he improvised fortress which rested on it. When the situation was not ripe, hen the insurrection was not decidedly admitted, when the masses disowned the ovement, all was over with the combatants, the city was changed into a desert round the revolt, souls grew chilled, refuges were nailed up, and the street urned into a defile to help the army to take the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.5#A people cannot be forced, through surprise, to walk more quickly than it hooses. Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand! A people does not let itself o at random. Then it abandons the insurrection to itself. The insurgents become oxious, infected with the plague. A house is an escarpment, a door is a efusal, a façade is a wall. This wall hears, sees and will not. It might open nd save you. No. This wall is a judge. It gazes at you and condemns you. What ismal things are closed houses. They seem dead, they are living. Life which is, s it were, suspended there, persists there. No one has gone out of them for our and twenty hours, but no one is missing from them. In the interior of that ock, people go and come, go to bed and rise again; they are a family party here; there they eat and drink; they are afraid, a terrible thing! Fear excuses his fearful lack of hospitality; terror is mixed with it, an extenuating ircumstance. Sometimes, even, and this has been actually seen, fear turns to assion; fright may change into fury, as prudence does into rage; hence this ise saying: “The enraged moderates.” There are outbursts of supreme terror, hence springs wrath like a mournful smoke.—“What do these people want? What ave they come there to do? Let them get out of the scrape. So much the worse or them. It is their fault. They are only getting what they deserve. It does ot concern us. Here is our poor street all riddled with balls. They are a pack f rascals. Above all things, don’t open the door.”—And the house assumes the ir of a tomb. The insurgent is in the death-throes in front of that house; he ees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near; if he cries, he knows that hey are listening to him, and that no one will come; there stand walls which ight protect him, there are men who might save him; and these walls have ears f flesh, and these men have bowels of stone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.6#Whom shall he reproach?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.7#No one and every one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.8#The incomplete times in which we live.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.9#It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted into evolution, and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest, and from inerva turns to Pallas.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.10#The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaits it; t almost always comes too soon. Then it becomes resigned, and stoically accepts atastrophe in lieu of triumph. It serves those who deny it without complaint, ven excusing them, and even disculpates them, and its magnanimity consists in onsenting to abandonment. It is indomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle owards ingratitude.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.11#Is this ingratitude, however?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.12#Yes, from the point of view of the human race.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.13#No, from the point of view of the individual.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.14#Progress is man’s mode of existence. The general life of the human race is alled Progress, the collective stride of the human race is called Progress. rogress advances; it makes the great human and terrestrial journey towards the elestial and the divine; it has its halting places where it rallies the laggard roop, it has its stations where it meditates, in the presence of some splendid anaan suddenly unveiled on its horizon, it has its nights when it sleeps; and t is one of the poignant anxieties of the thinker that he sees the shadow esting on the human soul, and that he gropes in darkness without being able to waken that slumbering Progress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.15#“God is dead, perhaps,” said Gerard de Nerval one day to the writer of hese lines, confounding progress with God, and taking the interruption of ovement for the death of Being.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.16#He who despairs is in the wrong. Progress infallibly awakes, and, in hort, we may say that it marches on, even when it is asleep, for it has ncreased in size. When we behold it erect once more, we find it taller. To be lways peaceful does not depend on progress any more than it does on the stream; rect no barriers, cast in no boulders; obstacles make water froth and humanity oil. Hence arise troubles; but after these troubles, we recognize the fact that round has been gained. Until order, which is nothing else than universal peace, as been established, until harmony and unity reign, progress will have evolutions as its halting-places.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.17#What, then, is progress? We have just enunciated it; the permanent life of he peoples.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.18#Now, it sometimes happens, that the momentary life of individuals offers esistance to the eternal life of the human race.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.19#Let us admit without bitterness, that the individual has his distinct nterests, and can, without forfeiture, stipulate for his interest, and defend t; the present has its pardonable dose of egotism; momentary life has its ights, and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to the future. The eneration which is passing in its turn over the earth, is not forced to abridge t for the sake of the generations, its equal, after all, who will have their urn later on.—“I exist,” murmurs that some one whose name is All. “I am young nd in love, I am old and I wish to repose, I am the father of a family, I toil, prosper, I am successful in business, I have houses to lease, I have money in he government funds, I am happy, I have a wife and children, I have all this, I esire to live, leave me in peace.”—Hence, at certain hours, a profound cold roods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.20#Utopia, moreover, we must admit, quits its radiant sphere when it makes ar. It, the truth of to-morrow, borrows its mode of procedure, battle, from the ie of yesterday. It, the future, behaves like the past. It, pure idea, becomes deed of violence. It complicates its heroism with a violence for which it is ust that it should be held to answer; a violence of occasion and expedient, ontrary to principle, and for which it is fatally punished. The Utopia, nsurrection, fights with the old military code in its fist; it shoots spies, it xecutes traitors; it suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown arkness. It makes use of death, a serious matter. It seems as though Utopia had o longer any faith in radiance, its irresistible and incorruptible force. It trikes with the sword. Now, no sword is simple. Every blade has two edges; he ho wounds with the one is wounded with the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.21#Having made this reservation, and made it with all severity, it is mpossible for us not to admire, whether they succeed or not, those the glorious ombatants of the future, the confessors of Utopia. Even when they miscarry, hey are worthy of veneration; and it is, perhaps, in failure, that they possess he most majesty. Victory, when it is in accord with progress, merits the pplause of the people; but a heroic defeat merits their tender compassion. The ne is magnificent, the other sublime. For our own part, we prefer martyrdom to uccess. John Brown is greater than Washington, and Pisacane is greater than aribaldi.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.22#It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of the anquished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.23#We are unjust towards these great men who attempt the future, when they ail.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.24#Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad. Every barricade seems a rime. Their theories are incriminated, their aim suspected, their ulterior otive is feared, their conscience denounced. They are reproached with raising, recting, and heaping up, against the reigning social state, a mass of miseries, f griefs, of iniquities, of wrongs, of despairs, and of tearing from the lowest epths blocks of shadow in order therein to embattle themselves and to combat. eople shout to them: “You are tearing up the pavements of hell!” They might eply: “That is because our barricade is made of good intentions.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.25#The best thing, assuredly, is the pacific solution. In short, let us agree hat when we behold the pavement, we think of the bear, and it is a good will hich renders society uneasy. But it depends on society to save itself, it is to ts own good will that we make our appeal. No violent remedy is necessary. To tudy evil amiably, to prove its existence, then to cure it. It is to this that e invite it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.26#However that may be, even when fallen, above all when fallen, these men, ho at every point of the universe, with their eyes fixed on France, are triving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of the ideal, are august; hey give their life a free offering to progress; they accomplish the will of rovidence; they perform a religious act. At the appointed hour, with as much isinterestedness as an actor who answers to his cue, in obedience to the divine tage-manager, they enter the tomb. And this hopeless combat, this stoical isappearance they accept in order to bring about the supreme and universal onsequences, the magnificent and irresistibly human movement begun on the 14th f July, 1789; these soldiers are priests. The French revolution is an act of od.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.27#Moreover, there are, and it is proper to add this distinction to the istinctions already pointed out in another chapter,—there are accepted evolutions, revolutions which are called revolutions; there are refused evolutions, which are called riots.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.28#An insurrection which breaks out, is an idea which is passing its xamination before the people. If the people lets fall a black ball, the idea is ried fruit; the insurrection is a mere skirmish.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.29#Waging war at every summons and every time that Utopia desires it, is not he thing for the peoples. Nations have not always and at every hour the emperament of heroes and martyrs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.30#They are positive. _A priori_, insurrection is repugnant to them, in the irst place, because it often results in a catastrophe, in the second place, ecause it always has an abstraction as its point of departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.31#Because, and this is a noble thing, it is always for the ideal, and for he ideal alone, that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrifice hemselves. An insurrection is an enthusiasm. Enthusiasm may wax wroth; hence he appeal to arms. But every insurrection, which aims at a government or a égime, aims higher. Thus, for instance, and we insist upon it, what the chiefs f the insurrection of 1832, and, in particular, the young enthusiasts of the ue de la Chanvrerie were combating, was not precisely Louis Philippe. The ajority of them, when talking freely, did justice to this king who stood midway etween monarchy and revolution; no one hated him. But they attacked the younger ranch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they had attacked its elder ranch in Charles X.; and that which they wished to overturn in overturning oyalty in France, was, as we have explained, the usurpation of man over man, nd of privilege over right in the entire universe. Paris without a king has as esult the world without despots. This is the manner in which they reasoned. heir aim was distant no doubt, vague perhaps, and it retreated in the face of heir efforts; but it was great.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.32#Thus it is. And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions, which are almost lways illusions for the sacrificed, but illusions with which, after all, the hole of human certainty is mingled. We throw ourselves into these tragic ffairs and become intoxicated with that which we are about to do. Who knows? We ay succeed. We are few in number, we have a whole army arrayed against us; but e are defending right, the natural law, the sovereignty of each one over imself from which no abdication is possible, justice and truth, and in case of eed, we die like the three hundred Spartans. We do not think of Don Quixote but f Leonidas. And we march straight before us, and once pledged, we do not draw ack, and we rush onwards with head held low, cherishing as our hope an nprecedented victory, revolution completed, progress set free again, the ggrandizement of the human race, universal deliverance; and in the event of the orst, Thermopylæ.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.33#These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck, nd we have just explained why. The crowd is restive in the presence of the mpulses of paladins. Heavy masses, the multitudes which are fragile because of heir very weight, fear adventures; and there is a touch of adventure in the deal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.34#Moreover, and we must not forget this, interests which are not very riendly to the ideal and the sentimental are in the way. Sometimes the stomach aralyzes the heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.35#The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this, that she takes less from he stomach than other nations: she more easily knots the rope about her loins. he is the first awake, the last asleep. She marches forwards. She is a eeker.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.36#This arises from the fact that she is an artist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.37#The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic, the same as the eautiful is nothing but the summit of the true. Artistic peoples are also onsistent peoples. To love beauty is to see the light. That is why the torch of urope, that is to say of civilization, was first borne by Greece, who passed it n to Italy, who handed it on to France. Divine, illuminating nations of scouts! Vitælampada tradunt_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.38#It is an admirable thing that the poetry of a people is the element of its rogress. The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity of imagination. nly, a civilizing people should remain a manly people. Corinth, yes; Sybaris, o. Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a bastard. He must be neither a ilettante nor a virtuoso: but he must be artistic. In the matter of ivilization, he must not refine, but he must sublime. On this condition, one ives to the human race the pattern of the ideal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.39#The modern ideal has its type in art, and its means is science. It is hrough science that it will realize that august vision of the poets, the ocially beautiful. Eden will be reconstructed by A+B. At the point which ivilization has now reached, the exact is a necessary element of the splendid, nd the artistic sentiment is not only served, but completed by the scientific rgan; dreams must be calculated. Art, which is the conqueror, should have for upport science, which is the walker; the solidity of the creature which is idden is of importance. The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the enius of India as its vehicle; Alexander on the elephant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.40#Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit to uide civilization. Genuflection before the idol or before money wastes away the uscles which walk and the will which advances. Hieratic or mercantile bsorption lessens a people’s power of radiance, lowers its horizon by lowering ts level, and deprives it of that intelligence, at once both human and divine f the universal goal, which makes missionaries of nations. Babylon has no deal; Carthage has no ideal. Athens and Rome have and keep, throughout all the octurnal darkness of the centuries, halos of civilization.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.41#France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy. She is Athenian n the matter of beauty, and Roman in her greatness. Moreover, she is good. She ives herself. Oftener than is the case with other races, is she in the humor or self-devotion and sacrifice. Only, this humor seizes upon her, and again bandons her. And therein lies the great peril for those who run when she esires only to walk, or who walk on when she desires to halt. France has her elapses into materialism, and, at certain instants, the ideas which obstruct hat sublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatness and re of the dimensions of a Missouri or a South Carolina. What is to be done in uch a case? The giantess plays at being a dwarf; immense France has her freaks f pettiness. That is all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.42#To this there is nothing to say. Peoples, like planets, possess the right o an eclipse. And all is well, provided that the light returns and that the clipse does not degenerate into night. Dawn and resurrection are synonymous. he reappearance of the light is identical with the persistence of the _I_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.43#Let us state these facts calmly. Death on the barricade or the tomb in xile, is an acceptable occasion for devotion. The real name of devotion is isinterestedness. Let the abandoned allow themselves to be abandoned, let the xiled allow themselves to be exiled, and let us confine ourselves to entreating reat nations not to retreat too far, when they do retreat. One must not push oo far in descent under pretext of a return to reason.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.44#Matter exists, the minute exists, interest exists, the stomach exists; but he stomach must not be the sole wisdom. The life of the moment has its rights, e admit, but permanent life has its rights also. Alas! the fact that one is ounted does not preclude a fall. This can be seen in history more frequently han is desirable: A nation is great, it tastes the ideal, then it bites the ire, and finds it good; and if it be asked how it happens that it has abandoned ocrates for Falstaff, it replies: “Because I love statesmen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.45#One word more before returning to our subject, the conflict.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.46#A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothing else han a convulsion towards the ideal. Progress trammelled is sickly, and is ubject to these tragic epilepsies. With that malady of progress, civil war, we ave been obliged to come in contact in our passage. This is one of the fatal hases, at once act and entr’acte of that drama whose pivot is a social ondemnation, and whose veritable title is _Progress_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.47#Progress!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.48#The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought; and, t the point of this drama which we have now reached, the idea which it contains aving still more than one trial to undergo, it is, perhaps, permitted to us, if ot to lift the veil from it, to at least allow its light to shine through.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.20.49#The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is, from one nd to the other, as a whole and in detail, whatever may be its intermittences, xceptions and faults, the march from evil to good, from the unjust to the just, rom night to day, from appetite to conscience, from rottenness to life, from ell to heaven, from nothingness to God. Point of departure: matter; point of rrival: the soul. The hydra at the beginning, the angel at the end.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.head#CHAPTER XXI—THE HEROES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.1#All at once, the drum beat the charge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.2#The attack was a hurricane. On the evening before, in the darkness, the arricade had been approached silently, as by a boa. Now, in broad daylight, in hat widening street, surprise was decidedly impossible, rude force had, oreover, been unmasked, the cannon had begun the roar, the army hurled itself n the barricade. Fury now became skill. A powerful detachment of infantry of he line, broken at regular intervals, by the National Guard and the Municipal uard on foot, and supported by serried masses which could be heard though not een, debauched into the street at a run, with drums beating, trumpets braying, ayonets levelled, the sappers at their head, and, imperturbable under the rojectiles, charged straight for the barricade with the weight of a brazen beam gainst a wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.3#The wall held firm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.4#The insurgents fired impetuously. The barricade once scaled had a mane of ightning flashes. The assault was so furious, that for one moment, it was nundated with assailants; but it shook off the soldiers as the lion shakes off he dogs, and it was only covered with besiegers as the cliff is covered with oam, to reappear, a moment later, beetling, black and formidable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.5#The column, forced to retreat, remained massed in the street, unprotected ut terrible, and replied to the redoubt with a terrible discharge of musketry. ny one who has seen fireworks will recall the sheaf formed of interlacing ightnings which is called a bouquet. Let the reader picture to himself this ouquet, no longer vertical but horizontal, bearing a bullet, buckshot or a iscaïen at the tip of each one of its jets of flame, and picking off dead men ne after another from its clusters of lightning. The barricade was underneath t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.6#On both sides, the resolution was equal. The bravery exhibited there was lmost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocity which began y the sacrifice of self.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.7#This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave. The roop wished to make an end of it, insurrection was desirous of fighting. The cceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth and in the flush of health urns intrepidity into frenzy. In this fray, each one underwent the broadening rowth of the death hour. The street was strewn with corpses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.8#The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at the ther. Enjolras, who carried the whole barricade in his head, reserved and heltered himself; three soldiers fell, one after the other, under his mbrasure, without having even seen him; Marius fought unprotected. He made imself a target. He stood with more than half his body above the breastworks. here is no more violent prodigal than the avaricious man who takes the bit in is teeth; there is no man more terrible in action than a dreamer. Marius was ormidable and pensive. In battle he was as in a dream. One would have ronounced him a phantom engaged in firing a gun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.9#The insurgents’ cartridges were giving out; but not their sarcasms. In this hirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood, they laughed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.10#Courfeyrac was bareheaded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.11#“What have you done with your hat?” Bossuet asked him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.12#Courfeyrac replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.13#“They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.14#Or they uttered haughty comments.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.15#“Can any one understand,” exclaimed Feuilly bitterly, “those men,—[and he ited names, well-known names, even celebrated names, some belonging to the old rmy]—who had promised to join us, and taken an oath to aid us, and who had ledged their honor to it, and who are our generals, and who abandon us!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.16#And Combeferre restricted himself to replying with a grave smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.17#“There are people who observe the rules of honor as one observes the tars, from a great distance.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.18#The interior of the barricade was so strewn with torn cartridges that one ould have said that there had been a snowstorm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.19#The assailants had numbers in their favor; the insurgents had position. hey were at the top of a wall, and they thundered point-blank upon the soldiers ripping over the dead and wounded and entangled in the escarpment. This arricade, constructed as it was and admirably buttressed, was really one of hose situations where a handful of men hold a legion in check. Nevertheless, he attacking column, constantly recruited and enlarged under the shower of ullets, drew inexorably nearer, and now, little by little, step by step, but urely, the army closed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the ine-press.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.20#One assault followed another. The horror of the situation kept ncreasing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.21#Then there burst forth on that heap of paving-stones, in that Rue de la hanvrerie, a battle worthy of a wall of Troy. These haggard, ragged, exhausted en, who had had nothing to eat for four and twenty hours, who had not slept, ho had but a few more rounds to fire, who were fumbling in their pockets which ad been emptied of cartridges, nearly all of whom were wounded, with head or rm bandaged with black and blood-stained linen, with holes in their clothes rom which the blood trickled, and who were hardly armed with poor guns and otched swords, became Titans. The barricade was ten times attacked, approached, ssailed, scaled, and never captured.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.22#In order to form an idea of this struggle, it is necessary to imagine fire et to a throng of terrible courages, and then to gaze at the conflagration. It as not a combat, it was the interior of a furnace; there mouths breathed the lame; there countenances were extraordinary. The human form seemed impossible here, the combatants flamed forth there, and it was formidable to behold the oing and coming in that red glow of those salamanders of the fray.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.23#The successive and simultaneous scenes of this grand slaughter we renounce ll attempts at depicting. The epic alone has the right to fill twelve thousand erses with a battle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.24#One would have pronounced this that hell of Brahmanism, the most edoubtable of the seventeen abysses, which the Veda calls the Forest of words.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.25#They fought hand to hand, foot to foot, with pistol shots, with blows of he sword, with their fists, at a distance, close at hand, from above, from elow, from everywhere, from the roofs of the houses, from the windows of the ine-shop, from the cellar windows, whither some had crawled. They were one gainst sixty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.26#The façade of Corinthe, half demolished, was hideous. The window, tattooed ith grape-shot, had lost glass and frame and was nothing now but a shapeless ole, tumultuously blocked with paving-stones.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.27#Bossuet was killed; Feuilly was killed; Courfeyrac was killed; Combeferre, ransfixed by three blows from a bayonet in the breast at the moment when he was ifting up a wounded soldier, had only time to cast a glance to heaven when he xpired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.28#Marius, still fighting, was so riddled with wounds, particularly in the ead, that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood, and one would have aid that his face was covered with a red kerchief.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.21.29#Enjolras alone was not struck. When he had no longer any weapon, he eached out his hands to right and left and an insurgent thrust some arm or ther into his fist. All he had left was the stumps of four swords; one more han François I. at Marignan. Homer says: “Diomedes cuts the throat of Axylus, on of Teuthranis, who dwelt in happy Arisba; Euryalus, son of Mecistæus, xterminates Dresos and Opheltios, Esepius, and that Pedasus whom the naiad barbarea bore to the blameless Bucolion; Ulysses overthrows Pidytes of ercosius; Antilochus, Ablerus; Polypætes, Astyalus; Polydamas, Otos, of yllene; and Teucer, Aretaon. Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus’ ike. Agamemnon, king of the heroes, flings to earth Elatos, born in the rocky ity which is laved by the sounding river Satnoïs.” In our old poems of xploits, Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore with a cobbler’s houlder-stick of fire, and the latter defends himself by stoning the hero with owers which he plucks up by the roots. Our ancient mural frescoes show us the wo Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon, armed, emblazoned and crested in war-like uise, on horseback and approaching each other, their battle-axes in hand, asked with iron, gloved with iron, booted with iron, the one caparisoned in rmine, the other draped in azure: Bretagne with his lion between the two horns f his crown, Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor. But, in rder to be superb, it is not necessary to wear, like Yvon, the ducal morion, to ave in the fist, like Esplandian, a living flame, or, like Phyles, father of olydamas, to have brought back from Ephyra a good suit of mail, a present from he king of men, Euphetes; it suffices to give one’s life for a conviction or a oyalty. This ingenuous little soldier, yesterday a peasant of Bauce or imousin, who prowls with his clasp-knife by his side, around the children’s urses in the Luxembourg garden, this pale young student bent over a piece of natomy or a book, a blond youth who shaves his beard with scissors,—take both f them, breathe upon them with a breath of duty, place them face to face in the arrefour Boucherat or in the blind alley Planche-Mibray, and let the one fight or his flag, and the other for his ideal, and let both of them imagine that hey are fighting for their country; the struggle will be colossal; and the hadow which this raw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that rand epic field where humanity is striving, will equal the shadow cast by egaryon, King of Lycia, tiger-filled, crushing in his embrace the immense body f Ajax, equal to the gods.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.head#CHAPTER XXII—FOOT TO FOOT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.1#When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive, except Enjolras nd Marius at the two extremities of the barricade, the centre, which had so ong sustained Courfeyrac, Joly, Bossuet, Feuilly and Combeferre, gave way. The annon, though it had not effected a practicable breach, had made a rather large ollow in the middle of the redoubt; there, the summit of the wall had isappeared before the balls, and had crumbled away; and the rubbish which had allen, now inside, now outside, had, as it accumulated, formed two piles in the ature of slopes on the two sides of the barrier, one on the inside, the other n the outside. The exterior slope presented an inclined plane to the ttack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.2#A final assault was there attempted, and this assault succeeded. The mass ristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run, came up with irresistible orce, and the serried front of battle of the attacking column made its ppearance through the smoke on the crest of the battlements. This time, it was ecisive. The group of insurgents who were defending the centre retreated in onfusion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.3#Then the gloomy love of life awoke once more in some of them. Many, finding hemselves under the muzzles of this forest of guns, did not wish to die. This s a moment when the instinct of self-preservation emits howls, when the beast eappears in men. They were hemmed in by the lofty, six-story house which formed he background of their redoubt. This house might prove their salvation. The uilding was barricaded, and walled, as it were, from top to bottom. Before the roops of the line had reached the interior of the redoubt, there was time for a oor to open and shut, the space of a flash of lightning was sufficient for hat, and the door of that house, suddenly opened a crack and closed again nstantly, was life for these despairing men. Behind this house, there were treets, possible flight, space. They set to knocking at that door with the utts of their guns, and with kicks, shouting, calling, entreating, wringing heir hands. No one opened. From the little window on the third floor, the head f the dead man gazed down upon them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.4#But Enjolras and Marius, and the seven or eight rallied about them, sprang orward and protected them. Enjolras had shouted to the soldiers: “Don’t dvance!” and as an officer had not obeyed, Enjolras had killed the officer. He as now in the little inner court of the redoubt, with his back planted against he Corinthe building, a sword in one hand, a rifle in the other, holding open he door of the wine-shop which he barred against assailants. He shouted to the esperate men:—“There is but one door open; this one.”—And shielding them with is body, and facing an entire battalion alone, he made them pass in behind him. ll precipitated themselves thither. Enjolras, executing with his rifle, which e now used like a cane, what single-stick players call a “covered rose” round is head, levelled the bayonets around and in front of him, and was the last to nter; and then ensued a horrible moment, when the soldiers tried to make their ay in, and the insurgents strove to bar them out. The door was slammed with uch violence, that, as it fell back into its frame, it showed the five fingers f a soldier who had been clinging to it, cut off and glued to the post.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.5#Marius remained outside. A shot had just broken his collar bone, he felt hat he was fainting and falling. At that moment, with eyes already shut, he elt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him, and the swoon in which his senses anished, hardly allowed him time for the thought, mingled with a last memory of osette:—“I am taken prisoner. I shall be shot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.6#Enjolras, not seeing Marius among those who had taken refuge in the ine-shop, had the same idea. But they had reached a moment when each man has ot the time to meditate on his own death. Enjolras fixed the bar across the oor, and bolted it, and double-locked it with key and chain, while those utside were battering furiously at it, the soldiers with the butts of their uskets, the sappers with their axes. The assailants were grouped about that oor. The siege of the wine-shop was now beginning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.7#The soldiers, we will observe, were full of wrath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.8#The death of the artillery-sergeant had enraged them, and then, a still ore melancholy circumstance. During the few hours which had preceded the ttack, it had been reported among them that the insurgents were mutilating heir prisoners, and that there was the headless body of a soldier in the ine-shop. This sort of fatal rumor is the usual accompaniment of civil wars, nd it was a false report of this kind which, later on, produced the catastrophe f the Rue Transnonain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.9#When the door was barricaded, Enjolras said to the others:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.10#“Let us sell our lives dearly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.11#Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche. Beneath the lack cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible, one large, the other mall, and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath the cold folds of the hroud. A hand projected from beneath the winding sheet and hung near the floor. t was that of the old man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.12#Enjolras bent down and kissed that venerable hand, just as he had kissed is brow on the preceding evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.13#These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course of his ife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.14#Let us abridge the tale. The barricade had fought like a gate of Thebes; he wine-shop fought like a house of Saragossa. These resistances are dogged. No uarter. No flag of truce possible. Men are willing to die, provided their pponent will kill them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.15#When Suchet says:—“Capitulate,”—Palafox replies: “After the war with annon, the war with knives.” Nothing was lacking in the capture by assault of he Hucheloup wine-shop; neither paving-stones raining from the windows and the oof on the besiegers and exasperating the soldiers by crushing them horribly, or shots fired from the attic-windows and the cellar, nor the fury of attack, or, finally, when the door yielded, the frenzied madness of extermination. The ssailants, rushing into the wine-shop, their feet entangled in the panels of he door which had been beaten in and flung on the ground, found not a single ombatant there. The spiral staircase, hewn asunder with the axe, lay in the iddle of the tap-room, a few wounded men were just breathing their last, every ne who was not killed was on the first floor, and from there, through the hole n the ceiling, which had formed the entrance of the stairs, a terrific fire urst forth. It was the last of their cartridges. When they were exhausted, when hese formidable men on the point of death had no longer either powder or ball, ach grasped in his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved, and of hich we have spoken, and held the scaling party in check with these frightfully ragile clubs. They were bottles of aquafortis.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.16#We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred. The besieged an, alas! converts everything into a weapon. Greek fire did not disgrace rchimedes, boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard. All war is a thing of terror, nd there is no choice in it. The musketry of the besiegers, though confined and mbarrassed by being directed from below upwards, was deadly. The rim of the ole in the ceiling was speedily surrounded by heads of the slain, whence ripped long, red and smoking streams, the uproar was indescribable; a close and urning smoke almost produced night over this combat. Words are lacking to xpress horror when it has reached this pitch. There were no longer men in this onflict, which was now infernal. They were no longer giants matched with olossi. It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer. Demons attacked, pectres resisted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.22.17#It was heroism become monstrous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.head#CHAPTER XXIII—ORESTES FASTING AND PYLADES DRUNK
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.1#At length, by dint of mounting on each other’s backs, aiding themselves ith the skeleton of the staircase, climbing up the walls, clinging to the eiling, slashing away at the very brink of the trap-door, the last one who ffered resistance, a score of assailants, soldiers, National Guardsmen, unicipal guardsmen, in utter confusion, the majority disfigured by wounds in he face during that redoubtable ascent, blinded by blood, furious, rendered avage, made an irruption into the apartment on the first floor. There they ound only one man still on his feet, Enjolras. Without cartridges, without word, he had nothing in his hand now but the barrel of his gun whose stock he ad broken over the head of those who were entering. He had placed the billiard able between his assailants and himself; he had retreated into the corner of he room, and there, with haughty eye, and head borne high, with this stump of a eapon in his hand, he was still so alarming as to speedily create an empty pace around him. A cry arose:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.2#“He is the leader! It was he who slew the artillery-man. It is well that he as placed himself there. Let him remain there. Let us shoot him down on the pot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.3#“Shoot me,” said Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.4#And flinging away his bit of gun-barrel, and folding his arms, he offered is breast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.5#The audacity of a fine death always affects men. As soon as Enjolras folded is arms and accepted his end, the din of strife ceased in the room, and this haos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchral solemnity. The menacing majesty f Enjolras disarmed and motionless, appeared to oppress this tumult, and this oung man, haughty, bloody, and charming, who alone had not a wound, who was as ndifferent as an invulnerable being, seemed, by the authority of his tranquil lance, to constrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully. His beauty, t that moment augmented by his pride, was resplendent, and he was fresh and osy after the fearful four and twenty hours which had just elapsed, as though e could no more be fatigued than wounded. It was of him, possibly, that a itness spoke afterwards, before the council of war: “There was an insurgent hom I heard called Apollo.” A National Guardsman who had taken aim at Enjolras, owered his gun, saying: “It seems to me that I am about to shoot a flower.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.6#Twelve men formed into a squad in the corner opposite Enjolras, and ilently made ready their guns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.7#Then a sergeant shouted:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.8#“Take aim!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.9#An officer intervened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.10#“Wait.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.11#And addressing Enjolras:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.12#“Do you wish to have your eyes bandaged?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.13#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.14#“Was it you who killed the artillery sergeant?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.15#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.16#Grantaire had waked up a few moments before.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.17#Grantaire, it will be remembered, had been asleep ever since the preceding vening in the upper room of the wine-shop, seated on a chair and leaning on the able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.18#He realized in its fullest sense the old metaphor of “dead drunk.” The ideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into a lethargy. is table being small, and not suitable for the barricade, he had been left in ossession of it. He was still in the same posture, with his breast bent over he table, his head lying flat on his arms, surrounded by glasses, beer-jugs and ottles. His was the overwhelming slumber of the torpid bear and the satiated eech. Nothing had had any effect upon it, neither the fusillade, nor the annon-balls, nor the grape-shot which had made its way through the window into he room where he was. Nor the tremendous uproar of the assault. He merely eplied to the cannonade, now and then, by a snore. He seemed to be waiting here for a bullet which should spare him the trouble of waking. Many corpses ere strewn around him; and, at the first glance, there was nothing to istinguish him from those profound sleepers of death.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.19#Noise does not rouse a drunken man; silence awakens him. The fall of verything around him only augmented Grantaire’s prostration; the crumbling of ll things was his lullaby. The sort of halt which the tumult underwent in the resence of Enjolras was a shock to this heavy slumber. It had the effect of a arriage going at full speed, which suddenly comes to a dead stop. The persons ozing within it wake up. Grantaire rose to his feet with a start, stretched out is arms, rubbed his eyes, stared, yawned, and understood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.20#A fit of drunkenness reaching its end resembles a curtain which is torn way. One beholds, at a single glance and as a whole, all that it has concealed. ll suddenly presents itself to the memory; and the drunkard who has known othing of what has been taking place during the last twenty-four hours, has no ooner opened his eyes than he is perfectly informed. Ideas recur to him with brupt lucidity; the obliteration of intoxication, a sort of steam which has bscured the brain, is dissipated, and makes way for the clear and sharply utlined importunity of realities.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.21#Relegated, as he was, to one corner, and sheltered behind the illiard-table, the soldiers whose eyes were fixed on Enjolras, had not even oticed Grantaire, and the sergeant was preparing to repeat his order: “Take im!” when all at once, they heard a strong voice shout beside them:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.22#“Long live the Republic! I’m one of them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.23#Grantaire had risen. The immense gleam of the whole combat which he had issed, and in which he had had no part, appeared in the brilliant glance of the ransfigured drunken man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.24#He repeated: “Long live the Republic!” crossed the room with a firm stride nd placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.25#“Finish both of us at one blow,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.26#And turning gently to Enjolras, he said to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.27#“Do you permit it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.28#Enjolras pressed his hand with a smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.29#This smile was not ended when the report resounded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.30#Enjolras, pierced by eight bullets, remained leaning against the wall, as hough the balls had nailed him there. Only, his head was bowed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.31#Grantaire fell at his feet, as though struck by a thunderbolt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.32#A few moments later, the soldiers dislodged the last remaining insurgents, ho had taken refuge at the top of the house. They fired into the attic through wooden lattice. They fought under the very roof. They flung bodies, some of hem still alive, out through the windows. Two light-infantrymen, who tried to ift the shattered omnibus, were slain by two shots fired from the attic. A man n a blouse was flung down from it, with a bayonet wound in the abdomen, and reathed his last on the ground. A soldier and an insurgent slipped together on he sloping slates of the roof, and, as they would not release each other, they ell, clasped in a ferocious embrace. A similar conflict went on in the cellar. houts, shots, a fierce trampling. Then silence. The barricade was captured.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.23.33#The soldiers began to search the houses round about, and to pursue the ugitives.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.head#CHAPTER XXIV—PRISONER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.1#Marius was, in fact, a prisoner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.2#The hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had felt at he moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that of Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.3#Jean Valjean had taken no other part in the combat than to expose himself n it. Had it not been for him, no one, in that supreme phase of agony, would ave thought of the wounded. Thanks to him, everywhere present in the carnage, ike a providence, those who fell were picked up, transported to the tap-room, nd cared for. In the intervals, he reappeared on the barricade. But nothing hich could resemble a blow, an attack or even personal defence proceeded from is hands. He held his peace and lent succor. Moreover, he had received only a ew scratches. The bullets would have none of him. If suicide formed part of hat he had meditated on coming to this sepulchre, to that spot, he had not ucceeded. But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide, an irreligious ct.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.4#Jean Valjean, in the thick cloud of the combat, did not appear to see arius; the truth is, that he never took his eyes from the latter. When a shot aid Marius low, Jean Valjean leaped forward with the agility of a tiger, fell pon him as on his prey, and bore him off.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.5#The whirlwind of the attack was, at that moment, so violently concentrated pon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop, that no one saw Jean Valjean ustaining the fainting Marius in his arms, traverse the unpaved field of the arricade and disappear behind the angle of the Corinthe building.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.6#The reader will recall this angle which formed a sort of cape on the treet; it afforded shelter from the bullets, the grape-shot, and all eyes, and few square feet of space. There is sometimes a chamber which does not burn in he midst of a conflagration, and in the midst of raging seas, beyond a romontory or at the extremity of a blind alley of shoals, a tranquil nook. It as in this sort of fold in the interior trapezium of the barricade, that ponine had breathed her last.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.7#There Jean Valjean halted, let Marius slide to the ground, placed his back gainst the wall, and cast his eyes about him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.8#The situation was alarming.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.9#For an instant, for two or three perhaps, this bit of wall was a shelter, ut how was he to escape from this massacre? He recalled the anguish which he ad suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before, and in what manner he had ontrived to make his escape; it was difficult then, to-day it was impossible. e had before him that deaf and implacable house, six stories in height, which ppeared to be inhabited only by a dead man leaning out of his window; he had on is right the rather low barricade, which shut off the Rue de la Petite ruanderie; to pass this obstacle seemed easy, but beyond the crest of the arrier a line of bayonets was visible. The troops of the line were posted on he watch behind that barricade. It was evident, that to pass the barricade was o go in quest of the fire of the platoon, and that any head which should run he risk of lifting itself above the top of that wall of stones would serve as a arget for sixty shots. On his left he had the field of battle. Death lurked ound the corner of that wall.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.10#What was to be done?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.11#Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.12#And it was necessary to decide on the instant, to devise some expedient, o come to some decision. Fighting was going on a few paces away; fortunately, ll were raging around a single point, the door of the wine-shop; but if it hould occur to one soldier, to one single soldier, to turn the corner of the ouse, or to attack him on the flank, all was over.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.13#Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him, he gazed at the barricade at ne side of him, then he looked at the ground, with the violence of the last xtremity, bewildered, and as though he would have liked to pierce a hole there ith his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.14#By dint of staring, something vaguely striking in such an agony began to ssume form and outline at his feet, as though it had been a power of glance hich made the thing desired unfold. A few paces distant he perceived, at the ase of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and watched on the exterior, eneath a disordered mass of paving-stones which partly concealed it, an iron rating, placed flat and on a level with the soil. This grating, made of stout, ransverse bars, was about two feet square. The frame of paving-stones which upported it had been torn up, and it was, as it were, unfastened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.15#Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture, something like he flue of a chimney, or the pipe of a cistern. Jean Valjean darted forward. is old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination. To thrust aside he stones, to raise the grating, to lift Marius, who was as inert as a dead ody, upon his shoulders, to descend, with this burden on his loins, and with he aid of his elbows and knees into that sort of well, fortunately not very eep, to let the heavy trap, upon which the loosened stones rolled down afresh, all into its place behind him, to gain his footing on a flagged surface three etres below the surface,—all this was executed like that which one does in reams, with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of an eagle; this took nly a few minutes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.16#Jean Valjean found himself with Marius, who was still unconscious, in a ort of long, subterranean corridor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.17#There reigned profound peace, absolute silence, night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.1.24.18#The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from the all into the convent recurred to him. Only, what he was carrying to-day was not osette; it was Marius. He could barely hear the formidable tumult in the ine-shop, taken by assault, like a vague murmur overhead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.head#BOOK SECOND—THE INTESTINE OF THE LEVIATHAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.1#Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water. And this without etaphor. How, and in what manner? Day and night. With what object? With no bject. With what intention? With no intention. Why? For no reason. By means of hat organ? By means of its intestine. What is its intestine? The sewer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.2#Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure which the aluations of special science have set upon it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.3#Science, after having long groped about, now knows that the most ecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure. The hinese, let us confess it to our shame, knew it before us. Not a Chinese easant—it is Eckberg who says this,—goes to town without bringing back with im, at the two extremities of his bamboo pole, two full buckets of what we esignate as filth. Thanks to human dung, the earth in China is still as young s in the days of Abraham. Chinese wheat yields a hundred fold of the seed. here is no guano comparable in fertility with the detritus of a capital. A reat city is the most mighty of dung-makers. Certain success would attend the xperiment of employing the city to manure the plain. If our gold is manure, our anure, on the other hand, is gold.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.4#What is done with this golden manure? It is swept into the abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.5#Fleets of vessels are despatched, at great expense, to collect the dung of etrels and penguins at the South Pole, and the incalculable element of opulence hich we have on hand, we send to the sea. All the human and animal manure which he world wastes, restored to the land instead of being cast into the water, ould suffice to nourish the world.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.6#Those heaps of filth at the gate-posts, those tumbrils of mud which jolt hrough the street by night, those terrible casks of the street department, hose fetid drippings of subterranean mire, which the pavements hide from ou,—do you know what they are? They are the meadow in flower, the green grass, ild thyme, thyme and sage, they are game, they are cattle, they are the atisfied bellows of great oxen in the evening, they are perfumed hay, they are olden wheat, they are the bread on your table, they are the warm blood in your eins, they are health, they are joy, they are life. This is the will of that ysterious creation which is transformation on earth and transfiguration in eaven.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.7#Restore this to the great crucible; your abundance will flow forth from it. he nutrition of the plains furnishes the nourishment of men.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.8#You have it in your power to lose this wealth, and to consider me idiculous to boot. This will form the master-piece of your ignorance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.9#Statisticians have calculated that France alone makes a deposit of half a illiard every year, in the Atlantic, through the mouths of her rivers. Note his: with five hundred millions we could pay one quarter of the expenses of our udget. The cleverness of man is such that he prefers to get rid of these five undred millions in the gutter. It is the very substance of the people that is arried off, here drop by drop, there wave after wave, the wretched outpour of ur sewers into the rivers, and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the cean. Every hiccough of our sewers costs us a thousand francs. From this spring wo results, the land impoverished, and the water tainted. Hunger arising from he furrow, and disease from the stream.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.10#It is notorious, for example, that at the present hour, the Thames is oisoning London.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.11#So far as Paris is concerned, it has become indispensable of late, to ransport the mouths of the sewers downstream, below the last bridge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.12#A double tubular apparatus, provided with valves and sluices, sucking up nd driving back, a system of elementary drainage, simple as the lungs of a man, nd which is already in full working order in many communities in England, would uffice to conduct the pure water of the fields into our cities, and to send ack to the fields the rich water of the cities, and this easy exchange, the implest in the world, would retain among us the five hundred millions now hrown away. People are thinking of other things.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.13#The process actually in use does evil, with the intention of doing good. he intention is good, the result is melancholy. Thinking to purge the city, the opulation is blanched like plants raised in cellars. A sewer is a mistake. When rainage, everywhere, with its double function, restoring what it takes, shall ave replaced the sewer, which is a simple impoverishing washing, then, this eing combined with the data of a now social economy, the product of the earth ill be increased tenfold, and the problem of misery will be singularly ightened. Add the suppression of parasitism, and it will be solved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.14#In the meanwhile, the public wealth flows away to the river, and leakage akes place. Leakage is the word. Europe is being ruined in this manner by xhaustion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.15#As for France, we have just cited its figures. Now, Paris contains one wenty-fifth of the total population of France, and Parisian guano being the ichest of all, we understate the truth when we value the loss on the part of aris at twenty-five millions in the half milliard which France annually ejects. These twenty-five millions, employed in assistance and enjoyment, would ouble the splendor of Paris. The city spends them in sewers. So that we may say hat Paris’s great prodigality, its wonderful festival, its Beaujon folly, its rgy, its stream of gold from full hands, its pomp, its luxury, its agnificence, is its sewer system.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.16#It is in this manner that, in the blindness of a poor political economy, e drown and allow to float downstream and to be lost in the gulfs the ell-being of all. There should be nets at Saint-Cloud for the public ortune.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.17#Economically considered, the matter can be summed up thus: Paris is a pendthrift. Paris, that model city, that patron of well-arranged capitals, of hich every nation strives to possess a copy, that metropolis of the ideal, that ugust country of the initiative, of impulse and of effort, that centre and that welling of minds, that nation-city, that hive of the future, that marvellous ombination of Babylon and Corinth, would make a peasant of the Fo-Kian shrug is shoulders, from the point of view which we have just indicated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.18#Imitate Paris and you will ruin yourselves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.19#Moreover, and particularly in this immemorial and senseless waste, Paris s itself an imitator.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.20#These surprising exhibitions of stupidity are not novel; this is no young olly. The ancients did like the moderns. “The sewers of Rome,” says Liebig, have absorbed all the well-being of the Roman peasant.” When the Campagna of ome was ruined by the Roman sewer, Rome exhausted Italy, and when she had put taly in her sewer, she poured in Sicily, then Sardinia, then Africa. The sewer f Rome has engulfed the world. This cesspool offered its engulfment to the city nd the universe. _Urbi et orbi_. Eternal city, unfathomable sewer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.21#Rome sets the example for these things as well as for others.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.22#Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar to intelligent owns.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.23#For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we have ust explained our views, Paris has beneath it another Paris; a Paris of sewers; hich has its streets, its crossroads, its squares, its blind-alleys, its rteries, and its circulation, which is of mire and minus the human form.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.24#For nothing must be flattered, not even a great people; where there is verything there is also ignominy by the side of sublimity; and, if Paris ontains Athens, the city of light, Tyre, the city of might, Sparta, the city of irtue, Nineveh, the city of marvels, it also contains Lutetia, the city of ud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.25#However, the stamp of its power is there also, and the Titanic sink of aris realizes, among monuments, that strange ideal realized in humanity by some en like Macchiavelli, Bacon and Mirabeau, grandiose vileness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.26#The sub-soil of Paris, if the eye could penetrate its surface, would resent the aspect of a colossal madrepore. A sponge has no more partitions and ucts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six leagues round about, on which ests the great and ancient city. Not to mention its catacombs, which are a eparate cellar, not to mention the inextricable trellis-work of gas pipes, ithout reckoning the vast tubular system for the distribution of fresh water hich ends in the pillar fountains, the sewers alone form a tremendous, shadowy etwork under the two banks; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guiding hread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.1.27#There appears, in the humid mist, the rat which seems the product to which aris has given birth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.head#CHAPTER II—ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE SEWER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.1#Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover, the subterranean etwork of sewers, from a bird’s-eye view, will outline on the banks a species f large branch grafted on the river. On the right bank, the belt sewer will orm the trunk of this branch, the secondary ducts will form the branches, and hose without exit the twigs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.2#This figure is but a summary one and half exact, the right angle, which is he customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications, being very are in vegetation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.3#A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed by upposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet, as intricate as thicket, against a background of shadows, and the misshapen letters should be elded one to another in apparent confusion, and as at haphazard, now by their ngles, again by their extremities.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.4#Sinks and sewers played a great part in the Middle Ages, in the Lower mpire and in the Orient of old. The masses regarded these beds of ecomposition, these monstrous cradles of death, with a fear that was almost eligious. The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive to giddiness than he lions’ ditch of Babylon. Teglath-Phalasar, according to the rabbinical ooks, swore by the sink of Nineveh. It was from the sewer of Münster that John f Leyden produced his false moon, and it was from the cesspool of Kekscheb that riental menalchme, Mokanna, the veiled prophet of Khorassan, caused his false un to emerge.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.5#The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers. The Germoniæ58 arrated Rome. The sewer of Paris has been an ancient and formidable thing. It as been a sepulchre, it has served as an asylum. Crime, intelligence, social rotest, liberty of conscience, thought, theft, all that human laws persecute or ave persecuted, is hidden in that hole; the _maillotins_ in the fourteenth entury, the _tire-laine_ of the fifteenth, the Huguenots in the sixteenth, orin’s _illuminated_ in the seventeenth, the _chauffeurs_ [brigands] in the ighteenth. A hundred years ago, the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged hence, the pickpocket in danger slipped thither; the forest had its cave, Paris ad its sewer. Vagrancy, that Gallic _picareria_, accepted the sewer as the djunct of the Cour des Miracles, and at evening, it returned thither, fierce nd sly, through the Maubuée outlet, as into a bed-chamber.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.6#It was quite natural, that those who had the blind-alley Vide-Gousset, Empty-Pocket] or the Rue Coupe-Gorge [Cut-Throat], for the scene of their daily abor, should have for their domicile by night the culvert of the Chemin-Vert, r the catch basin of Hurepoix. Hence a throng of souvenirs. All sorts of hantoms haunt these long, solitary corridors; everywhere is putrescence and iasma; here and there are breathing-holes, where Villon within converses with abelais without.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.7#The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and of all ttempts. Political economy therein spies a detritus, social philosophy there eholds a residuum.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.8#The sewer is the conscience of the city. Everything there converges and onfronts everything else. In that livid spot there are shades, but there are no onger any secrets. Each thing bears its true form, or at least, its definitive orm. The mass of filth has this in its favor, that it is not a liar. ngenuousness has taken refuge there. The mask of Basil is to be found there, ut one beholds its cardboard and its strings and the inside as well as the utside, and it is accentuated by honest mud. Scapin’s false nose is its ext-door neighbor. All the uncleannesses of civilization, once past their use, all into this trench of truth, where the immense social sliding ends. They are here engulfed, but they display themselves there. This mixture is a confession. here, no more false appearances, no plastering over is possible, filth removes ts shirt, absolute denudation puts to the rout all illusions and mirages, there s nothing more except what really exists, presenting the sinister form of that hich is coming to an end. There, the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness, basket-handle tells a tale of domesticity; there the core of an apple which as entertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more; the effigy on he big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris, Caiphas’ spittle meets alstaff’s puking, the louis-d’or which comes from the gaming-house jostles the ail whence hangs the rope’s end of the suicide. A livid fœtus rolls along, nveloped in the spangles which danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday, a cap hich has pronounced judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which as formerly Margoton’s petticoat; it is more than fraternization, it is quivalent to addressing each other as _thou_. All which was formerly rouged, is ashed free. The last veil is torn away. A sewer is a cynic. It tells verything.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.9#The sincerity of foulness pleases us, and rests the soul. When one has assed one’s time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the great airs which easons of state, the oath, political sagacity, human justice, professional robity, the austerities of situation, incorruptible robes all assume, it olaces one to enter a sewer and to behold the mire which befits it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.10#This is instructive at the same time. We have just said that history asses through the sewer. The Saint-Barthélemys filter through there, drop by rop, between the paving-stones. Great public assassinations, political and eligious butcheries, traverse this underground passage of civilization, and hrust their corpses there. For the eye of the thinker, all historic murderers re to be found there, in that hideous penumbra, on their knees, with a scrap of heir winding-sheet for an apron, dismally sponging out their work. Louis XI. is here with Tristan, François I. with Duprat, Charles IX. is there with his other, Richelieu is there with Louis XIII., Louvois is there, Letellier is here, Hébert and Maillard are there, scratching the stones, and trying to make he traces of their actions disappear. Beneath these vaults one hears the brooms f spectres. One there breathes the enormous fetidness of social catastrophes. ne beholds reddish reflections in the corners. There flows a terrible stream, n which bloody hands have been washed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.2.11#The social observer should enter these shadows. They form a part of his aboratory. Philosophy is the microscope of the thought. Everything desires to lee from it, but nothing escapes it. Tergiversation is useless. What side of neself does one display in evasions? the shameful side. Philosophy pursues with ts glance, probes the evil, and does not permit it to escape into nothingness. n the obliteration of things which disappear, in the watching of things which anish, it recognizes all. It reconstructs the purple from the rag, and the oman from the scrap of her dress. From the cesspool, it reconstitutes the city; rom mud, it reconstructs manners; from the potsherd it infers the amphora or he jug. By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece of parchment, it recognizes he difference which separates the Jewry of the Judengasse from the Jewry of the hetto. It re-discovers in what remains that which has been, good, evil, the rue, the blood-stain of the palace, the ink-blot of the cavern, the drop of weat from the brothel, trials undergone, temptations welcomed, orgies cast orth, the turn which characters have taken as they became abased, the trace of rostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable, and on the esture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina’s elbowing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.head#CHAPTER III—BRUNESEAU
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.1#The sewer of Paris in the Middle Ages was legendary. In the sixteenth entury, Henri II. attempted a bore, which failed. Not a hundred years ago, the esspool, Mercier attests the fact, was abandoned to itself, and fared as best t might.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.2#Such was this ancient Paris, delivered over to quarrels, to indecision, and o gropings. It was tolerably stupid for a long time. Later on, ’89 showed how nderstanding comes to cities. But in the good, old times, the capital had not uch head. It did not know how to manage its own affairs either morally or aterially, and could not sweep out filth any better than it could abuses. verything presented an obstacle, everything raised a question. The sewer, for xample, was refractory to every itinerary. One could no more find one’s earings in the sewer than one could understand one’s position in the city; bove the unintelligible, below the inextricable; beneath the confusion of ongues there reigned the confusion of caverns; Dædalus backed up Babel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.3#Sometimes the Paris sewer took a notion to overflow, as though this isunderstood Nile were suddenly seized with a fit of rage. There occurred, nfamous to relate, inundations of the sewer. At times, that stomach of ivilization digested badly, the cesspool flowed back into the throat of the ity, and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth. These resemblances of the ewer to remorse had their good points; they were warnings; very badly accepted, owever; the city waxed indignant at the audacity of its mire, and did not admit hat the filth should return. Drive it out better.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.4#The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of the ge of eighty. The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des Victoires, where tands the statue of Louis XIV.; it entered the Rue Saint-Honoré by the two ouths to the sewer in the Champs-Élysées, the Rue Saint-Florentin through the aint-Florentin sewer, the Rue Pierre-à-Poisson through the sewer de la onnerie, the Rue Popincourt, through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert, the Rue de a Roquette, through the sewer of the Rue de Lappe; it covered the drain of the ue des Champs-Élysées to the height of thirty-five centimetres; and, to the outh, through the vent of the Seine, performing its functions in inverse sense, t penetrated the Rue Mazarine, the Rue de l‘Échaudé, and the Rue des Marais, here it stopped at a distance of one hundred and nine metres, a few paces istant from the house in which Racine had lived, respecting, in the seventeenth entury, the poet more than the King. It attained its maximum depth in the Rue aint-Pierre, where it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of he water-spout, and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin, where it spread ut over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in length.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.5#At the beginning of this century, the sewer of Paris was still a mysterious lace. Mud can never enjoy a good fame; but in this case its evil renown reached he verge of the terrible. Paris knew, in a confused way, that she had under her terrible cavern. People talked of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in hich swarmed centipedes fifteen long feet in length, and which might have erved Behemoth for a bathtub. The great boots of the sewermen never ventured urther than certain well-known points. We were then very near the epoch when he scavenger’s carts, from the summit of which Sainte-Foix fraternized with the arquis de Créqui, discharged their loads directly into the sewer. As for leaning out,—that function was entrusted to the pouring rains which encumbered ather than swept away. Rome left some poetry to her sewer, and called it the emoniæ; Paris insulted hers, and entitled it the Polypus-Hole. Science and uperstition were in accord, in horror. The Polypus hole was no less repugnant o hygiene than to legend. The goblin was developed under the fetid covering of he Mouffetard sewer; the corpses of the Marmousets had been cast into the sewer e la Barillerie; Fagon attributed the redoubtable malignant fever of 1685 to he great hiatus of the sewer of the Marais, which remained yawning until 1833 n the Rue Saint-Louis, almost opposite the sign of the _Gallant Messenger_. The outh of the sewer of the Rue de la Mortellerie was celebrated for the estilences which had their source there; with its grating of iron, with points imulating a row of teeth, it was like a dragon’s maw in that fatal street, reathing forth hell upon men. The popular imagination seasoned the sombre arisian sink with some indescribably hideous intermixture of the infinite. The ewer had no bottom. The sewer was the lower world. The idea of exploring these eprous regions did not even occur to the police. To try that unknown thing, to ast the plummet into that shadow, to set out on a voyage of discovery in that byss—who would have dared? It was alarming. Nevertheless, some one did present imself. The cesspool had its Christopher Columbus.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.6#One day, in 1805, during one of the rare apparitions which the Emperor made n Paris, the Minister of the Interior, some Decrès or Crétet or other, came to he master’s intimate levee. In the Carrousel there was audible the clanking of words of all those extraordinary soldiers of the great Republic, and of the reat Empire; then Napoleon’s door was blocked with heroes; men from the Rhine, rom the Escaut, from the Adige, and from the Nile; companions of Joubert, of esaix, of Marceau, of Hoche, of Kléber; the aérostiers of Fleurus, the renadiers of Mayence, the pontoon-builders of Genoa, hussars whom the Pyramids ad looked down upon, artillerists whom Junot’s cannon-ball had spattered with ud, cuirassiers who had taken by assault the fleet lying at anchor in the uyderzee; some had followed Bonaparte upon the bridge of Lodi, others had ccompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua, others had preceded Lannes in the ollow road of Montebello. The whole army of that day was present there, in the ourt-yard of the Tuileries, represented by a squadron or a platoon, and uarding Napoleon in repose; and that was the splendid epoch when the grand army ad Marengo behind it and Austerlitz before it.—“Sire,” said the Minister of the nterior to Napoleon, “yesterday I saw the most intrepid man in your mpire.”—“What man is that?” said the Emperor brusquely, “and what has he one?”—“He wants to do something, Sire.”—“What is it?”—“To visit the sewers of aris.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.3.7#This man existed and his name was Bruneseau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.head#CHAPTER IV
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.1#The visit took place. It was a formidable campaign; a nocturnal battle gainst pestilence and suffocation. It was, at the same time, a voyage of iscovery. One of the survivors of this expedition, an intelligent workingman, ho was very young at the time, related curious details with regard to it, everal years ago, which Bruneseau thought himself obliged to omit in his report o the prefect of police, as unworthy of official style. The processes of isinfection were, at that epoch, extremely rudimentary. Hardly had Bruneseau rossed the first articulations of that subterranean network, when eight aborers out of the twenty refused to go any further. The operation was omplicated; the visit entailed the necessity of cleaning; hence it was ecessary to cleanse and at the same time, to proceed; to note the entrances of ater, to count the gratings and the vents, to lay out in detail the branches, o indicate the currents at the point where they parted, to define the espective bounds of the divers basins, to sound the small sewers grafted on the rincipal sewer, to measure the height under the key-stone of each drain, and he width, at the spring of the vaults as well as at the bottom, in order to etermine the arrangements with regard to the level of each water-entrance, ither of the bottom of the arch, or on the soil of the street. They advanced ith toil. The lanterns pined away in the foul atmosphere. From time to time, a ainting sewerman was carried out. At certain points, there were precipices. The oil had given away, the pavement had crumbled, the sewer had changed into a ottomless well; they found nothing solid; a man disappeared suddenly; they had reat difficulty in getting him out again. On the advice of Fourcroy, they ighted large cages filled with tow steeped in resin, from time to time, in pots which had been sufficiently disinfected. In some places, the wall was overed with misshapen fungi,—one would have said tumors; the very stone seemed iseased within this unbreathable atmosphere.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.2#Bruneseau, in his exploration, proceeded down hill. At the point of eparation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur, he deciphered upon a rojecting stone the date of 1550; this stone indicated the limits where hilibert Delorme, charged by Henri II. with visiting the subterranean drains of aris, had halted. This stone was the mark of the sixteenth century on the ewer; Bruneseau found the handiwork of the seventeenth century once more in the onceau drain of the old Rue Vieille-du-Temple, vaulted between 1600 and 1650; nd the handiwork of the eighteenth in the western section of the collecting anal, walled and vaulted in 1740. These two vaults, especially the less ncient, that of 1740, were more cracked and decrepit than the masonry of the elt sewer, which dated from 1412, an epoch when the brook of fresh water of énilmontant was elevated to the dignity of the Grand Sewer of Paris, an dvancement analogous to that of a peasant who should become first _valet de hambre_ to the King; something like Gros-Jean transformed into Lebel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.3#Here and there, particularly beneath the Court-House, they thought they ecognized the hollows of ancient dungeons, excavated in the very sewer itself. ideous _in-pace_. An iron neck-collar was hanging in one of these cells. They alled them all up. Some of their finds were singular; among others, the keleton of an ourang-outan, who had disappeared from the Jardin des Plantes in 800, a disappearance probably connected with the famous and indisputable pparition of the devil in the Rue des Bernardins, in the last year of the ighteenth century. The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the ewer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.4#Beneath this long, arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion, a erfectly preserved rag-picker’s basket excited the admiration of all onnoisseurs. Everywhere, the mire, which the sewermen came to handle with ntrepidity, abounded in precious objects, jewels of gold and silver, precious tones, coins. If a giant had filtered this cesspool, he would have had the iches of centuries in his lair. At the point where the two branches of the Rue u Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye separate, they picked up a singular uguenot medal in copper, bearing on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal’s at, and on the other, a wolf with a tiara on his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.5#The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer. This ntrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothing but the hinges emained. From one of these hinges hung a dirty and shapeless rag which, rrested there in its passage, no doubt, had floated there in the darkness and inished its process of being torn apart. Bruneseau held his lantern close to his rag and examined it. It was of very fine batiste, and in one of the orners, less frayed than the rest, they made out a heraldic coronet and mbroidered above these seven letters: LAVBESP. The crown was the coronet of a arquis, and the seven letters signified _Laubespine_. They recognized the fact, hat what they had before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat. Marat n his youth had had amorous intrigues. This was when he was a member of the ousehold of the Comte d’Artois, in the capacity of physician to the Stables. rom these love affairs, historically proved, with a great lady, he had retained his sheet. As a waif or a souvenir. At his death, as this was the only linen of ny fineness which he had in his house, they buried him in it. Some old women ad shrouded him for the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend f the people had enjoyed voluptuousness. Bruneseau passed on. They left that ag where it hung; they did not put the finishing touch to it. Did this arise rom scorn or from respect? Marat deserved both. And then, destiny was there ufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touch it. Besides, the things of he sepulchre must be left in the spot which they select. In short, the relic as a strange one. A Marquise had slept in it; Marat had rotted in it; it had raversed the Pantheon to end with the rats of the sewer. This chamber rag, of hich Watteau would formerly have joyfully sketched every fold, had ended in ecoming worthy of the fixed gaze of Dante.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.6#The whole visit to the subterranean stream of filth of Paris lasted seven ears, from 1805 to 1812. As he proceeded, Bruneseau drew, directed, and ompleted considerable works; in 1808 he lowered the arch of the Ponceau, and, verywhere creating new lines, he pushed the sewer, in 1809, under the Rue aint-Denis as far as the fountain of the Innocents; in 1810, under the Rue roidmanteau and under the Salpêtrière; in 1811 under the Rue euve-des-Petits-Pères, under the Rue du Mail, under the Rue de l‘Écharpe, under he Place Royale; in 1812, under the Rue de la Paix, and under the Chaussée ’Antin. At the same time, he had the whole network disinfected and rendered ealthful. In the second year of his work, Bruneseau engaged the assistance of is son-in-law Nargaud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.7#It was thus that, at the beginning of the century, ancient society cleansed ts double bottom, and performed the toilet of its sewer. There was that much lean, at all events.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.8#Tortuous, cracked, unpaved, full of fissures, intersected by gullies, olted by eccentric elbows, mounting and descending illogically, fetid, wild, ierce, submerged in obscurity, with cicatrices on its pavements and scars on ts walls, terrible,—such was, retrospectively viewed, the antique sewer of aris. Ramifications in every direction, crossings, of trenches, branches, oose-feet, stars, as in military mines, cœcum, blind alleys, vaults lined with altpetre, pestiferous pools, scabby sweats, on the walls, drops dripping from he ceilings, darkness; nothing could equal the horror of this old, waste crypt, he digestive apparatus of Babylon, a cavern, ditch, gulf pierced with streets, titanic mole-burrow, where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind mole, he past, prowling through the shadows, in the filth which has been plendor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.4.9#This, we repeat, was the sewer of the past.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.5.head#CHAPTER V—PRESENT PROGRESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.5.1#To-day the sewer is clean, cold, straight, correct. It almost realizes the deal of what is understood in England by the word “respectable.” It is proper nd grayish; laid out by rule and line; one might almost say as though it came ut of a bandbox. It resembles a tradesman who has become a councillor of state. ne can almost see distinctly there. The mire there comports itself with ecency. At first, one might readily mistake it for one of those subterranean orridors, which were so common in former days, and so useful in flights of onarchs and princes, in those good old times, “when the people loved their ings.” The present sewer is a beautiful sewer; the pure style reigns there; the lassical rectilinear alexandrine which, driven out of poetry, appears to have aken refuge in architecture, seems mingled with all the stones of that long, ark and whitish vault; each outlet is an arcade; the Rue de Rivoli serves as attern even in the sewer. However, if the geometrical line is in place nywhere, it is certainly in the drainage trench of a great city. There, verything should be subordinated to the shortest road. The sewer has, nowadays, ssumed a certain official aspect. The very police reports, of which it ometimes forms the subject, no longer are wanting in respect towards it. The ords which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous and ignified. What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery; what used to be alled a hole is now called a surveying orifice. Villon would no longer meet ith his ancient temporary provisional lodging. This network of cellars has its mmemorial population of prowlers, rodents, swarming in greater numbers than ver; from time to time, an aged and veteran rat risks his head at the window of he sewer and surveys the Parisians; but even these vermin grow tame, so atisfied are they with their subterranean palace. The cesspool no longer etains anything of its primitive ferocity. The rain, which in former days oiled the sewer, now washes it. Nevertheless, do not trust yourself too much to t. Miasmas still inhabit it. It is more hypocritical than irreproachable. The refecture of police and the commission of health have done their best. But, in pite of all the processes of disinfection, it exhales, a vague, suspicious odor ike Tartuffe after confession.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.5.2#Let us confess, that, taking it all in all, this sweeping is a homage which he sewer pays to civilization, and as, from this point of view, Tartuffe’s onscience is a progress over the Augean stables, it is certain that the sewers f Paris have been improved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.5.3#It is more than progress; it is transmutation. Between the ancient and the resent sewer there is a revolution. What has effected this revolution?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.5.4#The man whom all the world forgets, and whom we have mentioned, runeseau.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.head#CHAPTER VI—FUTURE PROGRESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.1#The excavation of the sewer of Paris has been no slight task. The last ten enturies have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a termination, any ore than they have been able to finish Paris. The sewer, in fact, receives all he counter-shocks of the growth of Paris. Within the bosom of the earth, it is sort of mysterious polyp with a thousand antennæ, which expands below as the ity expands above. Every time that the city cuts a street, the sewer stretches ut an arm. The old monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three undred metres of sewers; that was where Paris stood in this respect on the irst of January, 1806. Beginning with this epoch, of which we shall shortly peak, the work was usefully and energetically resumed and prosecuted; Napoleon uilt—the figures are curious—four thousand eight hundred and four metres; Louis VIII., five thousand seven hundred and nine; Charles X., ten thousand eight undred and thirty-six; Louis-Philippe, eighty-nine thousand and twenty; the epublic of 1848, twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one; the resent government, seventy thousand five hundred; in all, at the present time, wo hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres; sixty leagues of ewers; the enormous entrails of Paris. An obscure ramification ever at work; a onstruction which is immense and ignored.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.2#As the reader sees, the subterranean labyrinth of Paris is to-day more than en times what it was at the beginning of the century. It is difficult to form ny idea of all the perseverance and the efforts which have been required to ring this cesspool to the point of relative perfection in which it now is. It as with great difficulty that the ancient monarchical provostship and, during he last ten years of the eighteenth century, the revolutionary mayoralty, had ucceeded in perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to 806. All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation, some peculiar to the soil, thers inherent in the very prejudices of the laborious population of Paris. aris is built upon a soil which is singularly rebellious to the pick, the hoe, he bore, and to human manipulation. There is nothing more difficult to pierce nd to penetrate than the geological formation upon which is superposed the arvellous historical formation called Paris; as soon as work in any form hatsoever is begun and adventures upon this stretch of alluvium, subterranean esistances abound. There are liquid clays, springs, hard rocks, and those soft nd deep quagmires which special science calls _moutardes_.59 The pick advances aboriously through the calcareous layers alternating with very slender threads f clay, and schistose beds in plates incrusted with oyster-shells, the ontemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans. Sometimes a rivulet suddenly bursts hrough a vault that has been begun, and inundates the laborers; or a layer of arl is laid bare, and rolls down with the fury of a cataract, breaking the toutest supporting beams like glass. Quite recently, at Villette, when it ecame necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martin canal ithout interrupting navigation or emptying the canal, a fissure appeared in the asin of the canal, water suddenly became abundant in the subterranean tunnel, hich was beyond the power of the pumping engines; it was necessary to send a iver to explore the fissure which had been made in the narrow entrance of the rand basin, and it was not without great difficulty that it was stopped up. lsewhere near the Seine, and even at a considerable distance from the river, as or instance, at Belleville, Grand-Rue and Lumière Passage, quicksands are ncountered in which one sticks fast, and in which a man sinks visibly. Add uffocation by miasmas, burial by slides, and sudden crumbling of the earth. Add he typhus, with which the workmen become slowly impregnated. In our own day, fter having excavated the gallery of Clichy, with a banquette to receive the rincipal water-conduit of Ourcq, a piece of work which was executed in a trench en metres deep; after having, in the midst of land-slides, and with the aid of xcavations often putrid, and of shoring up, vaulted the Bièvre from the oulevard de l’Hôpital, as far as the Seine; after having, in order to deliver aris from the floods of Montmartre and in order to provide an outlet for that iver-like pool nine hectares in extent, which crouched near the Barrière des artyrs, after having, let us state, constructed the line of sewers from the arrière Blanche to the road of Aubervilliers, in four months, working day and ight, at a depth of eleven metres; after having—a thing heretofore unseen—made subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec, without a trench, six metres below he surface, the superintendent, Monnot, died. After having vaulted three housand metres of sewer in all quarters of the city, from the Rue raversière-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l’Ourcine, after having freed the arrefour Censier-Mouffetard from inundations of rain by means of the branch of he Arbalète, after having built the Saint-Georges sewer, on rock and concrete n the fluid sands, after having directed the formidable lowering of the looring of the vault timber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch, Duleau the ngineer died. There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these, which re more useful, nevertheless, than the brutal slaughter of the field of attle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.3#The sewers of Paris in 1832 were far from being what they are to-day. runeseau had given the impulse, but the cholera was required to bring about the ast reconstruction which took place later on. It is surprising to say, for xample, that in 1821, a part of the belt sewer, called the Grand Canal, as in enice, still stood stagnating uncovered to the sky, in the Rue des Gourdes. It as only in 1821 that the city of Paris found in its pocket the two hundred and ixty-thousand eighty francs and six centimes required for covering this mass of ilth. The three absorbing wells, of the Combat, the Cunette, and Saint-Mandé, ith their discharging mouths, their apparatus, their cesspools, and their epuratory branches, only date from 1836. The intestinal sewer of Paris has been ade over anew, and, as we have said, it has been extended more than tenfold ithin the last quarter of a century.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.4#Thirty years ago, at the epoch of the insurrection of the 5th and 6th of une, it was still, in many localities, nearly the same ancient sewer. A very reat number of streets which are now convex were then sunken causeways. At the nd of a slope, where the tributaries of a street or crossroads ended, there ere often to be seen large, square gratings with heavy bars, whose iron, olished by the footsteps of the throng, gleamed dangerous and slippery for ehicles, and caused horses to fall. The official language of the Roads and ridges gave to these gratings the expressive name of _Cassis_.60
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.5#In 1832, in a number of streets, in the Rue de l‘Étoile, the Rue aint-Louis, the Rue du Temple, the Rue Vieille-du-Temple, the Rue Notre-Dame de azareth, the Rue Folie-Méricourt, the Quai aux Fleurs, the Rue du Petit-Musc, he Rue du Normandie, the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches, the Rue des Marais, the Faubourg aint-Martin, the Rue Notre Dame des-Victoires, the Faubourg Montmartre, the Rue range-Batelière, in the Champs-Élysées, the Rue Jacob, the Rue de Tournon, the ncient gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw. It consisted of enormous oids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone posts, with monumental ffrontery.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.6#Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in 663; five thousand three hundred fathoms. After Bruneseau, on the 1st of anuary, 1832, it had forty thousand three hundred metres. Between 1806 and 831, there had been built, on an average, seven hundred and fifty metres nnually, afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres of galleries were onstructed every year, in masonry, of small stones, with hydraulic mortar which ardens under water, on a cement foundation. At two hundred francs the metre, he sixty leagues of Paris’ sewers of the present day represent forty-eight illions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.7#In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the eginning, grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that immense uestion: the sewers of Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.8#Paris is the centre of two sheets, a sheet of water and a sheet of air. The heet of water, lying at a tolerably great depth underground, but already ounded by two bores, is furnished by the layer of green clay situated between he chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone; this layer may be represented by a disk ive and twenty leagues in circumference; a multitude of rivers and brooks ooze here; one drinks the Seine, the Marne, the Yonne, the Oise, the Aisne, the her, the Vienne and the Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle. he sheet of water is healthy, it comes from heaven in the first place and next rom the earth; the sheet of air is unhealthy, it comes from the sewer. All the iasms of the cesspool are mingled with the breath of the city; hence this bad reath. The air taken from above a dung-heap, as has been scientifically proved, s purer than the air taken from above Paris. In a given time, with the aid of rogress, mechanisms become perfected, and as light increases, the sheet of ater will be employed to purify the sheet of air; that is to say, to wash the ewer. The reader knows, that by “washing the sewer” we mean: the restitution of he filth to the earth; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the ields. Through this simple act, the entire social community will experience a iminution of misery and an augmentation of health. At the present hour, the adiation of diseases from Paris extends to fifty leagues around the Louvre, aken as the hub of this pestilential wheel.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.2.6.9#We might say that, for ten centuries, the cesspool has been the disease of aris. The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood. The popular nstinct has never been deceived in it. The occupation of sewermen was formerly lmost as perilous, and almost as repugnant to the people, as the occupation of nacker, which was so long held in horror and handed over to the executioner. igh wages were necessary to induce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine; the adder of the cesspool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it; it was said, in roverbial form: “to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave;” and all orts of hideous legends, as we have said, covered this colossal sink with error; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of the revolutions of the globe s of the revolutions of man, and where are to be found vestiges of all ataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to the rag of Marat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.head#BOOK THIRD—MUD BUT THE SOUL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.1#It was in the sewers of Paris that Jean Valjean found himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.2#Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea. As in the ocean, the iver may disappear there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.3#The transition was an unheard-of one. In the very heart of the city, Jean aljean had escaped from the city, and, in the twinkling of an eye, in the time equired to lift the cover and to replace it, he had passed from broad daylight o complete obscurity, from midday to midnight, from tumult to silence, from the hirlwind of thunders to the stagnation of the tomb, and, by a vicissitude far ore tremendous even than that of the Rue Polonceau, from the most extreme peril o the most absolute obscurity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.4#An abrupt fall into a cavern; a disappearance into the secret trap-door of aris; to quit that street where death was on every side, for that sort of epulchre where there was life, was a strange instant. He remained for several econds as though bewildered; listening, stupefied. The waste-trap of safety had uddenly yawned beneath him. Celestial goodness had, in a manner, captured him y treachery. Adorable ambuscades of providence!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.5#Only, the wounded man did not stir, and Jean Valjean did not know whether hat which he was carrying in that grave was a living being or a dead orpse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.6#His first sensation was one of blindness. All of a sudden, he could see othing. It seemed to him too, that, in one instant, he had become deaf. He no onger heard anything. The frantic storm of murder which had been let loose a ew feet above his head did not reach him, thanks to the thickness of the earth hich separated him from it, as we have said, otherwise than faintly and ndistinctly, and like a rumbling, in the depths. He felt that the ground was olid under his feet; that was all; but that was enough. He extended one arm and hen the other, touched the walls on both sides, and perceived that the passage as narrow; he slipped, and thus perceived that the pavement was wet. He autiously put forward one foot, fearing a hole, a sink, some gulf; he iscovered that the paving continued. A gust of fetidness informed him of the lace in which he stood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.7#After the lapse of a few minutes, he was no longer blind. A little light ell through the man-hole through which he had descended, and his eyes became ccustomed to this cavern. He began to distinguish something. The passage in hich he had burrowed—no other word can better express the situation—was walled n behind him. It was one of those blind alleys, which the special jargon terms ranches. In front of him there was another wall, a wall like night. The light f the air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean tood, and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls of the ewer. Beyond, the opaqueness was massive; to penetrate thither seemed horrible, n entrance into it appeared like an engulfment. A man could, however, plunge nto that wall of fog and it was necessary so to do. Haste was even requisite. t occurred to Jean Valjean that the grating which he had caught sight of under he flag-stones might also catch the eye of the soldiery, and that everything ung upon this chance. They also might descend into that well and search it. here was not a minute to be lost. He had deposited Marius on the ground, he icked him up again,—that is the real word for it,—placed him on his shoulders nce more, and set out. He plunged resolutely into the gloom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.8#The truth is, that they were less safe than Jean Valjean fancied. Perils of nother sort and no less serious were awaiting them, perchance. After the ightning-charged whirlwind of the combat, the cavern of miasmas and traps; fter chaos, the sewer. Jean Valjean had fallen from one circle of hell into nother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.9#When he had advanced fifty paces, he was obliged to halt. A problem resented itself. The passage terminated in another gut which he encountered cross his path. There two ways presented themselves. Which should he take? ught he to turn to the left or to the right? How was he to find his bearings in hat black labyrinth? This labyrinth, to which we have already called the eader’s attention, has a clue, which is its slope. To follow to the slope is to rrive at the river.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.10#This Jean Valjean instantly comprehended.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.11#He said to himself that he was probably in the sewer des Halles; that if e were to choose the path to the left and follow the slope, he would arrive, in ess than a quarter of an hour, at some mouth on the Seine between the Pont au hange and the Pont-Neuf, that is to say, he would make his appearance in broad aylight on the most densely peopled spot in Paris. Perhaps he would come out on ome man-hole at the intersection of streets. Amazement of the passers-by at eholding two bleeding men emerge from the earth at their feet. Arrival of the olice, a call to arms of the neighboring post of guards. Thus they would be eized before they had even got out. It would be better to plunge into that abyrinth, to confide themselves to that black gloom, and to trust to Providence or the outcome.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.12#He ascended the incline, and turned to the right.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.13#When he had turned the angle of the gallery, the distant glimmer of an ir-hole disappeared, the curtain of obscurity fell upon him once more, and he ecame blind again. Nevertheless, he advanced as rapidly as possible. Marius’ wo arms were passed round his neck, and the former’s feet dragged behind him. e held both these arms with one hand, and groped along the wall with the other. arius’ cheek touched his, and clung there, bleeding. He felt a warm stream hich came from Marius trickling down upon him and making its way under his lothes. But a humid warmth near his ear, which the mouth of the wounded man ouched, indicated respiration, and consequently, life. The passage along which ean Valjean was now proceeding was not so narrow as the first. Jean Valjean alked through it with considerable difficulty. The rain of the preceding day ad not, as yet, entirely run off, and it created a little torrent in the centre f the bottom, and he was forced to hug the wall in order not to have his feet n the water.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.14#Thus he proceeded in the gloom. He resembled the beings of the night roping in the invisible and lost beneath the earth in veins of shadow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.15#Still, little by little, whether it was that the distant air-holes emitted little wavering light in this opaque gloom, or whether his eyes had become ccustomed to the obscurity, some vague vision returned to him, and he began nce more to gain a confused idea, now of the wall which he touched, now of the ault beneath which he was passing. The pupil dilates in the dark, and the soul ilates in misfortune and ends by finding God there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.16#It was not easy to direct his course.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.17#The line of the sewer re-echoes, so to speak, the line of the streets hich lie above it. There were then in Paris two thousand two hundred streets. et the reader imagine himself beneath that forest of gloomy branches which is alled the sewer. The system of sewers existing at that epoch, placed end to nd, would have given a length of eleven leagues. We have said above, that the ctual network, thanks to the special activity of the last thirty years, was no ess than sixty leagues in extent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.18#Jean Valjean began by committing a blunder. He thought that he was beneath he Rue Saint-Denis, and it was a pity that it was not so. Under the Rue aint-Denis there is an old stone sewer which dates from Louis XIII. and which uns straight to the collecting sewer, called the Grand Sewer, with but a single lbow, on the right, on the elevation of the ancient Cour des Miracles, and a ingle branch, the Saint-Martin sewer, whose four arms describe a cross. But the ut of the Petite-Truanderie the entrance to which was in the vicinity of the orinthe wine-shop has never communicated with the sewer of the Rue Saint-Denis; t ended at the Montmartre sewer, and it was in this that Jean Valjean was ntangled. There opportunities of losing oneself abound. The Montmartre sewer is ne of the most labyrinthine of the ancient network. Fortunately, Jean Valjean ad left behind him the sewer of the markets whose geometrical plan presents the ppearance of a multitude of parrots’ roosts piled on top of each other; but he ad before him more than one embarrassing encounter and more than one street orner—for they are streets—presenting itself in the gloom like an interrogation oint; first, on his left, the vast sewer of the Plâtrière, a sort of Chinese uzzle, thrusting out and entangling its chaos of Ts and Zs under the ost-Office and under the rotunda of the Wheat Market, as far as the Seine, here it terminates in a Y; secondly, on his right, the curving corridor of the ue du Cadran with its three teeth, which are also blind courts; thirdly, on his eft, the branch of the Mail, complicated, almost at its inception, with a sort f fork, and proceeding from zig-zag to zig-zag until it ends in the grand crypt f the outlet of the Louvre, truncated and ramified in every direction; and astly, the blind alley of a passage of the Rue des Jeûneurs, without counting ittle ducts here and there, before reaching the belt sewer, which alone could onduct him to some issue sufficiently distant to be safe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.19#Had Jean Valjean had any idea of all that we have here pointed out, he ould speedily have perceived, merely by feeling the wall, that he was not in he subterranean gallery of the Rue Saint-Denis. Instead of the ancient stone, nstead of the antique architecture, haughty and royal even in the sewer, with avement and string courses of granite and mortar costing eight hundred livres he fathom, he would have felt under his hand contemporary cheapness, economical xpedients, porous stone filled with mortar on a concrete foundation, which osts two hundred francs the metre, and the bourgeoise masonry known as _à etits matériaux_—small stuff; but of all this he knew nothing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.20#He advanced with anxiety, but with calmness, seeing nothing, knowing othing, buried in chance, that is to say, engulfed in providence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.21#By degrees, we will admit, a certain horror seized upon him. The gloom hich enveloped him penetrated his spirit. He walked in an enigma. This aqueduct f the sewer is formidable; it interlaces in a dizzy fashion. It is a melancholy hing to be caught in this Paris of shadows. Jean Valjean was obliged to find nd even to invent his route without seeing it. In this unknown, every step that e risked might be his last. How was he to get out? should he find an issue? hould he find it in time? would that colossal subterranean sponge with its tone cavities, allow itself to be penetrated and pierced? should he there ncounter some unexpected knot in the darkness? should he arrive at the nextricable and the impassable? would Marius die there of hemorrhage and he of unger? should they end by both getting lost, and by furnishing two skeletons in nook of that night? He did not know. He put all these questions to himself ithout replying to them. The intestines of Paris form a precipice. Like the rophet, he was in the belly of the monster.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.22#All at once, he had a surprise. At the most unforeseen moment, and without aving ceased to walk in a straight line, he perceived that he was no longer scending; the water of the rivulet was beating against his heels, instead of eeting him at his toes. The sewer was now descending. Why? Was he about to rrive suddenly at the Seine? This danger was a great one, but the peril of etreating was still greater. He continued to advance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.23#It was not towards the Seine that he was proceeding. The ridge which the oil of Paris forms on its right bank empties one of its watersheds into the eine and the other into the Grand Sewer. The crest of this ridge which etermines the division of the waters describes a very capricious line. The ulminating point, which is the point of separation of the currents, is in the ainte-Avoye sewer, beyond the Rue Michel-le-Comte, in the sewer of the Louvre, ear the boulevards, and in the Montmartre sewer, near the Halles. It was this ulminating point that Jean Valjean had reached. He was directing his course owards the belt sewer; he was on the right path. But he did not know it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.24#Every time that he encountered a branch, he felt of its angles, and if he ound that the opening which presented itself was smaller than the passage in hich he was, he did not enter but continued his route, rightly judging that very narrower way must needs terminate in a blind alley, and could only lead im further from his goal, that is to say, the outlet. Thus he avoided the uadruple trap which was set for him in the darkness by the four labyrinths hich we have just enumerated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.25#At a certain moment, he perceived that he was emerging from beneath the aris which was petrified by the uprising, where the barricades had suppressed irculation, and that he was entering beneath the living and normal Paris. verhead he suddenly heard a noise as of thunder, distant but continuous. It was he rumbling of vehicles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.26#He had been walking for about half an hour, at least according to the alculation which he made in his own mind, and he had not yet thought of rest; e had merely changed the hand with which he was holding Marius. The darkness as more profound than ever, but its very depth reassured him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.27#All at once, he saw his shadow in front of him. It was outlined on a aint, almost indistinct reddish glow, which vaguely empurpled the flooring ault underfoot, and the vault overhead, and gilded to his right and to his left he two viscous walls of the passage. Stupefied, he turned round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.28#Behind him, in the portion of the passage which he had just passed hrough, at a distance which appeared to him immense, piercing the dense bscurity, flamed a sort of horrible star which had the air of surveying im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.29#It was the gloomy star of the police which was rising in the sewer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.1.30#In the rear of that star eight or ten forms were moving about in a onfused way, black, upright, indistinct, horrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.head#CHAPTER II—EXPLANATION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.1#On the day of the sixth of June, a battue of the sewers had been ordered. t was feared that the vanquished might have taken to them for refuge, and refect Gisquet was to search occult Paris while General Bugeaud swept public aris; a double and connected operation which exacted a double strategy on the art of the public force, represented above by the army and below by the police. hree squads of agents and sewermen explored the subterranean drain of Paris, he first on the right bank, the second on the left bank, the third in the city. he agents of police were armed with carabines, with bludgeons, swords and oignards.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.2#That which was directed at Jean Valjean at that moment, was the lantern of he patrol of the right bank.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.3#This patrol had just visited the curving gallery and the three blind alleys hich lie beneath the Rue du Cadran. While they were passing their lantern hrough the depths of these blind alleys, Jean Valjean had encountered on his ath the entrance to the gallery, had perceived that it was narrower than the rincipal passage and had not penetrated thither. He had passed on. The police, n emerging from the gallery du Cadran, had fancied that they heard the sound of ootsteps in the direction of the belt sewer. They were, in fact, the steps of ean Valjean. The sergeant in command of the patrol had raised his lantern, and he squad had begun to gaze into the mist in the direction whence the sound roceeded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.4#This was an indescribable moment for Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.5#Happily, if he saw the lantern well, the lantern saw him but ill. It was ight and he was shadow. He was very far off, and mingled with the darkness of he place. He hugged the wall and halted. Moreover, he did not understand what t was that was moving behind him. The lack of sleep and food, and his emotions ad caused him also to pass into the state of a visionary. He beheld a gleam, nd around that gleam, forms. What was it? He did not comprehend.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.6#Jean Valjean having paused, the sound ceased.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.7#The men of the patrol listened, and heard nothing, they looked and saw othing. They held a consultation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.8#There existed at that epoch at this point of the Montmartre sewer a sort of rossroads called _de service_, which was afterwards suppressed, on account of he little interior lake which formed there, swallowing up the torrent of rain n heavy storms. The patrol could form a cluster in this open space. Jean aljean saw these spectres form a sort of circle. These bull-dogs’ heads pproached each other closely and whispered together.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.9#The result of this council held by the watch dogs was, that they had been istaken, that there had been no noise, that it was useless to get entangled in he belt sewer, that it would only be a waste of time, but that they ought to asten towards Saint-Merry; that if there was anything to do, and any bousingot” to track out, it was in that quarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.10#From time to time, parties re-sole their old insults. In 1832, the word ousingot formed the interim between the word jacobin, which had become bsolete, and the word demagogue which has since rendered such excellent ervice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.11#The sergeant gave orders to turn to the left, towards the watershed of the eine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.12#If it had occurred to them to separate into two squads, and to go in both irections, Jean Valjean would have been captured. All hung on that thread. It s probable that the instructions of the prefecture, foreseeing a possibility of ombat and insurgents in force, had forbidden the patrol to part company. The atrol resumed its march, leaving Jean Valjean behind it. Of all this movement, ean Valjean perceived nothing, except the eclipse of the lantern which suddenly heeled round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.13#Before taking his departure, the sergeant, in order to acquit his oliceman’s conscience, discharged his gun in the direction of Jean Valjean. The etonation rolled from echo to echo in the crypt, like the rumbling of that itanic entrail. A bit of plaster which fell into the stream and splashed up the ater a few paces away from Jean Valjean, warned him that the ball had struck he arch over his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.2.14#Slow and measured steps resounded for some time on the timber work, radually dying away as they retreated to a greater distance; the group of black orms vanished, a glimmer of light oscillated and floated, communicating to the ault a reddish glow which grew fainter, then disappeared; the silence became rofound once more, the obscurity became complete, blindness and deafness esumed possession of the shadows; and Jean Valjean, not daring to stir as yet, emained for a long time leaning with his back against the wall, with straining ars, and dilated pupils, watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE “SPUN” MAN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.1#This justice must be rendered to the police of that period, that even in he most serious public junctures, it imperturbably fulfilled its duties onnected with the sewers and surveillance. A revolt was, in its eyes, no retext for allowing malefactors to take the bit in their own mouths, and for eglecting society for the reason that the government was in peril. The ordinary ervice was performed correctly in company with the extraordinary service, and as not troubled by the latter. In the midst of an incalculable political event lready begun, under the pressure of a possible revolution, a police agent, spun” a thief without allowing himself to be distracted by insurrection and arricades.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.2#It was something precisely parallel which took place on the afternoon of he 6th of June on the banks of the Seine, on the slope of the right shore, a ittle beyond the Pont des Invalides.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.3#There is no longer any bank there now. The aspect of the locality has hanged.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.4#On that bank, two men, separated by a certain distance, seemed to be atching each other while mutually avoiding each other. The one who was in dvance was trying to get away, the one in the rear was trying to overtake the ther.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.5#It was like a game of checkers played at a distance and in silence. Neither eemed to be in any hurry, and both walked slowly, as though each of them feared y too much haste to make his partner redouble his pace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.6#One would have said that it was an appetite following its prey, and urposely without wearing the air of doing so. The prey was crafty and on its uard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.7#The proper relations between the hunted pole-cat and the hunting dog were bserved. The one who was seeking to escape had an insignificant mien and not an mpressive appearance; the one who was seeking to seize him was rude of aspect, nd must have been rude to encounter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.8#The first, conscious that he was the more feeble, avoided the second; but e avoided him in a manner which was deeply furious; any one who could have bserved him would have discerned in his eyes the sombre hostility of flight, nd all the menace that fear contains.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.9#The shore was deserted; there were no passers-by; not even a boatman nor a ighter-man was in the skiffs which were moored here and there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.10#It was not easy to see these two men, except from the quay opposite, and o any person who had scrutinized them at that distance, the man who was in dvance would have appeared like a bristling, tattered, and equivocal being, who as uneasy and trembling beneath a ragged blouse, and the other like a classic nd official personage, wearing the frock-coat of authority buttoned to the hin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.11#Perchance the reader might recognize these two men, if he were to see them loser at hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.12#What was the object of the second man?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.13#Probably to succeed in clothing the first more warmly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.14#When a man clothed by the state pursues a man in rags, it is in order to ake of him a man who is also clothed by the state. Only, the whole question ies in the color. To be dressed in blue is glorious; to be dressed in red is isagreeable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.15#There is a purple from below.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.16#It is probably some unpleasantness and some purple of this sort which the irst man is desirous of shirking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.17#If the other allowed him to walk on, and had not seized him as yet, it as, judging from all appearances, in the hope of seeing him lead up to some ignificant meeting-place and to some group worth catching. This delicate peration is called “spinning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.18#What renders this conjecture entirely probable is that the buttoned-up an, on catching sight from the shore of a hackney-coach on the quay as it was assing along empty, made a sign to the driver; the driver understood, evidently ecognized the person with whom he had to deal, turned about and began to follow he two men at the top of the quay, at a foot-pace. This was not observed by the louching and tattered personage who was in advance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.19#The hackney-coach rolled along the trees of the Champs-Élysées. The bust f the driver, whip in hand, could be seen moving along above the parapet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.20#One of the secret instructions of the police authorities to their agents ontains this article: “Always have on hand a hackney-coach, in case of mergency.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.21#While these two men were manœuvring, each on his own side, with rreproachable strategy, they approached an inclined plane on the quay which escended to the shore, and which permitted cab-drivers arriving from Passy to ome to the river and water their horses. This inclined plane was suppressed ater on, for the sake of symmetry; horses may die of thirst, but the eye is ratified.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.22#It is probable that the man in the blouse had intended to ascend this nclined plane, with a view to making his escape into the Champs-Élysées, a lace ornamented with trees, but, in return, much infested with policemen, and here the other could easily exercise violence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.23#This point on the quay is not very far distant from the house brought to aris from Moret in 1824, by Colonel Brack, and designated as “the house of rançois I.” A guard house is situated close at hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.24#To the great surprise of his watcher, the man who was being tracked did ot mount by the inclined plane for watering. He continued to advance along the uay on the shore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.25#His position was visibly becoming critical.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.26#What was he intending to do, if not to throw himself into the Seine?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.27#Henceforth, there existed no means of ascending to the quay; there was no ther inclined plane, no staircase; and they were near the spot, marked by the end in the Seine towards the Pont de Jéna, where the bank, growing constantly arrower, ended in a slender tongue, and was lost in the water. There he would nevitably find himself blocked between the perpendicular wall on his right, the iver on his left and in front of him, and the authorities on his heels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.28#It is true that this termination of the shore was hidden from sight by a eap of rubbish six or seven feet in height, produced by some demolition or ther. But did this man hope to conceal himself effectually behind that heap of ubbish, which one need but skirt? The expedient would have been puerile. He ertainly was not dreaming of such a thing. The innocence of thieves does not xtend to that point.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.29#The pile of rubbish formed a sort of projection at the water’s edge, which as prolonged in a promontory as far as the wall of the quay.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.30#The man who was being followed arrived at this little mound and went round t, so that he ceased to be seen by the other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.31#The latter, as he did not see, could not be seen; he took advantage of his fact to abandon all dissimulation and to walk very rapidly. In a few oments, he had reached the rubbish heap and passed round it. There he halted in heer amazement. The man whom he had been pursuing was no longer there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.32#Total eclipse of the man in the blouse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.33#The shore, beginning with the rubbish heap, was only about thirty paces ong, then it plunged into the water which beat against the wall of the quay. he fugitive could not have thrown himself into the Seine without being seen by he man who was following him. What had become of him?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.34#The man in the buttoned-up coat walked to the extremity of the shore, and emained there in thought for a moment, his fists clenched, his eyes searching. ll at once he smote his brow. He had just perceived, at the point where the and came to an end and the water began, a large iron grating, low, arched, arnished with a heavy lock and with three massive hinges. This grating, a sort f door pierced at the base of the quay, opened on the river as well as on the hore. A blackish stream passed under it. This stream discharged into the eine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.35#Beyond the heavy, rusty iron bars, a sort of dark and vaulted corridor ould be descried. The man folded his arms and stared at the grating with an air f reproach.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.36#As this gaze did not suffice, he tried to thrust it aside; he shook it, it esisted solidly. It is probable that it had just been opened, although no sound ad been heard, a singular circumstance in so rusty a grating; but it is certain hat it had been closed again. This indicated that the man before whom that door ad just opened had not a hook but a key.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.37#This evidence suddenly burst upon the mind of the man who was trying to ove the grating, and evoked from him this indignant ejaculation:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.38#“That is too much! A government key!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.39#Then, immediately regaining his composure, he expressed a whole world of nterior ideas by this outburst of monosyllables accented almost ironically: Come! Come! Come! Come!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.40#That said, and in the hope of something or other, either that he should ee the man emerge or other men enter, he posted himself on the watch behind a eap of rubbish, with the patient rage of a pointer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.3.41#The hackney-coach, which regulated all its movements on his, had, in its urn, halted on the quay above him, close to the parapet. The coachman, oreseeing a prolonged wait, encased his horses’ muzzles in the bag of oats hich is damp at the bottom, and which is so familiar to Parisians, to whom, be t said in parenthesis, the Government sometimes applies it. The rare passers-by n the Pont de Jéna turned their heads, before they pursued their way, to take a omentary glance at these two motionless items in the landscape, the man on the hore, the carriage on the quay.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.head#CHAPTER IV—HE ALSO BEARS HIS CROSS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.1#Jean Valjean had resumed his march and had not again paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.2#This march became more and more laborious. The level of these vaults aries; the average height is about five feet, six inches, and has been alculated for the stature of a man; Jean Valjean was forced to bend over, in rder not to strike Marius against the vault; at every step he had to bend, then o rise, and to feel incessantly of the wall. The moisture of the stones, and he viscous nature of the timber framework furnished but poor supports to which o cling, either for hand or foot. He stumbled along in the hideous dung-heap of he city. The intermittent gleams from the air-holes only appeared at very long ntervals, and were so wan that the full sunlight seemed like the light of the oon; all the rest was mist, miasma, opaqueness, blackness. Jean Valjean was oth hungry and thirsty; especially thirsty; and this, like the sea, was a place ull of water where a man cannot drink. His strength, which was prodigious, as he reader knows, and which had been but little decreased by age, thanks to his haste and sober life, began to give way, nevertheless. Fatigue began to gain on im; and as his strength decreased, it made the weight of his burden increase. arius, who was, perhaps, dead, weighed him down as inert bodies weigh. Jean aljean held him in such a manner that his chest was not oppressed, and so that espiration could proceed as well as possible. Between his legs he felt the apid gliding of the rats. One of them was frightened to such a degree that he it him. From time to time, a breath of fresh air reached him through the ent-holes of the mouths of the sewer, and reanimated him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.3#It might have been three hours past midday when he reached the elt-sewer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.4#He was, at first, astonished at this sudden widening. He found himself, all t once, in a gallery where his outstretched hands could not reach the two alls, and beneath a vault which his head did not touch. The Grand Sewer is, in act, eight feet wide and seven feet high.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.5#At the point where the Montmartre sewer joins the Grand Sewer, two other ubterranean galleries, that of the Rue de Provence, and that of the Abattoir, orm a square. Between these four ways, a less sagacious man would have remained ndecided. Jean Valjean selected the broadest, that is to say, the belt-sewer. ut here the question again came up—should he descend or ascend? He thought that he situation required haste, and that he must now gain the Seine at any risk. n other terms, he must descend. He turned to the left.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.6#It was well that he did so, for it is an error to suppose that the elt-sewer has two outlets, the one in the direction of Bercy, the other towards assy, and that it is, as its name indicates, the subterranean girdle of the aris on the right bank. The Grand Sewer, which is, it must be remembered, othing else than the old brook of Ménilmontant, terminates, if one ascends it, n a blind sack, that is to say, at its ancient point of departure which was its ource, at the foot of the knoll of Ménilmontant. There is no direct ommunication with the branch which collects the waters of Paris beginning with he Quartier Popincourt, and which falls into the Seine through the Amelot sewer bove the ancient Isle Louviers. This branch, which completes the collecting ewer, is separated from it, under the Rue Ménilmontant itself, by a pile which arks the dividing point of the waters, between upstream and downstream. If Jean aljean had ascended the gallery he would have arrived, after a thousand fforts, and broken down with fatigue, and in an expiring condition, in the loom, at a wall. He would have been lost.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.7#In case of necessity, by retracing his steps a little way, and entering the assage of the Filles-du-Calvaire, on condition that he did not hesitate at the ubterranean crossing of the Carrefour Boucherat, and by taking the corridor aint-Louis, then the Saint-Gilles gut on the left, then turning to the right nd avoiding the Saint-Sebastian gallery, he might have reached the Amelot ewer, and thence, provided that he did not go astray in the sort of F which ies under the Bastille, he might have attained the outlet on the Seine near the rsenal. But in order to do this, he must have been thoroughly familiar with the normous madrepore of the sewer in all its ramifications and in all its penings. Now, we must again insist that he knew nothing of that frightful drain hich he was traversing; and had any one asked him in what he was, he would have nswered: “In the night.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.8#His instinct served him well. To descend was, in fact, possible safety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.9#He left on his right the two narrow passages which branch out in the form f a claw under the Rue Laffitte and the Rue Saint-Georges and the long, ifurcated corridor of the Chaussée d’Antin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.10#A little beyond an affluent, which was, probably, the Madeleine branch, he alted. He was extremely weary. A passably large air-hole, probably the man-hole n the Rue d’Anjou, furnished a light that was almost vivid. Jean Valjean, with he gentleness of movement which a brother would exercise towards his wounded rother, deposited Marius on the banquette of the sewer. Marius’ blood-stained ace appeared under the wan light of the air-hole like the ashes at the bottom f a tomb. His eyes were closed, his hair was plastered down on his temples like painter’s brushes dried in red wash; his hands hung limp and dead. A clot of lood had collected in the knot of his cravat; his limbs were cold, and blood as clotted at the corners of his mouth; his shirt had thrust itself into his ounds, the cloth of his coat was chafing the yawning gashes in the living lesh. Jean Valjean, pushing aside the garments with the tips of his fingers, aid his hand upon Marius’ breast; his heart was still beating. Jean Valjean ore up his shirt, bandaged the young man’s wounds as well as he was able and topped the flowing blood; then bending over Marius, who still lay unconscious nd almost without breathing, in that half light, he gazed at him with nexpressible hatred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.11#On disarranging Marius’ garments, he had found two things in his pockets, he roll which had been forgotten there on the preceding evening, and Marius’ ocketbook. He ate the roll and opened the pocketbook. On the first page he ound the four lines written by Marius. The reader will recall them:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.12#“My name is Marius Pontmercy. Carry my body to my grandfather, M. illenormand, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the Marais.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.13#Jean Valjean read these four lines by the light of the air-hole, and emained for a moment as though absorbed in thought, repeating in a low tone: Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, number 6, Monsieur Gillenormand.” He replaced the ocketbook in Marius’ pocket. He had eaten, his strength had returned to him; he ook Marius up once more upon his back, placed the latter’s head carefully on is right shoulder, and resumed his descent of the sewer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.14#The Grand Sewer, directed according to the course of the valley of énilmontant, is about two leagues long. It is paved throughout a notable ortion of its extent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.15#This torch of the names of the streets of Paris, with which we are lluminating for the reader Jean Valjean’s subterranean march, Jean Valjean imself did not possess. Nothing told him what zone of the city he was raversing, nor what way he had made. Only the growing pallor of the pools of ight which he encountered from time to time indicated to him that the sun was ithdrawing from the pavement, and that the day would soon be over; and the olling of vehicles overhead, having become intermittent instead of continuous, hen having almost ceased, he concluded that he was no longer under central aris, and that he was approaching some solitary region, in the vicinity of the uter boulevards, or the extreme outer quays. Where there are fewer houses and treets, the sewer has fewer air-holes. The gloom deepened around Jean Valjean. evertheless, he continued to advance, groping his way in the dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.4.16#Suddenly this darkness became terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.head#CHAPTER V—IN THE CASE OF SAND AS IN THAT OF WOMAN, THERE IS A INENESS WHICH IS TREACHEROUS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.1#He felt that he was entering the water, and that he no longer had a avement under his feet, but only mud.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.2#It sometimes happens, that on certain shores of Bretagne or Scotland a man, ither a traveller or a fisherman, while walking at low tide on the beach far rom shore, suddenly notices that for several minutes past, he has been walking ith some difficulty. The beach under foot is like pitch; his soles stick fast o it; it is no longer sand, it is bird-lime. The strand is perfectly dry, but t every step that he takes, as soon as the foot is raised, the print is filled ith water. The eye, however, has perceived no change; the immense beach is mooth and tranquil, all the sand has the same aspect, nothing distinguishes the oil that is solid from that which is not solid; the joyous little cloud of and-lice continues to leap tumultuously under the feet of the passer-by.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.3#The man pursues his way, he walks on, turns towards the land, endeavors to pproach the shore. He is not uneasy. Uneasy about what? Only he is conscious hat the heaviness of his feet seems to be increasing at every step that he akes. All at once he sinks in. He sinks in two or three inches. Decidedly, he s not on the right road; he halts to get his bearings. Suddenly he glances at is feet; his feet have disappeared. The sand has covered them. He draws his eet out of the sand, he tries to retrace his steps, he turns back, he sinks in ore deeply than before. The sand is up to his ankles, he tears himself free rom it and flings himself to the left, the sand reaches to mid-leg, he flings imself to the right, the sand comes up to his knees. Then, with indescribable error, he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a quicksand, and that he has eneath him that frightful medium in which neither man can walk nor fish can wim. He flings away his burden, if he have one, he lightens himself, like a hip in distress; it is too late, the sand is above his knees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.4#He shouts, he waves his hat, or his handkerchief, the sand continually ains on him; if the beach is deserted, if the land is too far away, if the bank f sand is too ill-famed, there is no hero in the neighborhood, all is over, he s condemned to be engulfed. He is condemned to that terrible interment, long, nfallible, implacable, which it is impossible to either retard or hasten, which asts for hours, which will not come to an end, which seizes you erect, free, in he flush of health, which drags you down by the feet, which, at every effort hat you attempt, at every shout that you utter, draws you a little lower, which as the air of punishing you for your resistance by a redoubled grasp, which orces a man to return slowly to earth, while leaving him time to survey the orizon, the trees, the verdant country, the smoke of the villages on the plain, he sails of the ships on the sea, the birds which fly and sing, the sun and the ky. This engulfment is the sepulchre which assumes a tide, and which mounts rom the depths of the earth towards a living man. Each minute is an inexorable ayer-out of the dead. The wretched man tries to sit down, to lie down, to limb; every movement that he makes buries him deeper; he straightens himself p, he sinks; he feels that he is being swallowed up; he shrieks, implores, ries to the clouds, wrings his hands, grows desperate. Behold him in the sand p to his belly, the sand reaches to his breast, he is only a bust now. He plifts his hands, utters furious groans, clenches his nails on the beach, tries o cling fast to that ashes, supports himself on his elbows in order to raise imself from that soft sheath, and sobs frantically; the sand mounts higher. The and has reached his shoulders, the sand reaches to his throat; only his face is isible now. His mouth cries aloud, the sand fills it; silence. His eyes still aze forth, the sand closes them, night. Then his brow decreases, a little hair uivers above the sand; a hand projects, pierces the surface of the beach, waves nd disappears. Sinister obliteration of a man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.5#Sometimes a rider is engulfed with his horse; sometimes the carter is wallowed up with his cart; all founders in that strand. It is shipwreck lsewhere than in the water. It is the earth drowning a man. The earth, ermeated with the ocean, becomes a pitfall. It presents itself in the guise of plain, and it yawns like a wave. The abyss is subject to these reacheries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.6#This melancholy fate, always possible on certain sea beaches, was also ossible, thirty years ago, in the sewers of Paris.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.7#Before the important works, undertaken in 1833, the subterranean drain of aris was subject to these sudden slides.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.8#The water filtered into certain subjacent strata, which were particularly riable; the foot-way, which was of flag-stones, as in the ancient sewers, or of ement on concrete, as in the new galleries, having no longer an underpinning, ave way. A fold in a flooring of this sort means a crack, means crumbling. The ramework crumbled away for a certain length. This crevice, the hiatus of a gulf f mire, was called a _fontis_, in the special tongue. What is a _fontis?_ It is he quicksands of the seashore suddenly encountered under the surface of the arth; it is the beach of Mont Saint-Michel in a sewer. The soaked soil is in a tate of fusion, as it were; all its molecules are in suspension in soft medium; t is not earth and it is not water. The depth is sometimes very great. Nothing an be more formidable than such an encounter. If the water predominates, death s prompt, the man is swallowed up; if earth predominates, death is slow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.9#Can any one picture to himself such a death? If being swallowed by the arth is terrible on the seashore, what is it in a cesspool? Instead of the open ir, the broad daylight, the clear horizon, those vast sounds, those free clouds hence rains life, instead of those barks descried in the distance, of that hope nder all sorts of forms, of probable passers-by, of succor possible up to the ery last moment,—instead of all this, deafness, blindness, a black vault, the nside of a tomb already prepared, death in the mire beneath a cover! slow uffocation by filth, a stone box where asphyxia opens its claw in the mire and lutches you by the throat; fetidness mingled with the death-rattle; slime nstead of the strand, sulfuretted hydrogen in place of the hurricane, dung in lace of the ocean! And to shout, to gnash one’s teeth, and to writhe, and to truggle, and to agonize, with that enormous city which knows nothing of it all, ver one’s head!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.10#Inexpressible is the horror of dying thus! Death sometimes redeems his trocity by a certain terrible dignity. On the funeral pile, in shipwreck, one an be great; in the flames as in the foam, a superb attitude is possible; one here becomes transfigured as one perishes. But not here. Death is filthy. It is umiliating to expire. The supreme floating visions are abject. Mud is ynonymous with shame. It is petty, ugly, infamous. To die in a butt of alvoisie, like Clarence, is permissible; in the ditch of a scavenger, like scoubleau, is horrible. To struggle therein is hideous; at the same time that ne is going through the death agony, one is floundering about. There are hadows enough for hell, and mire enough to render it nothing but a slough, and he dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming a spectre or a rog.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.11#Everywhere else the sepulchre is sinister; here it is deformed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.12#The depth of the _fontis_ varied, as well as their length and their ensity, according to the more or less bad quality of the sub-soil. Sometimes a fontis_ was three or four feet deep, sometimes eight or ten; sometimes the ottom was unfathomable. Here the mire was almost solid, there almost liquid. In he Lunière fontis, it would have taken a man a day to disappear, while he would ave been devoured in five minutes by the Philippeaux slough. The mire bears up ore or less, according to its density. A child can escape where a man will erish. The first law of safety is to get rid of every sort of load. Every ewerman who felt the ground giving way beneath him began by flinging away his ack of tools, or his back-basket, or his hod.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.13#The fontis were due to different causes: the friability of the soil; some andslip at a depth beyond the reach of man; the violent summer rains; the ncessant flooding of winter; long, drizzling showers. Sometimes the weight of he surrounding houses on a marly or sandy soil forced out the vaults of the ubterranean galleries and caused them to bend aside, or it chanced that a looring vault burst and split under this crushing thrust. In this manner, the eaping up of the Parthénon, obliterated, a century ago, a portion of the vaults f Saint-Geneviève hill. When a sewer was broken in under the pressure of the ouses, the mischief was sometimes betrayed in the street above by a sort of pace, like the teeth of a saw, between the paving-stones; this crevice was eveloped in an undulating line throughout the entire length of the cracked ault, and then, the evil being visible, the remedy could be promptly applied. t also frequently happened, that the interior ravages were not revealed by any xternal scar, and in that case, woe to the sewermen. When they entered without recaution into the sewer, they were liable to be lost. Ancient registers make ention of several scavengers who were buried in fontis in this manner. They ive many names; among others, that of the sewerman who was swallowed up in a uagmire under the man-hole of the Rue Carême-Prenant, a certain Blaise outrain; this Blaise Poutrain was the brother of Nicholas Poutrain, who was the ast grave-digger of the cemetery called the Charnier des Innocents, in 1785, he epoch when that cemetery expired.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.5.14#There was also that young and charming Vicomte d’Escoubleau, of whom we ave just spoken, one of the heroes of the siege of Lérida, where they delivered he assault in silk stockings, with violins at their head. D’Escoubleau, urprised one night at his cousin’s, the Duchesse de Sourdis’, was drowned in a uagmire of the Beautreillis sewer, in which he had taken refuge in order to scape from the Duke. Madame de Sourdis, when informed of his death, demanded er smelling-bottle, and forgot to weep, through sniffling at her salts. In such ases, there is no love which holds fast; the sewer extinguishes it. Hero efuses to wash the body of Leander. Thisbe stops her nose in the presence of yramus and says: “Phew!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE FONTIS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.1#Jean Valjean found himself in the presence of a fontis.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.2#This sort of quagmire was common at that period in the subsoil of the hamps-Élysées, difficult to handle in the hydraulic works and a bad reservative of the subterranean constructions, on account of its excessive luidity. This fluidity exceeds even the inconsistency of the sands of the uartier Saint-Georges, which could only be conquered by a stone construction on concrete foundation, and the clayey strata, infected with gas, of the Quartier es Martyrs, which are so liquid that the only way in which a passage was ffected under the gallery des Martyrs was by means of a cast-iron pipe. When, n 1836, the old stone sewer beneath the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, in which we now ee Jean Valjean, was demolished for the purpose of reconstructing it, the uicksand, which forms the subsoil of the Champs-Élysées as far as the Seine, resented such an obstacle, that the operation lasted nearly six months, to the reat clamor of the dwellers on the riverside, particularly those who had hotels nd carriages. The work was more than unhealthy; it was dangerous. It is true hat they had four months and a half of rain, and three floods of the Seine.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.3#The fontis which Jean Valjean had encountered was caused by the downpour of he preceding day. The pavement, badly sustained by the subjacent sand, had iven way and had produced a stoppage of the water. Infiltration had taken lace, a slip had followed. The dislocated bottom had sunk into the ooze. To hat extent? Impossible to say. The obscurity was more dense there than lsewhere. It was a pit of mire in a cavern of night.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.4#Jean Valjean felt the pavement vanishing beneath his feet. He entered this lime. There was water on the surface, slime at the bottom. He must pass it. To etrace his steps was impossible. Marius was dying, and Jean Valjean exhausted. esides, where was he to go? Jean Valjean advanced. Moreover, the pit seemed, or the first few steps, not to be very deep. But in proportion as he advanced, is feet plunged deeper. Soon he had the slime up to his calves and water above is knees. He walked on, raising Marius in his arms, as far above the water as e could. The mire now reached to his knees, and the water to his waist. He ould no longer retreat. This mud, dense enough for one man, could not, bviously, uphold two. Marius and Jean Valjean would have stood a chance of xtricating themselves singly. Jean Valjean continued to advance, supporting the ying man, who was, perhaps, a corpse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.5#The water came up to his arm-pits; he felt that he was sinking; it was only ith difficulty that he could move in the depth of ooze which he had now eached. The density, which was his support, was also an obstacle. He still held arius on high, and with an unheard-of expenditure of force, he advanced still; ut he was sinking. He had only his head above the water now and his two arms olding up Marius. In the old paintings of the deluge there is a mother holding er child thus.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.6#He sank still deeper, he turned his face to the rear, to escape the water, nd in order that he might be able to breathe; anyone who had seen him in that loom would have thought that what he beheld was a mask floating on the shadows; e caught a faint glimpse above him of the drooping head and livid face of arius; he made a desperate effort and launched his foot forward; his foot truck something solid; a point of support. It was high time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.7#He straightened himself up, and rooted himself upon that point of support ith a sort of fury. This produced upon him the effect of the first step in a taircase leading back to life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.8#The point of support, thus encountered in the mire at the supreme moment, as the beginning of the other watershed of the pavement, which had bent but had ot given way, and which had curved under the water like a plank and in a single iece. Well built pavements form a vault and possess this sort of firmness. This ragment of the vaulting, partly submerged, but solid, was a veritable inclined lane, and, once on this plane, he was safe. Jean Valjean mounted this inclined lane and reached the other side of the quagmire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.9#As he emerged from the water, he came in contact with a stone and fell upon is knees. He reflected that this was but just, and he remained there for some ime, with his soul absorbed in words addressed to God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.6.10#He rose to his feet, shivering, chilled, foul-smelling, bowed beneath the ying man whom he was dragging after him, all dripping with slime, and his soul illed with a strange light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.head#CHAPTER VII—ONE SOMETIMES RUNS AGROUND WHEN ONE FANCIES THAT ONE IS ISEMBARKING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.1#He set out on his way once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.2#However, although he had not left his life in the fontis, he seemed to have eft his strength behind him there. That supreme effort had exhausted him. His assitude was now such that he was obliged to pause for breath every three or our steps, and lean against the wall. Once he was forced to seat himself on the anquette in order to alter Marius’ position, and he thought that he should have o remain there. But if his vigor was dead, his energy was not. He rose gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.3#He walked on desperately, almost fast, proceeded thus for a hundred paces, lmost without drawing breath, and suddenly came in contact with the wall. He ad reached an elbow of the sewer, and, arriving at the turn with head bent own, he had struck the wall. He raised his eyes, and at the extremity of the ault, far, very far away in front of him, he perceived a light. This time it as not that terrible light; it was good, white light. It was daylight. Jean aljean saw the outlet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.4#A damned soul, who, in the midst of the furnace, should suddenly perceive he outlet of Gehenna, would experience what Jean Valjean felt. It would fly ildly with the stumps of its burned wings towards that radiant portal. Jean aljean was no longer conscious of fatigue, he no longer felt Marius’ weight, he ound his legs once more of steel, he ran rather than walked. As he approached, he outlet became more and more distinctly defined. It was a pointed arch, lower han the vault, which gradually narrowed, and narrower than the gallery, which losed in as the vault grew lower. The tunnel ended like the interior of a unnel; a faulty construction, imitated from the wickets of penitentiaries, ogical in a prison, illogical in a sewer, and which has since been orrected.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.5#Jean Valjean reached the outlet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.6#There he halted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.7#It certainly was the outlet, but he could not get out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.8#The arch was closed by a heavy grating, and the grating, which, to all ppearance, rarely swung on its rusty hinges, was clamped to its stone jamb by a hick lock, which, red with rust, seemed like an enormous brick. The keyhole ould be seen, and the robust latch, deeply sunk in the iron staple. The door as plainly double-locked. It was one of those prison locks which old Paris was o fond of lavishing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.9#Beyond the grating was the open air, the river, the daylight, the shore, ery narrow but sufficient for escape. The distant quays, Paris, that gulf in hich one so easily hides oneself, the broad horizon, liberty. On the right, ownstream, the bridge of Jéna was discernible, on the left, upstream, the ridge of the Invalides; the place would have been a propitious one in which to wait the night and to escape. It was one of the most solitary points in Paris; he shore which faces the Grand-Caillou. Flies were entering and emerging hrough the bars of the grating.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.10#It might have been half-past eight o’clock in the evening. The day was eclining.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.11#Jean Valjean laid Marius down along the wall, on the dry portion of the aulting, then he went to the grating and clenched both fists round the bars; he shock which he gave it was frenzied, but it did not move. The grating did ot stir. Jean Valjean seized the bars one after the other, in the hope that he ight be able to tear away the least solid, and to make of it a lever wherewith o raise the door or to break the lock. Not a bar stirred. The teeth of a tiger re not more firmly fixed in their sockets. No lever; no prying possible. The bstacle was invincible. There was no means of opening the gate.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.12#Must he then stop there? What was he to do? What was to become of him? He ad not the strength to retrace his steps, to recommence the journey which he ad already taken. Besides, how was he to again traverse that quagmire whence he ad only extricated himself as by a miracle? And after the quagmire, was there ot the police patrol, which assuredly could not be twice avoided? And then, hither was he to go? What direction should he pursue? To follow the incline ould not conduct him to his goal. If he were to reach another outlet, he would ind it obstructed by a plug or a grating. Every outlet was, undoubtedly, closed n that manner. Chance had unsealed the grating through which he had entered, ut it was evident that all the other sewer mouths were barred. He had only ucceeded in escaping into a prison.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.13#All was over. Everything that Jean Valjean had done was useless. xhaustion had ended in failure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.14#They were both caught in the immense and gloomy web of death, and Jean aljean felt the terrible spider running along those black strands and quivering n the shadows. He turned his back to the grating, and fell upon the pavement, urled to earth rather than seated, close to Marius, who still made no movement, nd with his head bent between his knees. This was the last drop of anguish.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.7.15#Of what was he thinking during this profound depression? Neither of imself nor of Marius. He was thinking of Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—THE TORN COAT-TAIL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.1#In the midst of this prostration, a hand was laid on his shoulder, and a ow voice said to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.2#“Half shares.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.3#Some person in that gloom? Nothing so closely resembles a dream as despair. ean Valjean thought that he was dreaming. He had heard no footsteps. Was it ossible? He raised his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.4#A man stood before him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.5#This man was clad in a blouse; his feet were bare; he held his shoes in his eft hand; he had evidently removed them in order to reach Jean Valjean, without llowing his steps to be heard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.6#Jean Valjean did not hesitate for an instant. Unexpected as was this ncounter, this man was known to him. The man was Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.7#Although awakened, so to speak, with a start, Jean Valjean, accustomed to larms, and steeled to unforeseen shocks that must be promptly parried, nstantly regained possession of his presence of mind. Moreover, the situation ould not be made worse, a certain degree of distress is no longer capable of a rescendo, and Thénardier himself could add nothing to this blackness of this ight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.8#A momentary pause ensued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.9#Thénardier, raising his right hand to a level with his forehead, formed ith it a shade, then he brought his eyelashes together, by screwing up his yes, a motion which, in connection with a slight contraction of the mouth, haracterizes the sagacious attention of a man who is endeavoring to recognize nother man. He did not succeed. Jean Valjean, as we have just stated, had his ack turned to the light, and he was, moreover, so disfigured, so bemired, so leeding that he would have been unrecognizable in full noonday. On the ontrary, illuminated by the light from the grating, a cellar light, it is true, ivid, yet precise in its lividness, Thénardier, as the energetic popular etaphor expresses it, immediately “leaped into” Jean Valjean’s eyes. This nequality of conditions sufficed to assure some advantage to Jean Valjean in hat mysterious duel which was on the point of beginning between the two ituations and the two men. The encounter took place between Jean Valjean veiled nd Thénardier unmasked.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.10#Jean Valjean immediately perceived that Thénardier did not recognize im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.11#They surveyed each other for a moment in that half-gloom, as though taking ach other’s measure. Thénardier was the first to break the silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.12#“How are you going to manage to get out?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.13#Jean Valjean made no reply. Thénardier continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.14#“It’s impossible to pick the lock of that gate. But still you must get out f this.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.15#“That is true,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.16#“Well, half shares then.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.17#“What do you mean by that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.18#“You have killed that man; that’s all right. I have the key.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.19#Thénardier pointed to Marius. He went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.20#“I don’t know you, but I want to help you. You must be a friend.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.21#Jean Valjean began to comprehend. Thénardier took him for an assassin.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.22#Thénardier resumed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.23#“Listen, comrade. You didn’t kill that man without looking to see what he ad in his pockets. Give me my half. I’ll open the door for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.24#And half drawing from beneath his tattered blouse a huge key, he dded:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.25#“Do you want to see how a key to liberty is made? Look here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.26#Jean Valjean “remained stupid”—the expression belongs to the elder orneille—to such a degree that he doubted whether what he beheld was real. It as Providence appearing in horrible guise, and his good angel springing from he earth in the form of Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.27#Thénardier thrust his fist into a large pocket concealed under his blouse, rew out a rope and offered it to Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.28#“Hold on,” said he, “I’ll give you the rope to boot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.29#“What is the rope for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.30#“You will need a stone also, but you can find one outside. There’s a heap f rubbish.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.31#“What am I to do with a stone?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.32#“Idiot, you’ll want to sling that stiff into the river, you’ll need a tone and a rope, otherwise it would float on the water.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.33#Jean Valjean took the rope. There is no one who does not occasionally ccept in this mechanical way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.34#Thénardier snapped his fingers as though an idea had suddenly occurred to im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.35#“Ah, see here, comrade, how did you contrive to get out of that slough onder? I haven’t dared to risk myself in it. Phew! you don’t smell good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.36#After a pause he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.37#“I’m asking you questions, but you’re perfectly right not to answer. It’s n apprenticeship against that cursed quarter of an hour before the examining agistrate. And then, when you don’t talk at all, you run no risk of talking too oud. That’s no matter, as I can’t see your face and as I don’t know your name, ou are wrong in supposing that I don’t know who you are and what you want. I wig. You’ve broken up that gentleman a bit; now you want to tuck him away omewhere. The river, that great hider of folly, is what you want. I’ll get you ut of your scrape. Helping a good fellow in a pinch is what suits me to a air.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.38#While expressing his approval of Jean Valjean’s silence, he endeavored to orce him to talk. He jostled his shoulder in an attempt to catch a sight of his rofile, and he exclaimed, without, however, raising his tone:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.39#“Apropos of that quagmire, you’re a hearty animal. Why didn’t you toss the an in there?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.40#Jean Valjean preserved silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.41#Thénardier resumed, pushing the rag which served him as a cravat to the evel of his Adam’s apple, a gesture which completes the capable air of a erious man:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.42#“After all, you acted wisely. The workmen, when they come to-morrow to top up that hole, would certainly have found the stiff abandoned there, and it ight have been possible, thread by thread, straw by straw, to pick up the scent nd reach you. Some one has passed through the sewer. Who? Where did he get out? as he seen to come out? The police are full of cleverness. The sewer is reacherous and tells tales of you. Such a find is a rarity, it attracts ttention, very few people make use of the sewers for their affairs, while the iver belongs to everybody. The river is the true grave. At the end of a month hey fish up your man in the nets at Saint-Cloud. Well, what does one care for hat? It’s carrion! Who killed that man? Paris. And justice makes no inquiries. ou have done well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.43#The more loquacious Thénardier became, the more mute was Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.44#Again Thénardier shook him by the shoulder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.45#“Now let’s settle this business. Let’s go shares. You have seen my key, how me your money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.46#Thénardier was haggard, fierce, suspicious, rather menacing, yet micable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.47#There was one singular circumstance; Thénardier’s manners were not simple; e had not the air of being wholly at his ease; while affecting an air of ystery, he spoke low; from time to time he laid his finger on his mouth, and uttered, “hush!” It was difficult to divine why. There was no one there except hemselves. Jean Valjean thought that other ruffians might possibly be concealed n some nook, not very far off, and that Thénardier did not care to share with hem.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.48#Thénardier resumed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.49#“Let’s settle up. How much did the stiff have in his bags?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.50#Jean Valjean searched his pockets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.51#It was his habit, as the reader will remember, to always have some money bout him. The mournful life of expedients to which he had been condemned mposed this as a law upon him. On this occasion, however, he had been caught nprepared. When donning his uniform of a National Guardsman on the preceding vening, he had forgotten, dolefully absorbed as he was, to take his ocket-book. He had only some small change in his fob. He turned out his pocket, ll soaked with ooze, and spread out on the banquette of the vault one louis ’or, two five-franc pieces, and five or six large sous.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.52#Thénardier thrust out his lower lip with a significant twist of the eck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.53#“You knocked him over cheap,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.54#He set to feeling the pockets of Jean Valjean and Marius, with the reatest familiarity. Jean Valjean, who was chiefly concerned in keeping his ack to the light, let him have his way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.55#While handling Marius’ coat, Thénardier, with the skill of a pickpocket, nd without being noticed by Jean Valjean, tore off a strip which he concealed nder his blouse, probably thinking that this morsel of stuff might serve, later n, to identify the assassinated man and the assassin. However, he found no more han the thirty francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.56#“That’s true,” said he, “both of you together have no more than that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.57#And, forgetting his motto: “half shares,” he took all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.58#He hesitated a little over the large sous. After due reflection, he took hem also, muttering:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.59#“Never mind! You cut folks’ throats too cheap altogether.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.60#That done, he once more drew the big key from under his blouse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.61#“Now, my friend, you must leave. It’s like the fair here, you pay when you o out. You have paid, now clear out.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.62#And he began to laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.63#Had he, in lending to this stranger the aid of his key, and in making some ther man than himself emerge from that portal, the pure and disinterested ntention of rescuing an assassin? We may be permitted to doubt this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.64#Thénardier helped Jean Valjean to replace Marius on his shoulders, then he etook himself to the grating on tiptoe, and barefooted, making Jean Valjean a ign to follow him, looked out, laid his finger on his mouth, and remained for everal seconds, as though in suspense; his inspection finished, he placed the ey in the lock. The bolt slipped back and the gate swung open. It neither rated nor squeaked. It moved very softly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.65#It was obvious that this gate and those hinges, carefully oiled, were in he habit of opening more frequently than was supposed. This softness was uspicious; it hinted at furtive goings and comings, silent entrances and exits f nocturnal men, and the wolf-like tread of crime.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.66#The sewer was evidently an accomplice of some mysterious band. This aciturn grating was a receiver of stolen goods.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.67#Thénardier opened the gate a little way, allowing just sufficient space or Jean Valjean to pass out, closed the grating again, gave the key a double urn in the lock and plunged back into the darkness, without making any more oise than a breath. He seemed to walk with the velvet paws of a tiger.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.68#A moment later, that hideous providence had retreated into the nvisibility.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.8.69#Jean Valjean found himself in the open air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.head#CHAPTER IX—MARIUS PRODUCES ON SOME ONE WHO IS A JUDGE OF THE MATTER, HE EFFECT OF BEING DEAD
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.1#He allowed Marius to slide down upon the shore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.2#They were in the open air!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.3#The miasmas, darkness, horror lay behind him. The pure, healthful, living, oyous air that was easy to breathe inundated him. Everywhere around him reigned ilence, but that charming silence when the sun has set in an unclouded azure ky. Twilight had descended; night was drawing on, the great deliverer, the riend of all those who need a mantle of darkness that they may escape from an nguish. The sky presented itself in all directions like an enormous calm. The iver flowed to his feet with the sound of a kiss. The aerial dialogue of the ests bidding each other good night in the elms of the Champs-Élysées was udible. A few stars, daintily piercing the pale blue of the zenith, and visible o reverie alone, formed imperceptible little splendors amid the immensity. vening was unfolding over the head of Jean Valjean all the sweetness of the nfinite.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.4#It was that exquisite and undecided hour which says neither yes nor no. ight was already sufficiently advanced to render it possible to lose oneself at little distance and yet there was sufficient daylight to permit of recognition t close quarters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.5#For several seconds, Jean Valjean was irresistibly overcome by that august nd caressing serenity; such moments of oblivion do come to men; suffering efrains from harassing the unhappy wretch; everything is eclipsed in the houghts; peace broods over the dreamer like night; and, beneath the twilight hich beams and in imitation of the sky which is illuminated, the soul becomes tudded with stars. Jean Valjean could not refrain from contemplating that vast, lear shadow which rested over him; thoughtfully he bathed in the sea of ecstasy nd prayer in the majestic silence of the eternal heavens. Then he bent down wiftly to Marius, as though the sentiment of duty had returned to him, and, ipping up water in the hollow of his hand, he gently sprinkled a few drops on he latter’s face. Marius’ eyelids did not open; but his half-open mouth still reathed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.6#Jean Valjean was on the point of dipping his hand in the river once more, hen, all at once, he experienced an indescribable embarrassment, such as a erson feels when there is some one behind him whom he does not see.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.7#We have already alluded to this impression, with which everyone is amiliar.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.8#He turned round.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.9#Some one was, in fact, behind him, as there had been a short while efore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.10#A man of lofty stature, enveloped in a long coat, with folded arms, and earing in his right fist a bludgeon of which the leaden head was visible, stood few paces in the rear of the spot where Jean Valjean was crouching over arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.11#With the aid of the darkness, it seemed a sort of apparition. An ordinary an would have been alarmed because of the twilight, a thoughtful man on account f the bludgeon. Jean Valjean recognized Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.12#The reader has divined, no doubt, that Thénardier’s pursuer was no other han Javert. Javert, after his unlooked-for escape from the barricade, had etaken himself to the prefecture of police, had rendered a verbal account to he Prefect in person in a brief audience, had then immediately gone on duty gain, which implied—the note, the reader will recollect, which had been aptured on his person—a certain surveillance of the shore on the right bank of he Seine near the Champs-Élysées, which had, for some time past, aroused the ttention of the police. There he had caught sight of Thénardier and had ollowed him. The reader knows the rest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.13#Thus it will be easily understood that that grating, so obligingly opened o Jean Valjean, was a bit of cleverness on Thénardier’s part. Thénardier ntuitively felt that Javert was still there; the man spied upon has a scent hich never deceives him; it was necessary to fling a bone to that sleuth-hound. n assassin, what a godsend! Such an opportunity must never be allowed to slip. hénardier, by putting Jean Valjean outside in his stead, provided a prey for he police, forced them to relinquish his scent, made them forget him in a igger adventure, repaid Javert for his waiting, which always flatters a spy, arned thirty francs, and counted with certainty, so far as he himself was oncerned, on escaping with the aid of this diversion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.14#Jean Valjean had fallen from one danger upon another.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.15#These two encounters, this falling one after the other, from Thénardier pon Javert, was a rude shock.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.16#Javert did not recognize Jean Valjean, who, as we have stated, no longer ooked like himself. He did not unfold his arms, he made sure of his bludgeon in is fist, by an imperceptible movement, and said in a curt, calm voice:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.17#“Who are you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.18#“I.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.19#“Who is ‘I’?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.20#“Jean Valjean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.21#Javert thrust his bludgeon between his teeth, bent his knees, inclined his ody, laid his two powerful hands on the shoulders of Jean Valjean, which were lamped within them as in a couple of vices, scrutinized him, and recognized im. Their faces almost touched. Javert’s look was terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.22#Jean Valjean remained inert beneath Javert’s grasp, like a lion submitting o the claws of a lynx.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.23#“Inspector Javert,” said he, “you have me in your power. Moreover, I have egarded myself as your prisoner ever since this morning. I did not give you my ddress with any intention of escaping from you. Take me. Only grant me one avor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.24#Javert did not appear to hear him. He kept his eyes riveted on Jean aljean. His chin being contracted, thrust his lips upwards towards his nose, a ign of savage reverie. At length he released Jean Valjean, straightened himself tiffly up without bending, grasped his bludgeon again firmly, and, as though in dream, he murmured rather than uttered this question:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.25#“What are you doing here? And who is this man?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.26#He still abstained from addressing Jean Valjean as _thou_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.27#Jean Valjean replied, and the sound of his voice appeared to rouse avert:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.28#“It is with regard to him that I desire to speak to you. Dispose of me as ou see fit; but first help me to carry him home. That is all that I ask of ou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.29#Javert’s face contracted as was always the case when any one seemed to hink him capable of making a concession. Nevertheless, he did not say “no.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.30#Again he bent over, drew from his pocket a handkerchief which he moistened n the water and with which he then wiped Marius’ blood-stained brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.31#“This man was at the barricade,” said he in a low voice and as though peaking to himself. “He is the one they called Marius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.32#A spy of the first quality, who had observed everything, listened to verything, and taken in everything, even when he thought that he was to die; ho had played the spy even in his agony, and who, with his elbows leaning on he first step of the sepulchre, had taken notes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.33#He seized Marius’ hand and felt his pulse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.34#“He is wounded,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.35#“He is a dead man,” said Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.36#Jean Valjean replied:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.37#“No. Not yet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.38#“So you have brought him thither from the barricade?” remarked Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.39#His preoccupation must indeed have been very profound for him not to nsist on this alarming rescue through the sewer, and for him not to even notice ean Valjean’s silence after his question.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.40#Jean Valjean, on his side, seemed to have but one thought. He resumed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.41#“He lives in the Marais, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, with his grandfather. do not recollect his name.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.42#Jean Valjean fumbled in Marius’ coat, pulled out his pocket-book, opened t at the page which Marius had pencilled, and held it out to Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.43#There was still sufficient light to admit of reading. Besides this, Javert ossessed in his eye the feline phosphorescence of night birds. He deciphered he few lines written by Marius, and muttered: “Gillenormand, Rue des Filles-du alvaire, No. 6.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.44#Then he exclaimed: “Coachman!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.45#The reader will remember that the hackney-coach was waiting in case of eed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.46#Javert kept Marius’ pocket-book.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.47#A moment later, the carriage, which had descended by the inclined plane of he watering-place, was on the shore. Marius was laid upon the back seat, and avert seated himself on the front seat beside Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.48#The door slammed, and the carriage drove rapidly away, ascending the quays n the direction of the Bastille.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.9.49#They quitted the quays and entered the streets. The coachman, a black form n his box, whipped up his thin horses. A glacial silence reigned in the arriage. Marius, motionless, with his body resting in the corner, and his head rooping on his breast, his arms hanging, his legs stiff, seemed to be awaiting nly a coffin; Jean Valjean seemed made of shadow, and Javert of stone, and in hat vehicle full of night, whose interior, every time that it passed in front f a street lantern, appeared to be turned lividly wan, as by an intermittent lash of lightning, chance had united and seemed to be bringing face to face the hree forms of tragic immobility, the corpse, the spectre, and the statue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.head#CHAPTER X—RETURN OF THE SON WHO WAS PRODIGAL OF HIS LIFE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.1#At every jolt over the pavement, a drop of blood trickled from Marius’ air.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.2#Night had fully closed in when the carriage arrived at No. 6, Rue des illes-du-Calvaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.3#Javert was the first to alight; he made sure with one glance of the number n the carriage gate, and, raising the heavy knocker of beaten iron, embellished n the old style, with a male goat and a satyr confronting each other, he gave a iolent peal. The gate opened a little way and Javert gave it a push. The porter alf made his appearance yawning, vaguely awake, and with a candle in his and.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.4#Everyone in the house was asleep. People go to bed betimes in the Marais, specially on days when there is a revolt. This good, old quarter, terrified at he Revolution, takes refuge in slumber, as children, when they hear the Bugaboo oming, hide their heads hastily under their coverlet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.5#In the meantime Jean Valjean and the coachman had taken Marius out of the arriage, Jean Valjean supporting him under the armpits, and the coachman under he knees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.6#As they thus bore Marius, Jean Valjean slipped his hand under the latter’s lothes, which were broadly rent, felt his breast, and assured himself that his eart was still beating. It was even beating a little less feebly, as though the ovement of the carriage had brought about a certain fresh access of life.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.7#Javert addressed the porter in a tone befitting the government, and the resence of the porter of a factious person.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.8#“Some person whose name is Gillenormand?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.9#“Here. What do you want with him?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.10#“His son is brought back.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.11#“His son?” said the porter stupidly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.12#“He is dead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.13#Jean Valjean, who, soiled and tattered, stood behind Javert, and whom the orter was surveying with some horror, made a sign to him with his head that his was not so.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.14#The porter did not appear to understand either Javert’s words or Jean aljean’s sign.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.15#Javert continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.16#“He went to the barricade, and here he is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.17#“To the barricade?” ejaculated the porter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.18#“He has got himself killed. Go waken his father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.19#The porter did not stir.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.20#“Go along with you!” repeated Javert.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.21#And he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.22#“There will be a funeral here to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.23#For Javert, the usual incidents of the public highway were categorically lassed, which is the beginning of foresight and surveillance, and each ontingency had its own compartment; all possible facts were arranged in rawers, as it were, whence they emerged on occasion, in variable quantities; in he street, uproar, revolt, carnival, and funeral.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.24#The porter contented himself with waking Basque. Basque woke Nicolette; icolette roused great-aunt Gillenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.25#As for the grandfather, they let him sleep on, thinking that he would hear bout the matter early enough in any case.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.26#Marius was carried up to the first floor, without any one in the other arts of the house being aware of the fact, and deposited on an old sofa in M. illenormand’s antechamber; and while Basque went in search of a physician, and hile Nicolette opened the linen-presses, Jean Valjean felt Javert touch him on he shoulder. He understood and descended the stairs, having behind him the step f Javert who was following him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.27#The porter watched them take their departure as he had watched their rrival, in terrified somnolence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.28#They entered the carriage once more, and the coachman mounted his box.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.29#“Inspector Javert,” said Jean, “grant me yet another favor.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.30#“What is it?” demanded Javert roughly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.31#“Let me go home for one instant. Then you shall do whatever you like with e.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.32#Javert remained silent for a few moments, with his chin drawn back into he collar of his great-coat, then he lowered the glass and front:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.10.33#“Driver,” said he, “Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.head#CHAPTER XI—CONCUSSION IN THE ABSOLUTE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.1#They did not open their lips again during the whole space of their ide.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.2#What did Jean Valjean want? To finish what he had begun; to warn Cosette, o tell her where Marius was, to give her, possibly, some other useful nformation, to take, if he could, certain final measures. As for himself, so ar as he was personally concerned, all was over; he had been seized by Javert nd had not resisted; any other man than himself in like situation would, erhaps, have had some vague thoughts connected with the rope which Thénardier ad given him, and of the bars of the first cell that he should enter; but, let s impress it upon the reader, after the Bishop, there had existed in Jean aljean a profound hesitation in the presence of any violence, even when irected against himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.3#Suicide, that mysterious act of violence against the unknown which may ontain, in a measure, the death of the soul, was impossible to Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.4#At the entrance to the Rue de l’Homme Armé, the carriage halted, the way eing too narrow to admit of the entrance of vehicles. Javert and Jean Valjean lighted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.5#The coachman humbly represented to “monsieur l’Inspecteur,” that the trecht velvet of his carriage was all spotted with the blood of the ssassinated man, and with mire from the assassin. That is the way he understood t. He added that an indemnity was due him. At the same time, drawing his ertificate book from his pocket, he begged the inspector to have the goodness o write him “a bit of an attestation.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.6#Javert thrust aside the book which the coachman held out to him, and aid:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.7#“How much do you want, including your time of waiting and the drive?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.8#“It comes to seven hours and a quarter,” replied the man, “and my velvet as perfectly new. Eighty francs, Mr. Inspector.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.9#Javert drew four napoleons from his pocket and dismissed the carriage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.10#Jean Valjean fancied that it was Javert’s intention to conduct him on foot o the post of the Blancs-Manteaux or to the post of the Archives, both of which re close at hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.11#They entered the street. It was deserted as usual. Javert followed Jean aljean. They reached No. 7. Jean Valjean knocked. The door opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.12#“It is well,” said Javert. “Go upstairs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.13#He added with a strange expression, and as though he were exerting an ffort in speaking in this manner:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.14#“I will wait for you here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.15#Jean Valjean looked at Javert. This mode of procedure was but little in ccord with Javert’s habits. However, he could not be greatly surprised that avert should now have a sort of haughty confidence in him, the confidence of he cat which grants the mouse liberty to the length of its claws, seeing that ean Valjean had made up his mind to surrender himself and to make an end of it. e pushed open the door, entered the house, called to the porter who was in bed nd who had pulled the cord from his couch: “It is I!” and ascended the tairs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.16#On arriving at the first floor, he paused. All sorrowful roads have their tations. The window on the landing-place, which was a sash-window, was open. As n many ancient houses, the staircase got its light from without and had a view n the street. The street-lantern, situated directly opposite, cast some light n the stairs, and thus effected some economy in illumination.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.17#Jean Valjean, either for the sake of getting the air, or mechanically, hrust his head out of this window. He leaned out over the street. It is short, nd the lantern lighted it from end to end. Jean Valjean was overwhelmed with mazement; there was no longer any one there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.11.18#Javert had taken his departure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.head#CHAPTER XII—THE GRANDFATHER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.1#Basque and the porter had carried Marius into the drawing-room, as he still ay stretched out, motionless, on the sofa upon which he had been placed on his rrival. The doctor who had been sent for had hastened thither. Aunt illenormand had risen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.2#Aunt Gillenormand went and came, in affright, wringing her hands and ncapable of doing anything but saying: “Heavens! is it possible?” At times she dded: “Everything will be covered with blood.” When her first horror had passed ff, a certain philosophy of the situation penetrated her mind, and took form in he exclamation: “It was bound to end in this way!” She did not go so far as: “I old you so!” which is customary on this sort of occasion. At the physician’s rders, a camp bed had been prepared beside the sofa. The doctor examined arius, and after having found that his pulse was still beating, that the ounded man had no very deep wound on his breast, and that the blood on the orners of his lips proceeded from his nostrils, he had him placed flat on the ed, without a pillow, with his head on the same level as his body, and even a rifle lower, and with his bust bare in order to facilitate respiration. ademoiselle Gillenormand, on perceiving that they were undressing Marius, ithdrew. She set herself to telling her beads in her own chamber.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.3#The trunk had not suffered any internal injury; a bullet, deadened by the ocket-book, had turned aside and made the tour of his ribs with a hideous aceration, which was of no great depth, and consequently, not dangerous. The ong, underground journey had completed the dislocation of the broken ollar-bone, and the disorder there was serious. The arms had been slashed with abre cuts. Not a single scar disfigured his face; but his head was fairly overed with cuts; what would be the result of these wounds on the head? Would hey stop short at the hairy cuticle, or would they attack the brain? As yet, his could not be decided. A grave symptom was that they had caused a swoon, and hat people do not always recover from such swoons. Moreover, the wounded man ad been exhausted by hemorrhage. From the waist down, the barricade had rotected the lower part of the body from injury.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.4#Basque and Nicolette tore up linen and prepared bandages; Nicolette sewed hem, Basque rolled them. As lint was lacking, the doctor, for the time being, rrested the bleeding with layers of wadding. Beside the bed, three candles urned on a table where the case of surgical instruments lay spread out. The octor bathed Marius’ face and hair with cold water. A full pail was reddened in n instant. The porter, candle in hand, lighted them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.5#The doctor seemed to be pondering sadly. From time to time, he made a egative sign with his head, as though replying to some question which he had nwardly addressed to himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.6#A bad sign for the sick man are these mysterious dialogues of the doctor ith himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.7#At the moment when the doctor was wiping Marius’ face, and lightly touching is still closed eyes with his finger, a door opened at the end of the rawing-room, and a long, pallid figure made its appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.8#This was the grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.9#The revolt had, for the past two days, deeply agitated, enraged and ngrossed the mind of M. Gillenormand. He had not been able to sleep on the revious night, and he had been in a fever all day long. In the evening, he had one to bed very early, recommending that everything in the house should be well arred, and he had fallen into a doze through sheer fatigue.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.10#Old men sleep lightly; M. Gillenormand’s chamber adjoined the rawing-room, and in spite of all the precautions that had been taken, the noise ad awakened him. Surprised at the rift of light which he saw under his door, he ad risen from his bed, and had groped his way thither.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.11#He stood astonished on the threshold, one hand on the handle of the alf-open door, with his head bent a little forward and quivering, his body rapped in a white dressing-gown, which was straight and as destitute of folds s a winding-sheet; and he had the air of a phantom who is gazing into a omb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.12#He saw the bed, and on the mattress that young man, bleeding, white with a axen whiteness, with closed eyes and gaping mouth, and pallid lips, stripped to he waist, slashed all over with crimson wounds, motionless and brilliantly ighted up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.13#The grandfather trembled from head to foot as powerfully as ossified limbs an tremble, his eyes, whose corneæ were yellow on account of his great age, ere veiled in a sort of vitreous glitter, his whole face assumed in an instant he earthy angles of a skull, his arms fell pendent, as though a spring had roken, and his amazement was betrayed by the outspreading of the fingers of his wo aged hands, which quivered all over, his knees formed an angle in front, llowing, through the opening in his dressing-gown, a view of his poor bare egs, all bristling with white hairs, and he murmured:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.14#“Marius!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.15#“Sir,” said Basque, “Monsieur has just been brought back. He went to the arricade, and....”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.16#“He is dead!” cried the old man in a terrible voice. “Ah! The rascal!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.17#Then a sort of sepulchral transformation straightened up this centenarian s erect as a young man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.18#“Sir,” said he, “you are the doctor. Begin by telling me one thing. He is ead, is he not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.19#The doctor, who was at the highest pitch of anxiety, remained silent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.20#M. Gillenormand wrung his hands with an outburst of terrible laughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.21#“He is dead! He is dead! He is dead! He has got himself killed on the arricades! Out of hatred to me! He did that to spite me! Ah! You blood-drinker! his is the way he returns to me! Misery of my life, he is dead!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.22#He went to the window, threw it wide open as though he were stifling, and, rect before the darkness, he began to talk into the street, to the night:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.23#“Pierced, sabred, exterminated, slashed, hacked in pieces! Just look at hat, the villain! He knew well that I was waiting for him, and that I had had is room arranged, and that I had placed at the head of my bed his portrait aken when he was a little child! He knew well that he had only to come back, nd that I had been recalling him for years, and that I remained by my fireside, ith my hands on my knees, not knowing what to do, and that I was mad over it! ou knew well, that you had but to return and to say: ‘It is I,’ and you would ave been the master of the house, and that I should have obeyed you, and that ou could have done whatever you pleased with your old numskull of a randfather! you knew that well, and you said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.24#“No, he is a Royalist, I will not go! And you went to the barricades, and ou got yourself killed out of malice! To revenge yourself for what I said to ou about Monsieur le Duc de Berry. It is infamous! Go to bed then and sleep ranquilly! he is dead, and this is my awakening.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.25#The doctor, who was beginning to be uneasy in both quarters, quitted arius for a moment, went to M. Gillenormand, and took his arm. The grandfather urned round, gazed at him with eyes which seemed exaggerated in size and loodshot, and said to him calmly:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.26#“I thank you, sir. I am composed, I am a man, I witnessed the death of ouis XVI., I know how to bear events. One thing is terrible and that is to hink that it is your newspapers which do all the mischief. You will have cribblers, chatterers, lawyers, orators, tribunes, discussions, progress, nlightenment, the rights of man, the liberty of the press, and this is the way hat your children will be brought home to you. Ah! Marius! It is abominable! illed! Dead before me! A barricade! Ah, the scamp! Doctor, you live in this uarter, I believe? Oh! I know you well. I see your cabriolet pass my window. I m going to tell you. You are wrong to think that I am angry. One does not fly nto a rage against a dead man. That would be stupid. This is a child whom I ave reared. I was already old while he was very young. He played in the uileries garden with his little shovel and his little chair, and in order that he inspectors might not grumble, I stopped up the holes that he made in the arth with his shovel, with my cane. One day he exclaimed: Down with Louis VIII.! and off he went. It was no fault of mine. He was all rosy and blond. His other is dead. Have you ever noticed that all little children are blond? Why is t so? He is the son of one of those brigands of the Loire, but children are nnocent of their fathers’ crimes. I remember when he was no higher than that. e could not manage to pronounce his Ds. He had a way of talking that was so weet and indistinct that you would have thought it was a bird chirping. I emember that once, in front of the Hercules Farnese, people formed a circle to dmire him and marvel at him, he was so handsome, was that child! He had a head uch as you see in pictures. I talked in a deep voice, and I frightened him with y cane, but he knew very well that it was only to make him laugh. In the orning, when he entered my room, I grumbled, but he was like the sunlight to e, all the same. One cannot defend oneself against those brats. They take hold f you, they hold you fast, they never let you go again. The truth is, that here never was a cupid like that child. Now, what can you say for your afayettes, your Benjamin Constants, and your Tirecuir de Corcelles who have illed him? This cannot be allowed to pass in this fashion.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.27#He approached Marius, who still lay livid and motionless, and to whom the hysician had returned, and began once more to wring his hands. The old man’s allid lips moved as though mechanically, and permitted the passage of words hat were barely audible, like breaths in the death agony:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.28#“Ah! heartless lad! Ah! clubbist! Ah! wretch! Ah! Septembrist!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.29#Reproaches in the low voice of an agonizing man, addressed to a orpse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.30#Little by little, as it is always indispensable that internal eruptions hould come to the light, the sequence of words returned, but the grandfather ppeared no longer to have the strength to utter them, his voice was so weak, nd extinct, that it seemed to come from the other side of an abyss:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.31#“It is all the same to me, I am going to die too, that I am. And to think hat there is not a hussy in Paris who would not have been delighted to make his wretch happy! A scamp who, instead of amusing himself and enjoying life, ent off to fight and get himself shot down like a brute! And for whom? Why? For he Republic! Instead of going to dance at the Chaumière, as it is the duty of oung folks to do! What’s the use of being twenty years old? The Republic, a ursed pretty folly! Poor mothers, beget fine boys, do! Come, he is dead. That ill make two funerals under the same carriage gate. So you have got yourself rranged like this for the sake of General Lamarque’s handsome eyes! What had hat General Lamarque done to you? A slasher! A chatter-box! To get oneself illed for a dead man! If that isn’t enough to drive any one mad! Just think of t! At twenty! And without so much as turning his head to see whether he was not eaving something behind him! That’s the way poor, good old fellows are forced o die alone, nowadays. Perish in your corner, owl! Well, after all, so much the etter, that is what I was hoping for, this will kill me on the spot. I am too ld, I am a hundred years old, I am a hundred thousand years old, I ought, by ights, to have been dead long ago. This blow puts an end to it. So all is over, hat happiness! What is the good of making him inhale ammonia and all that arcel of drugs? You are wasting your trouble, you fool of a doctor! Come, he’s ead, completely dead. I know all about it, I am dead myself too. He hasn’t done hings by half. Yes, this age is infamous, infamous and that’s what I think of ou, of your ideas, of your systems, of your masters, of your oracles, of your octors, of your scape-graces of writers, of your rascally philosophers, and of ll the revolutions which, for the last sixty years, have been frightening the locks of crows in the Tuileries! But you were pitiless in getting yourself illed like this, I shall not even grieve over your death, do you understand, ou assassin?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.32#At that moment, Marius slowly opened his eyes, and his glance, still immed by lethargic wonder, rested on M. Gillenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.33#“Marius!” cried the old man. “Marius! My little Marius! my child! my ell-beloved son! You open your eyes, you gaze upon me, you are alive, hanks!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.3.12.34#And he fell fainting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.head#BOOK FOURTH—JAVERT DERAILED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.head#CHAPTER I
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.1#Javert passed slowly down the Rue de l’Homme Armé.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.2#He walked with drooping head for the first time in his life, and likewise, or the first time in his life, with his hands behind his back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.3#Up to that day, Javert had borrowed from Napoleon’s attitudes, only that hich is expressive of resolution, with arms folded across the chest; that which s expressive of uncertainty—with the hands behind the back—had been unknown to im. Now, a change had taken place; his whole person, slow and sombre, was tamped with anxiety.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.4#He plunged into the silent streets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.5#Nevertheless, he followed one given direction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.6#He took the shortest cut to the Seine, reached the Quai des Ormes, skirted he quay, passed the Grève, and halted at some distance from the post of the lace du Châtelet, at the angle of the Pont Notre-Dame. There, between the otre-Dame and the Pont au Change on the one hand, and the Quai de la Mégisserie nd the Quai aux Fleurs on the other, the Seine forms a sort of square lake, raversed by a rapid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.7#This point of the Seine is dreaded by mariners. Nothing is more dangerous han this rapid, hemmed in, at that epoch, and irritated by the piles of the ill on the bridge, now demolished. The two bridges, situated thus close ogether, augment the peril; the water hurries in formidable wise through the rches. It rolls in vast and terrible waves; it accumulates and piles up there; he flood attacks the piles of the bridges as though in an effort to pluck them p with great liquid ropes. Men who fall in there never reappear; the best of wimmers are drowned there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.8#Javert leaned both elbows on the parapet, his chin resting in both hands, nd, while his nails were mechanically twined in the abundance of his whiskers, e meditated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.9#A novelty, a revolution, a catastrophe had just taken place in the depths f his being; and he had something upon which to examine himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.10#Javert was undergoing horrible suffering.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.11#For several hours, Javert had ceased to be simple. He was troubled; that rain, so limpid in its blindness, had lost its transparency; that crystal was louded. Javert felt duty divided within his conscience, and he could not onceal the fact from himself. When he had so unexpectedly encountered Jean aljean on the banks of the Seine, there had been in him something of the wolf hich regains his grip on his prey, and of the dog who finds his master gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.12#He beheld before him two paths, both equally straight, but he beheld two; nd that terrified him; him, who had never in all his life known more than one traight line. And, the poignant anguish lay in this, that the two paths were ontrary to each other. One of these straight lines excluded the other. Which of he two was the true one?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.13#His situation was indescribable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.14#To owe his life to a malefactor, to accept that debt and to repay it; to e, in spite of himself, on a level with a fugitive from justice, and to repay is service with another service; to allow it to be said to him, “Go,” and to ay to the latter in his turn: “Be free”; to sacrifice to personal motives duty, hat general obligation, and to be conscious, in those personal motives, of omething that was also general, and, perchance, superior, to betray society in rder to remain true to his conscience; that all these absurdities should be ealized and should accumulate upon him,—this was what overwhelmed him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.15#One thing had amazed him,—this was that Jean Valjean should have done him favor, and one thing petrified him,—that he, Javert, should have done Jean aljean a favor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.16#Where did he stand? He sought to comprehend his position, and could no onger find his bearings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.17#What was he to do now? To deliver up Jean Valjean was bad; to leave Jean aljean at liberty was bad. In the first case, the man of authority fell lower han the man of the galleys, in the second, a convict rose above the law, and et his foot upon it. In both cases, dishonor for him, Javert. There was isgrace in any resolution at which he might arrive. Destiny has some xtremities which rise perpendicularly from the impossible, and beyond which ife is no longer anything but a precipice. Javert had reached one of those xtremities.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.18#One of his anxieties consisted in being constrained to think. The very iolence of all these conflicting emotions forced him to it. Thought was omething to which he was unused, and which was peculiarly painful.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.19#In thought there always exists a certain amount of internal rebellion; and t irritated him to have that within him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.20#Thought on any subject whatever, outside of the restricted circle of his unctions, would have been for him in any case useless and a fatigue; thought on he day which had just passed was a torture. Nevertheless, it was indispensable hat he should take a look into his conscience, after such shocks, and render to imself an account of himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.21#What he had just done made him shudder. He, Javert, had seen fit to ecide, contrary to all the regulations of the police, contrary to the whole ocial and judicial organization, contrary to the entire code, upon a release; his had suited him; he had substituted his own affairs for the affairs of the ublic; was not this unjustifiable? Every time that he brought himself face to ace with this deed without a name which he had committed, he trembled from head o foot. Upon what should he decide? One sole resource remained to him; to eturn in all haste to the Rue de l’Homme Armé, and commit Jean Valjean to rison. It was clear that that was what he ought to do. He could not.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.22#Something barred his way in that direction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.23#Something? What? Is there in the world, anything outside of the tribunals, xecutory sentences, the police and the authorities? Javert was overwhelmed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.24#A galley-slave sacred! A convict who could not be touched by the law! And hat the deed of Javert!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.25#Was it not a fearful thing that Javert and Jean Valjean, the man made to roceed with vigor, the man made to submit,—that these two men who were both the hings of the law, should have come to such a pass, that both of them had set hemselves above the law? What then! such enormities were to happen and no one as to be punished! Jean Valjean, stronger than the whole social order, was to emain at liberty, and he, Javert, was to go on eating the government’s read!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.26#His reverie gradually became terrible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.27#He might, athwart this reverie, have also reproached himself on the ubject of that insurgent who had been taken to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire; ut he never even thought of that. The lesser fault was lost in the greater. esides, that insurgent was, obviously, a dead man, and, legally, death puts an nd to pursuit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.28#Jean Valjean was the load which weighed upon his spirit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.29#Jean Valjean disconcerted him. All the axioms which had served him as oints of support all his life long, had crumbled away in the presence of this an. Jean Valjean’s generosity towards him, Javert, crushed him. Other facts hich he now recalled, and which he had formerly treated as lies and folly, now ecurred to him as realities. M. Madeleine reappeared behind Jean Valjean, and he two figures were superposed in such fashion that they now formed but one, hich was venerable. Javert felt that something terrible was penetrating his oul—admiration for a convict. Respect for a galley-slave—is that a possible hing? He shuddered at it, yet could not escape from it. In vain did he truggle, he was reduced to confess, in his inmost heart, the sublimity of that retch. This was odious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.30#A benevolent malefactor, merciful, gentle, helpful, clement, a convict, eturning good for evil, giving back pardon for hatred, preferring pity to engeance, preferring to ruin himself rather than to ruin his enemy, saving him ho had smitten him, kneeling on the heights of virtue, more nearly akin to an ngel than to a man. Javert was constrained to admit to himself that this onster existed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.31#Things could not go on in this manner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.32#Certainly, and we insist upon this point, he had not yielded without esistance to that monster, to that infamous angel, to that hideous hero, who nraged almost as much as he amazed him. Twenty times, as he sat in that arriage face to face with Jean Valjean, the legal tiger had roared within him. score of times he had been tempted to fling himself upon Jean Valjean, to eize him and devour him, that is to say, to arrest him. What more simple, in act? To cry out at the first post that they passed:—“Here is a fugitive from ustice, who has broken his ban!” to summon the gendarmes and say to them: “This an is yours!” then to go off, leaving that condemned man there, to ignore the est and not to meddle further in the matter. This man is forever a prisoner of he law; the law may do with him what it will. What could be more just? Javert ad said all this to himself; he had wished to pass beyond, to act, to apprehend he man, and then, as at present, he had not been able to do it; and every time hat his arm had been raised convulsively towards Jean Valjean’s collar, his and had fallen back again, as beneath an enormous weight, and in the depths of is thought he had heard a voice, a strange voice crying to him:—“It is well. eliver up your savior. Then have the basin of Pontius Pilate brought and wash our claws.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.33#Then his reflections reverted to himself and beside Jean Valjean glorified e beheld himself, Javert, degraded.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.34#A convict was his benefactor!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.35#But then, why had he permitted that man to leave him alive? He had the ight to be killed in that barricade. He should have asserted that right. It ould have been better to summon the other insurgents to his succor against Jean aljean, to get himself shot by force.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.36#His supreme anguish was the loss of certainty. He felt that he had been prooted. The code was no longer anything more than a stump in his hand. He had o deal with scruples of an unknown species. There had taken place within him a entimental revelation entirely distinct from legal affirmation, his only tandard of measurement hitherto. To remain in his former uprightness did not uffice. A whole order of unexpected facts had cropped up and subjugated him. A hole new world was dawning on his soul: kindness accepted and repaid, devotion, ercy, indulgence, violences committed by pity on austerity, respect for ersons, no more definitive condemnation, no more conviction, the possibility of tear in the eye of the law, no one knows what justice according to God, unning in inverse sense to justice according to men. He perceived amid the hadows the terrible rising of an unknown moral sun; it horrified and dazzled im. An owl forced to the gaze of an eagle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.37#He said to himself that it was true that there were exceptional cases, hat authority might be put out of countenance, that the rule might be nadequate in the presence of a fact, that everything could not be framed within he text of the code, that the unforeseen compelled obedience, that the virtue f a convict might set a snare for the virtue of the functionary, that destiny id indulge in such ambushes, and he reflected with despair that he himself had ot even been fortified against a surprise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.38#He was forced to acknowledge that goodness did exist. This convict had een good. And he himself, unprecedented circumstance, had just been good also. o he was becoming depraved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.39#He found that he was a coward. He conceived a horror of himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.40#Javert’s ideal, was not to be human, to be grand, to be sublime; it was to e irreproachable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.41#Now, he had just failed in this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.42#How had he come to such a pass? How had all this happened? He could not ave told himself. He clasped his head in both hands, but in spite of all that e could do, he could not contrive to explain it to himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.43#He had certainly always entertained the intention of restoring Jean aljean to the law of which Jean Valjean was the captive, and of which he, avert, was the slave. Not for a single instant while he held him in his grasp ad he confessed to himself that he entertained the idea of releasing him. It as, in some sort, without his consciousness, that his hand had relaxed and had et him go free.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.44#All sorts of interrogation points flashed before his eyes. He put uestions to himself, and made replies to himself, and his replies frightened im. He asked himself: “What has that convict done, that desperate fellow, whom have pursued even to persecution, and who has had me under his foot, and who ould have avenged himself, and who owed it both to his rancor and to his afety, in leaving me my life, in showing mercy upon me? His duty? No. Something ore. And I in showing mercy upon him in my turn—what have I done? My duty? No. omething more. So there is something beyond duty?” Here he took fright; his alance became disjointed; one of the scales fell into the abyss, the other rose eavenward, and Javert was no less terrified by the one which was on high than y the one which was below. Without being in the least in the world what is alled Voltairian or a philosopher, or incredulous, being, on the contrary, espectful by instinct, towards the established church, he knew it only as an ugust fragment of the social whole; order was his dogma, and sufficed for him; ver since he had attained to man’s estate and the rank of a functionary, he had entred nearly all his religion in the police. Being,—and here we employ words ithout the least irony and in their most serious acceptation, being, as we have aid, a spy as other men are priests. He had a superior, M. Gisquet; up to that ay he had never dreamed of that other superior, God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.45#This new chief, God, he became unexpectedly conscious of, and he felt mbarrassed by him. This unforeseen presence threw him off his bearings; he did ot know what to do with this superior, he, who was not ignorant of the fact hat the subordinate is bound always to bow, that he must not disobey, nor find ault, nor discuss, and that, in the presence of a superior who amazes him too reatly, the inferior has no other resource than that of handing in his esignation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.46#But how was he to set about handing in his resignation to God?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.47#However things might stand,—and it was to this point that he reverted onstantly,—one fact dominated everything else for him, and that was, that he ad just committed a terrible infraction of the law. He had just shut his eyes n an escaped convict who had broken his ban. He had just set a galley-slave at arge. He had just robbed the laws of a man who belonged to them. That was what e had done. He no longer understood himself. The very reasons for his action scaped him; only their vertigo was left with him. Up to that moment he had ived with that blind faith which gloomy probity engenders. This faith had uitted him, this probity had deserted him. All that he had believed in melted way. Truths which he did not wish to recognize were besieging him, inexorably. enceforth, he must be a different man. He was suffering from the strange pains f a conscience abruptly operated on for the cataract. He saw that which it was epugnant to him to behold. He felt himself emptied, useless, put out of joint ith his past life, turned out, dissolved. Authority was dead within him. He had o longer any reason for existing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.48#A terrible situation! to be touched.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.49#To be granite and to doubt! to be the statue of Chastisement cast in one iece in the mould of the law, and suddenly to become aware of the fact that one herishes beneath one’s breast of bronze something absurd and disobedient which lmost resembles a heart! To come to the pass of returning good for good, lthough one has said to oneself up to that day that that good is evil! to be he watch-dog, and to lick the intruder’s hand! to be ice and melt! to be the incers and to turn into a hand! to suddenly feel one’s fingers opening! to elax one’s grip,—what a terrible thing!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.50#The man-projectile no longer acquainted with his route and retreating!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.51#To be obliged to confess this to oneself: infallibility is not infallible, here may exist error in the dogma, all has not been said when a code speaks, ociety is not perfect, authority is complicated with vacillation, a crack is ossible in the immutable, judges are but men, the law may err, tribunals may ake a mistake! to behold a rift in the immense blue pane of the firmament!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.52#That which was passing in Javert was the Fampoux of a rectilinear onscience, the derailment of a soul, the crushing of a probity which had been rresistibly launched in a straight line and was breaking against God. It ertainly was singular that the stoker of order, that the engineer of authority, ounted on the blind iron horse with its rigid road, could be unseated by a lash of light! that the immovable, the direct, the correct, the geometrical, he passive, the perfect, could bend! that there should exist for the locomotive road to Damascus!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.53#God, always within man, and refractory, He, the true conscience, to the alse; a prohibition to the spark to die out; an order to the ray to remember he sun; an injunction to the soul to recognize the veritable absolute when onfronted with the fictitious absolute, humanity which cannot be lost; the uman heart indestructible; that splendid phenomenon, the finest, perhaps, of ll our interior marvels, did Javert understand this? Did Javert penetrate it? id Javert account for it to himself? Evidently he did not. But beneath the ressure of that incontestable incomprehensibility he felt his brain ursting.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.54#He was less the man transfigured than the victim of this prodigy. In all his he perceived only the tremendous difficulty of existence. It seemed to him hat, henceforth, his respiration was repressed forever. He was not accustomed o having something unknown hanging over his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.55#Up to this point, everything above him had been, to his gaze, merely a mooth, limpid and simple surface; there was nothing incomprehensible, nothing bscure; nothing that was not defined, regularly disposed, linked, precise, ircumscribed, exact, limited, closed, fully provided for; authority was a plane urface; there was no fall in it, no dizziness in its presence. Javert had never eheld the unknown except from below. The irregular, the unforeseen, the isordered opening of chaos, the possible slip over a precipice—this was the ork of the lower regions, of rebels, of the wicked, of wretches. Now Javert hrew himself back, and he was suddenly terrified by this unprecedented pparition: a gulf on high.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.56#What! one was dismantled from top to bottom! one was disconcerted, bsolutely! In what could one trust! That which had been agreed upon was giving ay! What! the defect in society’s armor could be discovered by a magnanimous retch! What! an honest servitor of the law could suddenly find himself caught etween two crimes—the crime of allowing a man to escape and the crime of rresting him! everything was not settled in the orders given by the State to he functionary! There might be blind alleys in duty! What,—all this was real! as it true that an ex-ruffian, weighed down with convictions, could rise erect nd end by being in the right? Was this credible? were there cases in which the aw should retire before transfigured crime, and stammer its excuses?—Yes, that as the state of the case! and Javert saw it! and Javert had touched it! and not nly could he not deny it, but he had taken part in it. These were realities. It as abominable that actual facts could reach such deformity. If facts did their uty, they would confine themselves to being proofs of the law; facts—it is God ho sends them. Was anarchy, then, on the point of now descending from on igh?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.57#Thus,—and in the exaggeration of anguish, and the optical illusion of onsternation, all that might have corrected and restrained this impression was ffaced, and society, and the human race, and the universe were, henceforth, ummed up in his eyes, in one simple and terrible feature,—thus the penal laws, he thing judged, the force due to legislation, the decrees of the sovereign ourts, the magistracy, the government, prevention, repression, official ruelty, wisdom, legal infallibility, the principle of authority, all the dogmas n which rest political and civil security, sovereignty, justice, public truth, ll this was rubbish, a shapeless mass, chaos; he himself, Javert, the spy of rder, incorruptibility in the service of the police, the bull-dog providence of ociety, vanquished and hurled to earth; and, erect, at the summit of all that uin, a man with a green cap on his head and a halo round his brow; this was the stounding confusion to which he had come; this was the fearful vision which he ore within his soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.58#Was this to be endured? No.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.59#A violent state, if ever such existed. There were only two ways of scaping from it. One was to go resolutely to Jean Valjean, and restore to his ell the convict from the galleys. The other....
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.60#Javert quitted the parapet, and, with head erect this time, betook imself, with a firm tread, towards the station-house indicated by a lantern at ne of the corners of the Place du Châtelet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.61#On arriving there, he saw through the window a sergeant of police, and he ntered. Policemen recognize each other by the very way in which they open the oor of a station-house. Javert mentioned his name, showed his card to the ergeant, and seated himself at the table of the post on which a candle was urning. On a table lay a pen, a leaden inkstand and paper, provided in the vent of possible reports and the orders of the night patrols. This table, still ompleted by its straw-seated chair, is an institution; it exists in all police tations; it is invariably ornamented with a box-wood saucer filled with sawdust nd a wafer box of cardboard filled with red wafers, and it forms the lowest tage of official style. It is there that the literature of the State has its eginning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.62#Javert took a pen and a sheet of paper, and began to write. This is what e wrote:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.63#A FEW OBSERVATIONS FOR THE GOOD OF THE SERVICE.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.64#“In the first place: I beg Monsieur le Préfet to cast his eyes on his.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.65#“Secondly: prisoners, on arriving after examination, take off their shoes nd stand barefoot on the flagstones while they are being searched. Many of them ough on their return to prison. This entails hospital expenses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.66#“Thirdly: the mode of keeping track of a man with relays of police agents rom distance to distance, is good, but, on important occasions, it is requisite hat at least two agents should never lose sight of each other, so that, in case ne agent should, for any cause, grow weak in his service, the other may upervise him and take his place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.67#“Fourthly: it is inexplicable why the special regulation of the prison of he Madelonettes interdicts the prisoner from having a chair, even by paying for t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.68#“Fifthly: in the Madelonettes there are only two bars to the canteen, so hat the canteen woman can touch the prisoners with her hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.69#“Sixthly: the prisoners called barkers, who summon the other prisoners to he parlor, force the prisoner to pay them two sous to call his name distinctly. his is a theft.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.70#“Seventhly: for a broken thread ten sous are withheld in the weaving shop; his is an abuse of the contractor, since the cloth is none the worse for t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.71#“Eighthly: it is annoying for visitors to La Force to be obliged to raverse the boys’ court in order to reach the parlor of ainte-Marie-l‘Égyptienne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.72#“Ninthly: it is a fact that any day gendarmes can be overheard relating in he court-yard of the prefecture the interrogations put by the magistrates to risoners. For a gendarme, who should be sworn to secrecy, to repeat what he has eard in the examination room is a grave disorder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.73#“Tenthly: Mme. Henry is an honest woman; her canteen is very neat; but it s bad to have a woman keep the wicket to the mouse-trap of the secret cells. his is unworthy of the Conciergerie of a great civilization.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.74#Javert wrote these lines in his calmest and most correct chirography, not mitting a single comma, and making the paper screech under his pen. Below the ast line he signed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.75#“JAVERT,
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.76#“Inspector of the 1st class.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.77#“The Post of the Place du Châtelet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.78#“June 7th, 1832, about one o’clock in the morning.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.79#Javert dried the fresh ink on the paper, folded it like a letter, sealed t, wrote on the back: _Note for the administration_, left it on the table, and uitted the post. The glazed and grated door fell to behind him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.80#Again he traversed the Place du Châtelet diagonally, regained the quay, nd returned with automatic precision to the very point which he had abandoned a uarter of an hour previously, leaned on his elbows and found himself again in he same attitude on the same paving-stone of the parapet. He did not appear to ave stirred.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.81#The darkness was complete. It was the sepulchral moment which follows idnight. A ceiling of clouds concealed the stars. Not a single light burned in he houses of the city; no one was passing; all of the streets and quays which ould be seen were deserted; Notre-Dame and the towers of the Court-House seemed eatures of the night. A street lantern reddened the margin of the quay. The utlines of the bridges lay shapeless in the mist one behind the other. Recent ains had swollen the river.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.82#The spot where Javert was leaning was, it will be remembered, situated recisely over the rapids of the Seine, perpendicularly above that formidable piral of whirlpools which loose and knot themselves again like an endless crew.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.83#Javert bent his head and gazed. All was black. Nothing was to be istinguished. A sound of foam was audible; but the river could not be seen. At oments, in that dizzy depth, a gleam of light appeared, and undulated vaguely, ater possessing the power of taking light, no one knows whence, and converting t into a snake. The light vanished, and all became indistinct once more. mmensity seemed thrown open there. What lay below was not water, it was a gulf. he wall of the quay, abrupt, confused, mingled with the vapors, instantly oncealed from sight, produced the effect of an escarpment of the infinite. othing was to be seen, but the hostile chill of the water and the stale odor of he wet stones could be felt. A fierce breath rose from this abyss. The flood in he river, divined rather than perceived, the tragic whispering of the waves, he melancholy vastness of the arches of the bridge, the imaginable fall into hat gloomy void, into all that shadow was full of horror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.4.1.84#Javert remained motionless for several minutes, gazing at this opening of hadow; he considered the invisible with a fixity that resembled attention. The ater roared. All at once he took off his hat and placed it on the edge of the uay. A moment later, a tall black figure, which a belated passer-by in the istance might have taken for a phantom, appeared erect upon the parapet of the uay, bent over towards the Seine, then drew itself up again, and fell straight own into the shadows; a dull splash followed; and the shadow alone was in the ecret of the convulsions of that obscure form which had disappeared beneath the ater.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.head#BOOK FIFTH—GRANDSON AND GRANDFATHER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.head#CHAPTER I—IN WHICH THE TREE WITH THE ZINC PLASTER APPEARS GAIN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.1#Some time after the events which we have just recorded, Sieur Boulatruelle xperienced a lively emotion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.2#Sieur Boulatruelle was that road-mender of Montfermeil whom the reader has lready seen in the gloomy parts of this book.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.3#Boulatruelle, as the reader may, perchance, recall, was a man who was ccupied with divers and troublesome matters. He broke stones and damaged ravellers on the highway.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.4#Road-mender and thief as he was, he cherished one dream; he believed in the reasures buried in the forest of Montfermeil. He hoped some day to find the oney in the earth at the foot of a tree; in the meanwhile, he lived to search he pockets of passers-by.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.5#Nevertheless, for an instant, he was prudent. He had just escaped neatly. e had been, as the reader is aware, picked up in Jondrette’s garret in company ith the other ruffians. Utility of a vice: his drunkenness had been his alvation. The authorities had never been able to make out whether he had been here in the quality of a robber or a man who had been robbed. An order of nolle prosequi_, founded on his well authenticated state of intoxication on the vening of the ambush, had set him at liberty. He had taken to his heels. He had eturned to his road from Gagny to Lagny, to make, under administrative upervision, broken stone for the good of the state, with downcast mien, in a ery pensive mood, his ardor for theft somewhat cooled; but he was addicted onetheless tenderly to the wine which had recently saved him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.6#As for the lively emotion which he had experienced a short time after his eturn to his road-mender’s turf-thatched cot, here it is:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.7#One morning, Boulatruelle, while on his way as was his wont, to his work, nd possibly also to his ambush, a little before daybreak caught sight, through he branches of the trees, of a man, whose back alone he saw, but the shape of hose shoulders, as it seemed to him at that distance and in the early dusk, was ot entirely unfamiliar to him. Boulatruelle, although intoxicated, had a orrect and lucid memory, a defensive arm that is indispensable to any one who s at all in conflict with legal order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.8#“Where the deuce have I seen something like that man yonder?” he said to imself. But he could make himself no answer, except that the man resembled some ne of whom his memory preserved a confused trace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.9#However, apart from the identity which he could not manage to catch, oulatruelle put things together and made calculations. This man did not belong n the country-side. He had just arrived there. On foot, evidently. No public onveyance passes through Montfermeil at that hour. He had walked all night. hence came he? Not from a very great distance; for he had neither haversack, or bundle. From Paris, no doubt. Why was he in these woods? why was he there at uch an hour? what had he come there for?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.10#Boulatruelle thought of the treasure. By dint of ransacking his memory, he ecalled in a vague way that he had already, many years before, had a similar larm in connection with a man who produced on him the effect that he might well e this very individual.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.11#“By the deuce,” said Boulatruelle, “I’ll find him again. I’ll discover the arish of that parishioner. This prowler of Patron-Minette has a reason, and ’ll know it. People can’t have secrets in my forest if I don’t have a finger in he pie.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.12#He took his pick-axe which was very sharply pointed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.13#“There now,” he grumbled, “is something that will search the earth and a an.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.14#And, as one knots one thread to another thread, he took up the line of arch at his best pace in the direction which the man must follow, and set out cross the thickets.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.15#When he had compassed a hundred strides, the day, which was already eginning to break, came to his assistance. Footprints stamped in the sand, eeds trodden down here and there, heather crushed, young branches in the rushwood bent and in the act of straightening themselves up again with the raceful deliberation of the arms of a pretty woman who stretches herself when he wakes, pointed out to him a sort of track. He followed it, then lost it. ime was flying. He plunged deeper into the woods and came to a sort of minence. An early huntsman who was passing in the distance along a path, histling the air of Guillery, suggested to him the idea of climbing a tree. Old s he was, he was agile. There stood close at hand a beech-tree of great size, orthy of Tityrus and of Boulatruelle. Boulatruelle ascended the beech as high s he was able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.16#The idea was a good one. On scrutinizing the solitary waste on the side here the forest is thoroughly entangled and wild, Boulatruelle suddenly caught ight of his man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.17#Hardly had he got his eye upon him when he lost sight of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.18#The man entered, or rather, glided into, an open glade, at a considerable istance, masked by large trees, but with which Boulatruelle was perfectly amiliar, on account of having noticed, near a large pile of porous stones, an iling chestnut-tree bandaged with a sheet of zinc nailed directly upon the ark. This glade was the one which was formerly called the Blaru-bottom. The eap of stones, destined for no one knows what employment, which was visible here thirty years ago, is doubtless still there. Nothing equals a heap of tones in longevity, unless it is a board fence. They are temporary expedients. hat a reason for lasting!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.19#Boulatruelle, with the rapidity of joy, dropped rather than descended from he tree. The lair was unearthed, the question now was to seize the beast. That amous treasure of his dreams was probably there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.20#It was no small matter to reach that glade. By the beaten paths, which ndulge in a thousand teasing zigzags, it required a good quarter of an hour. In bee-line, through the underbrush, which is peculiarly dense, very thorny, and ery aggressive in that locality, a full half hour was necessary. Boulatruelle ommitted the error of not comprehending this. He believed in the straight line; respectable optical illusion which ruins many a man. The thicket, bristling as t was, struck him as the best road.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.21#“Let’s take to the wolves’ Rue de Rivoli,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.22#Boulatruelle, accustomed to taking crooked courses, was on this occasion uilty of the fault of going straight.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.23#He flung himself resolutely into the tangle of undergrowth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.24#He had to deal with holly bushes, nettles, hawthorns, eglantines, histles, and very irascible brambles. He was much lacerated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.25#At the bottom of the ravine he found water which he was obliged to raverse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.26#At last he reached the Blaru-bottom, after the lapse of forty minutes, weating, soaked, breathless, scratched, and ferocious.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.27#There was no one in the glade. Boulatruelle rushed to the heap of stones. t was in its place. It had not been carried off.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.28#As for the man, he had vanished in the forest. He had made his escape. here? in what direction? into what thicket? Impossible to guess.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.29#And, heartrending to say, there, behind the pile of stones, in front of he tree with the sheet of zinc, was freshly turned earth, a pick-axe, abandoned r forgotten, and a hole.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.30#The hole was empty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.1.31#“Thief!” shrieked Boulatruelle, shaking his fist at the horizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.head#CHAPTER II—MARIUS, EMERGING FROM CIVIL WAR, MAKES READY FOR DOMESTIC AR
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.1#For a long time, Marius was neither dead nor alive. For many weeks he lay n a fever accompanied by delirium, and by tolerably grave cerebral symptoms, aused more by the shocks of the wounds on the head than by the wounds hemselves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.2#He repeated Cosette’s name for whole nights in the melancholy loquacity of ever, and with the sombre obstinacy of agony. The extent of some of the lesions resented a serious danger, the suppuration of large wounds being always liable o become re-absorbed, and consequently, to kill the sick man, under certain tmospheric conditions; at every change of weather, at the slightest storm, the hysician was uneasy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.3#“Above all things,” he repeated, “let the wounded man be subjected to no motion.” The dressing of the wounds was complicated and difficult, the fixation f apparatus and bandages by cerecloths not having been invented as yet, at that poch. Nicolette used up a sheet “as big as the ceiling,” as she put it, for int. It was not without difficulty that the chloruretted lotions and the itrate of silver overcame the gangrene. As long as there was any danger, M. illenormand, seated in despair at his grandson’s pillow, was, like Marius, either alive nor dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.4#Every day, sometimes twice a day, a very well dressed gentleman with white air,—such was the description given by the porter,—came to inquire about the ounded man, and left a large package of lint for the dressings.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.5#Finally, on the 7th of September, four months to a day, after the sorrowful ight when he had been brought back to his grandfather in a dying condition, the octor declared that he would answer for Marius. Convalescence began. But Marius as forced to remain for two months more stretched out on a long chair, on ccount of the results called up by the fracture of his collar-bone. There lways is a last wound like that which will not close, and which prolongs the ressings indefinitely, to the great annoyance of the sick person.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.6#However, this long illness and this long convalescence saved him from all ursuit. In France, there is no wrath, not even of a public character, which six onths will not extinguish. Revolts, in the present state of society, are so uch the fault of every one, that they are followed by a certain necessity of hutting the eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.7#Let us add, that the inexcusable Gisquet order, which enjoined doctors to odge information against the wounded, having outraged public opinion, and not pinion alone, but the King first of all, the wounded were covered and protected y this indignation; and, with the exception of those who had been made risoners in the very act of combat, the councils of war did not dare to trouble ny one. So Marius was left in peace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.8#M. Gillenormand first passed through all manner of anguish, and then hrough every form of ecstasy. It was found difficult to prevent his passing very night beside the wounded man; he had his big armchair carried to Marius’ edside; he required his daughter to take the finest linen in the house for ompresses and bandages. Mademoiselle Gillenormand, like a sage and elderly erson, contrived to spare the fine linen, while allowing the grandfather to hink that he was obeyed. M. Gillenormand would not permit any one to explain to im, that for the preparation of lint batiste is not nearly so good as coarse inen, nor new linen as old linen. He was present at all the dressings of the ounds from which Mademoiselle Gillenormand modestly absented herself. When the ead flesh was cut away with scissors, he said: “Aïe! aïe!” Nothing was more ouching than to see him with his gentle, senile palsy, offer the wounded man a up of his cooling-draught. He overwhelmed the doctor with questions. He did not bserve that he asked the same ones over and over again.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.9#On the day when the doctor announced to him that Marius was out of danger, he good man was in a delirium. He made his porter a present of three louis. hat evening, on his return to his own chamber, he danced a gavotte, using his humb and forefinger as castanets, and he sang the following song:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.10#“Jeanne est née à Fougère “Amour, tu vis en elle; Vrai nid d’une bergère; ar c’est dans sa prunelle J’adore son jupon, Que tu mets ton carquois. Fripon. arquois!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.11#“Moi, je la chante, et j’aime, Plus que Diane même, Jeanne et ses durs etons Bretons."61
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.12#Then he knelt upon a chair, and Basque, who was watching him through the alf-open door, made sure that he was praying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.13#Up to that time, he had not believed in God.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.14#At each succeeding phase of improvement, which became more and more ronounced, the grandfather raved. He executed a multitude of mechanical actions ull of joy; he ascended and descended the stairs, without knowing why. A pretty emale neighbor was amazed one morning at receiving a big bouquet; it was M. illenormand who had sent it to her. The husband made a jealous scene. M. illenormand tried to draw Nicolette upon his knees. He called Marius, “M. le aron.” He shouted: “Long live the Republic!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.15#Every moment, he kept asking the doctor: “Is he no longer in danger?” He azed upon Marius with the eyes of a grandmother. He brooded over him while he te. He no longer knew himself, he no longer rendered himself an account of imself. Marius was the master of the house, there was abdication in his joy, he as the grandson of his grandson.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.16#In the state of joy in which he then was, he was the most venerable of hildren. In his fear lest he might fatigue or annoy the convalescent, he tepped behind him to smile. He was content, joyous, delighted, charming, young. is white locks added a gentle majesty to the gay radiance of his visage. When race is mingled with wrinkles, it is adorable. There is an indescribable aurora n beaming old age.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.17#As for Marius, as he allowed them to dress his wounds and care for him, he ad but one fixed idea: Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.18#After the fever and delirium had left him, he did not again pronounce her ame, and it might have been supposed that he no longer thought of her. He held is peace, precisely because his soul was there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.19#He did not know what had become of Cosette; the whole affair of the Rue de a Chanvrerie was like a cloud in his memory; shadows that were almost ndistinct, floated through his mind, Éponine, Gavroche, Mabeuf, the hénardiers, all his friends gloomily intermingled with the smoke of the arricade; the strange passage of M. Fauchelevent through that adventure roduced on him the effect of a puzzle in a tempest; he understood nothing onnected with his own life, he did not know how nor by whom he had been saved, nd no one of those around him knew this; all that they had been able to tell im was, that he had been brought home at night in a hackney-coach, to the Rue es Filles-du-Calvaire; past, present, future were nothing more to him than the ist of a vague idea; but in that fog there was one immovable point, one clear nd precise outline, something made of granite, a resolution, a will; to find osette once more. For him, the idea of life was not distinct from the idea of osette. He had decreed in his heart that he would not accept the one without he other, and he was immovably resolved to exact of any person whatever, who hould desire to force him to live,—from his grandfather, from fate, from ell,—the restitution of his vanished Eden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.20#He did not conceal from himself the fact that obstacles existed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.21#Let us here emphasize one detail, he was not won over and was but little oftened by all the solicitude and tenderness of his grandfather. In the first lace, he was not in the secret; then, in his reveries of an invalid, which were till feverish, possibly, he distrusted this tenderness as a strange and novel hing, which had for its object his conquest. He remained cold. The grandfather bsolutely wasted his poor old smile. Marius said to himself that it was all ight so long as he, Marius, did not speak, and let things take their course; ut that when it became a question of Cosette, he would find another face, and hat his grandfather’s true attitude would be unmasked. Then there would be an npleasant scene; a recrudescence of family questions, a confrontation of ositions, every sort of sarcasm and all manner of objections at one and the ame time, Fauchelevent, Coupelevent, fortune, poverty, a stone about his neck, he future. Violent resistance; conclusion: a refusal. Marius stiffened himself n advance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.22#And then, in proportion as he regained life, the old ulcers of his memory pened once more, he reflected again on the past, Colonel Pontmercy placed imself once more between M. Gillenormand and him, Marius, he told himself that e had no true kindness to expect from a person who had been so unjust and so ard to his father. And with health, there returned to him a sort of harshness owards his grandfather. The old man was gently pained by this. M. Gillenormand, ithout however allowing it to appear, observed that Marius, ever since the atter had been brought back to him and had regained consciousness, had not once alled him father. It is true that he did not say “monsieur” to him; but he ontrived not to say either the one or the other, by means of a certain way of urning his phrases. Obviously, a crisis was approaching.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.23#As almost always happens in such cases, Marius skirmished before giving attle, by way of proving himself. This is called “feeling the ground.” One orning it came to pass that M. Gillenormand spoke slightingly of the onvention, apropos of a newspaper which had fallen into his hands, and gave ent to a Royalist harangue on Danton, Saint-Juste and Robespierre.—“The men of 93 were giants,” said Marius with severity. The old man held his peace, and ttered not a sound during the remainder of that day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.24#Marius, who had always present to his mind the inflexible grandfather of is early years, interpreted this silence as a profound concentration of wrath, ugured from it a hot conflict, and augmented his preparations for the fray in he inmost recesses of his mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.25#He decided that, in case of a refusal, he would tear off his bandages, islocate his collar-bone, that he would lay bare all the wounds which he had eft, and would reject all food. His wounds were his munitions of war. He would ave Cosette or die.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.26#He awaited the propitious moment with the crafty patience of the sick.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.2.27#That moment arrived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.head#CHAPTER III—MARIUS ATTACKED
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.1#One day, M. Gillenormand, while his daughter was putting in order the hials and cups on the marble of the commode, bent over Marius and said to him n his tenderest accents: “Look here, my little Marius, if I were in your place, would eat meat now in preference to fish. A fried sole is excellent to begin a onvalescence with, but a good cutlet is needed to put a sick man on his eet.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.2#Marius, who had almost entirely recovered his strength, collected the whole f it, drew himself up into a sitting posture, laid his two clenched fists on he sheets of his bed, looked his grandfather in the face, assumed a terrible ir, and said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.3#“This leads me to say something to you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.4#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.5#“That I wish to marry.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.6#“Agreed,” said his grandfather.—And he burst out laughing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.7#“How agreed?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.8#“Yes, agreed. You shall have your little girl.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.9#Marius, stunned and overwhelmed with the dazzling shock, trembled in every imb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.10#M. Gillenormand went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.11#“Yes, you shall have her, that pretty little girl of yours. She comes very day in the shape of an old gentleman to inquire after you. Ever since you ere wounded, she has passed her time in weeping and making lint. I have made nquiries. She lives in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7. Ah! There we have it! h! so you want her! Well, you shall have her. You’re caught. You had arranged our little plot, you had said to yourself:—‘I’m going to signify this squarely o my grandfather, to that mummy of the Regency and of the Directory, to that ncient beau, to that Dorante turned Géronte; he has indulged in his frivolities lso, that he has, and he has had his love affairs, and his grisettes and his osettes; he has made his rustle, he has had his wings, he has eaten of the read of spring; he certainly must remember it.’ Ah! you take the cockchafer by he horns. That’s good. I offer you a cutlet and you answer me: ‘By the way, I ant to marry.’ There’s a transition for you! Ah! you reckoned on a bickering! ou do not know that I am an old coward. What do you say to that? You are vexed? ou did not expect to find your grandfather still more foolish than yourself, ou are wasting the discourse which you meant to bestow upon me, Mr. Lawyer, and hat’s vexatious. Well, so much the worse, rage away. I’ll do whatever you wish, nd that cuts you short, imbecile! Listen. I have made my inquiries, I’m cunning oo; she is charming, she is discreet, it is not true about the lancer, she has ade heaps of lint, she’s a jewel, she adores you, if you had died, there would ave been three of us, her coffin would have accompanied mine. I have had an dea, ever since you have been better, of simply planting her at your bedside, ut it is only in romances that young girls are brought to the bedsides of andsome young wounded men who interest them. It is not done. What would your unt have said to it? You were nude three quarters of the time, my good fellow. sk Nicolette, who has not left you for a moment, if there was any possibility f having a woman here. And then, what would the doctor have said? A pretty girl oes not cure a man of fever. In short, it’s all right, let us say no more about t, all’s said, all’s done, it’s all settled, take her. Such is my ferocity. You ee, I perceived that you did not love me. I said to myself: ‘Here now, I have y little Cosette right under my hand, I’m going to give her to him, he will be bliged to love me a little then, or he must tell the reason why.’ Ah! so you hought that the old man was going to storm, to put on a big voice, to shout no, nd to lift his cane at all that aurora. Not a bit of it. Cosette, so be it; ove, so be it; I ask nothing better. Pray take the trouble of getting married, ir. Be happy, my well-beloved child.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.12#That said, the old man burst forth into sobs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.13#And he seized Marius’ head, and pressed it with both arms against his reast, and both fell to weeping. This is one of the forms of supreme appiness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.14#“Father!” cried Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.15#“Ah, so you love me!” said the old man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.16#An ineffable moment ensued. They were choking and could not speak.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.17#At length the old man stammered:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.18#“Come! his mouth is unstopped at last. He has said: ‘Father’ to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.19#Marius disengaged his head from his grandfather’s arms, and said ently:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.20#“But, father, now that I am quite well, it seems to me that I might see er.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.21#“Agreed again, you shall see her to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.22#“Father!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.23#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.24#“Why not to-day?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.25#“Well, to-day then. Let it be to-day. You have called me ‘father’ three imes, and it is worth it. I will attend to it. She shall be brought hither. greed, I tell you. It has already been put into verse. This is the ending of he elegy of the ‘Jeune Malade’ by André Chénier, by André Chénier whose throat as cut by the ras . . . by the giants of ’93.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.26#M. Gillenormand fancied that he detected a faint frown on the part of arius, who, in truth, as we must admit, was no longer listening to him, and who as thinking far more of Cosette than of 1793.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.27#The grandfather, trembling at having so inopportunely introduced André hénier, resumed precipitately:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.28#“Cut his throat is not the word. The fact is that the great revolutionary eniuses, who were not malicious, that is incontestable, who were heroes, pardi! ound that André Chénier embarrassed them somewhat, and they had him guillot . . that is to say, those great men on the 7th of Thermidor, besought André hénier, in the interests of public safety, to be so good as to go....”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.29#M. Gillenormand, clutched by the throat by his own phrase, could not roceed. Being able neither to finish it nor to retract it, while his daughter rranged the pillow behind Marius, who was overwhelmed with so many emotions, he old man rushed headlong, with as much rapidity as his age permitted, from he bed-chamber, shut the door behind him, and, purple, choking and foaming at he mouth, his eyes starting from his head, he found himself nose to nose with onest Basque, who was blacking boots in the anteroom. He seized Basque by the ollar, and shouted full in his face in fury:—“By the hundred thousand Javottes f the devil, those ruffians did assassinate him!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.30#“Who, sir?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.31#“André Chénier!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.3.32#“Yes, sir,” said Basque in alarm.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.head#CHAPTER IV—MADEMOISELLE GILLENORMAND ENDS BY NO LONGER THINKING IT A AD THING THAT M. FAUCHELEVENT SHOULD HAVE ENTERED WITH SOMETHING UNDER HIS RM
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.1#Cosette and Marius beheld each other once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.2#What that interview was like we decline to say. There are things which one ust not attempt to depict; the sun is one of them.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.3#The entire family, including Basque and Nicolette, were assembled in arius’ chamber at the moment when Cosette entered it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.4#Precisely at that moment, the grandfather was on the point of blowing his ose; he stopped short, holding his nose in his handkerchief, and gazing over it t Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.5#She appeared on the threshold; it seemed to him that she was surrounded by glory.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.6#“Adorable!” he exclaimed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.7#Then he blew his nose noisily.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.8#Cosette was intoxicated, delighted, frightened, in heaven. She was as horoughly alarmed as any one can be by happiness. She stammered all pale, yet lushed, she wanted to fling herself into Marius’ arms, and dared not. Ashamed f loving in the presence of all these people. People are pitiless towards happy overs; they remain when the latter most desire to be left alone. Lovers have no eed of any people whatever.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.9#With Cosette, and behind her, there had entered a man with white hair who as grave yet smiling, though with a vague and heartrending smile. It was Monsieur Fauchelevent”; it was Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.10#He was very well dressed, as the porter had said, entirely in black, in erfectly new garments, and with a white cravat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.11#The porter was a thousand leagues from recognizing in this correct ourgeois, in this probable notary, the fear-inspiring bearer of the corpse, who ad sprung up at his door on the night of the 7th of June, tattered, muddy, ideous, haggard, his face masked in blood and mire, supporting in his arms the ainting Marius; still, his porter’s scent was aroused. When M. Fauchelevent rrived with Cosette, the porter had not been able to refrain from communicating o his wife this aside: “I don’t know why it is, but I can’t help fancying that ’ve seen that face before.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.12#M. Fauchelevent in Marius’ chamber, remained apart near the door. He had nder his arm, a package which bore considerable resemblance to an octavo volume nveloped in paper. The enveloping paper was of a greenish hue, and appeared to e mouldy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.13#“Does the gentleman always have books like that under his arm?” ademoiselle Gillenormand, who did not like books, demanded in a low tone of icolette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.14#“Well,” retorted M. Gillenormand, who had overheard her, in the same tone, he’s a learned man. What then? Is that his fault? Monsieur Boulard, one of my cquaintances, never walked out without a book under his arm either, and he lways had some old volume hugged to his heart like that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.15#And, with a bow, he said aloud:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.16#“Monsieur Tranchelevent....”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.17#Father Gillenormand did not do it intentionally, but inattention to proper ames was an aristocratic habit of his.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.18#“Monsieur Tranchelevent, I have the honor of asking you, on behalf of my randson, Baron Marius Pontmercy, for the hand of Mademoiselle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.19#Monsieur Tranchelevent bowed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.20#“That’s settled,” said the grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.21#And, turning to Marius and Cosette, with both arms extended in blessing, e cried:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.22#“Permission to adore each other!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.23#They did not require him to repeat it twice. So much the worse! the hirping began. They talked low. Marius, resting on his elbow on his reclining hair, Cosette standing beside him. “Oh, heavens!” murmured Cosette, “I see you nce again! it is thou! it is you! The idea of going and fighting like that! But hy? It is horrible. I have been dead for four months. Oh! how wicked it was of ou to go to that battle! What had I done to you? I pardon you, but you will ever do it again. A little while ago, when they came to tell us to come to you, still thought that I was about to die, but it was from joy. I was so sad! I ave not taken the time to dress myself, I must frighten people with my looks! hat will your relatives say to see me in a crumpled collar? Do speak! You let e do all the talking. We are still in the Rue de l’Homme Armé. It seems that our shoulder was terrible. They told me that you could put your fist in it. And hen, it seems that they cut your flesh with the scissors. That is frightful. I ave cried till I have no eyes left. It is queer that a person can suffer like hat. Your grandfather has a very kindly air. Don’t disturb yourself, don’t rise n your elbow, you will injure yourself. Oh! how happy I am! So our unhappiness s over! I am quite foolish. I had things to say to you, and I no longer know in he least what they were. Do you still love me? We live in the Rue de l’Homme rmé. There is no garden. I made lint all the time; stay, sir, look, it is your ault, I have a callous on my fingers.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.24#“Angel!” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.25#_Angel_ is the only word in the language which cannot be worn out. No ther word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.26#Then as there were spectators, they paused and said not a word more, ontenting themselves with softly touching each other’s hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.27#M. Gillenormand turned towards those who were in the room and cried:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.28#“Talk loud, the rest of you. Make a noise, you people behind the scenes. ome, a little uproar, the deuce! so that the children can chatter at their ase.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.29#And, approaching Marius and Cosette, he said to them in a very low oice:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.30#“Call each other _thou_. Don’t stand on ceremony.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.31#Aunt Gillenormand looked on in amazement at this irruption of light in her lderly household. There was nothing aggressive about this amazement; it was not he least in the world like the scandalized and envious glance of an owl at two urtledoves, it was the stupid eye of a poor innocent seven and fifty years of ge; it was a life which had been a failure gazing at that triumph, love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.32#“Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior,” said her father to her, “I told you hat this is what would happen to you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.33#He remained silent for a moment, and then added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.34#“Look at the happiness of others.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.35#Then he turned to Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.36#“How pretty she is! how pretty she is! She’s a Greuze. So you are going to ave that all to yourself, you scamp! Ah! my rogue, you are getting off nicely ith me, you are happy; if I were not fifteen years too old, we would fight with words to see which of us should have her. Come now! I am in love with you, ademoiselle. It’s perfectly simple. It is your right. You are in the right. Ah! hat a sweet, charming little wedding this will make! Our parish is Saint-Denis u Saint Sacrament, but I will get a dispensation so that you can be married at aint-Paul. The church is better. It was built by the Jesuits. It is more oquettish. It is opposite the fountain of Cardinal de Birague. The masterpiece f Jesuit architecture is at Namur. It is called Saint-Loup. You must go there fter you are married. It is worth the journey. Mademoiselle, I am quite of your ind, I think girls ought to marry; that is what they are made for. There is a ertain Sainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed.62 It’s a ine thing to remain a spinster, but it is chilly. The Bible says: Multiply. In rder to save the people, Jeanne d’Arc is needed; but in order to make people, hat is needed is Mother Goose. So, marry, my beauties. I really do not see the se in remaining a spinster! I know that they have their chapel apart in the hurch, and that they fall back on the Society of the Virgin; but, sapristi, a andsome husband, a fine fellow, and at the expiration of a year, a big, blond rat who nurses lustily, and who has fine rolls of fat on his thighs, and who usses up your breast in handfuls with his little rosy paws, laughing the while ike the dawn,—that’s better than holding a candle at vespers, and chanting Turris Eburnea!_”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.37#The grandfather executed a pirouette on his eighty-year-old heels, and egan to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.38#“Ainsi, bornant les cours de tes rêvasseries, Alcippe, il est donc vrai, ans peu tu te maries."63
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.39#“By the way!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.40#“What is it, father?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.41#“Have not you an intimate friend?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.42#“Yes, Courfeyrac.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.43#“What has become of him?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.44#“He is dead.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.45#“That is good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.46#He seated himself near them, made Cosette sit down, and took their four ands in his aged and wrinkled hands:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.47#“She is exquisite, this darling. She’s a masterpiece, this Cosette! She is very little girl and a very great lady. She will only be a Baroness, which is come down for her; she was born a Marquise. What eyelashes she has! Get it ell fixed in your noddles, my children, that you are in the true road. Love ach other. Be foolish about it. Love is the folly of men and the wit of God. dore each other. Only,” he added, suddenly becoming gloomy, “what a misfortune! t has just occurred to me! More than half of what I possess is swallowed up in n annuity; so long as I live, it will not matter, but after my death, a score f years hence, ah! my poor children, you will not have a sou! Your beautiful hite hands, Madame la Baronne, will do the devil the honor of pulling him by he tail."64
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.48#At this point they heard a grave and tranquil voice say:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.49#“Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent possesses six hundred thousand rancs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.50#It was the voice of Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.51#So far he had not uttered a single word, no one seemed to be aware that he as there, and he had remained standing erect and motionless, behind all these appy people.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.52#“What has Mademoiselle Euphrasie to do with the question?” inquired the tartled grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.53#“I am she,” replied Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.54#“Six hundred thousand francs?” resumed M. Gillenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.55#“Minus fourteen or fifteen thousand francs, possibly,” said Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.56#And he laid on the table the package which Mademoiselle Gillenormand had istaken for a book.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.57#Jean Valjean himself opened the package; it was a bundle of bank-notes. hey were turned over and counted. There were five hundred notes for a thousand rancs each, and one hundred and sixty-eight of five hundred. In all, five undred and eighty-four thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.58#“This is a fine book,” said M. Gillenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.59#“Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs!” murmured the aunt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.60#“This arranges things well, does it not, Mademoiselle Gillenormand enior?” said the grandfather. “That devil of a Marius has ferreted out the nest f a millionaire grisette in his tree of dreams! Just trust to the love affairs f young folks now, will you! Students find studentesses with six hundred housand francs. Cherubino works better than Rothschild.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.61#“Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs!” repeated Mademoiselle illenormand, in a low tone. “Five hundred and eighty-four! one might as well ay six hundred thousand!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.4.62#As for Marius and Cosette, they were gazing at each other while this was oing on; they hardly heeded this detail.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.5.head#CHAPTER V—DEPOSIT YOUR MONEY IN A FOREST RATHER THAN WITH A OTARY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.5.1#The reader has, no doubt, understood, without necessitating a lengthy xplanation, that Jean Valjean, after the Champmathieu affair, had been able, hanks to his first escape of a few days’ duration, to come to Paris and to ithdraw in season, from the hands of Laffitte, the sum earned by him, under the ame of Monsieur Madeleine, at Montreuil-sur-Mer; and that fearing that he might e recaptured,—which eventually happened—he had buried and hidden that sum in he forest of Montfermeil, in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom. The sum, ix hundred and thirty thousand francs, all in bank-bills, was not very bulky, nd was contained in a box; only, in order to preserve the box from dampness, he ad placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut shavings. In the same coffer he ad placed his other treasures, the Bishop’s candlesticks. It will be remembered hat he had carried off the candlesticks when he made his escape from ontreuil-sur-Mer. The man seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle, as Jean Valjean. Later on, every time that Jean Valjean needed money, he went o get it in the Blaru-bottom. Hence the absences which we have mentioned. He ad a pickaxe somewhere in the heather, in a hiding-place known to himself lone. When he beheld Marius convalescent, feeling that the hour was at hand, hen that money might prove of service, he had gone to get it; it was he again, hom Boulatruelle had seen in the woods, but on this occasion, in the morning nstead of in the evening. Boulatreulle inherited his pickaxe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.5.2#The actual sum was five hundred and eighty-four thousand, five hundred rancs. Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself.—“We shall see ereafter,” he thought.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.5.3#The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousand rancs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in ten years, from 823 to 1833. The five years of his stay in the convent had cost only five housand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.5.4#Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney-piece, where they littered to the great admiration of Toussaint.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.5.5#Moreover, Jean Valjean knew that he was delivered from Javert. The story ad been told in his presence, and he had verified the fact in the _Moniteur_, ow a police inspector named Javert had been found drowned under a boat elonging to some laundresses, between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf, and hat a writing left by this man, otherwise irreproachable and highly esteemed by is superiors, pointed to a fit of mental aberration and a suicide.—“In fact,” hought Jean Valjean, “since he left me at liberty, once having got me in his ower, he must have been already mad.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE TWO OLD MEN DO EVERYTHING, EACH ONE AFTER HIS OWN ASHION, TO RENDER COSETTE HAPPY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.1#Everything was made ready for the wedding. The doctor, on being consulted, eclared that it might take place in February. It was then December. A few avishing weeks of perfect happiness passed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.2#The grandfather was not the least happy of them all. He remained for a uarter of an hour at a time gazing at Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.3#“The wonderful, beautiful girl!” he exclaimed. “And she has so sweet and ood an air! she is, without exception, the most charming girl that I have ever een in my life. Later on, she’ll have virtues with an odor of violets. How raceful! one cannot live otherwise than nobly with such a creature. Marius, my oy, you are a Baron, you are rich, don’t go to pettifogging, I beg of you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.4#Cosette and Marius had passed abruptly from the sepulchre to paradise. The ransition had not been softened, and they would have been stunned, had they not een dazzled by it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.5#“Do you understand anything about it?” said Marius to Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.6#“No,” replied Cosette, “but it seems to me that the good God is caring for s.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.7#Jean Valjean did everything, smoothed away every difficulty, arranged verything, made everything easy. He hastened towards Cosette’s happiness with s much ardor, and, apparently with as much joy, as Cosette herself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.8#As he had been a mayor, he understood how to solve that delicate problem, ith the secret of which he alone was acquainted, Cosette’s civil status. If he ere to announce her origin bluntly, it might prevent the marriage, who knows? e extricated Cosette from all difficulties. He concocted for her a family of ead people, a sure means of not encountering any objections. Cosette was the nly scion of an extinct family; Cosette was not his own daughter, but the aughter of the other Fauchelevent. Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardeners o the convent of the Petit-Picpus. Inquiry was made at that convent; the very est information and the most respectable references abounded; the good nuns, ot very apt and but little inclined to fathom questions of paternity, and not ttaching any importance to the matter, had never understood exactly of which of he two Fauchelevents Cosette was the daughter. They said what was wanted and hey said it with zeal. An _acte de notoriété_ was drawn up. Cosette became in he eyes of the law, Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent. She was declared an rphan, both father and mother being dead. Jean Valjean so arranged it that he as appointed, under the name of Fauchelevent, as Cosette’s guardian, with M. illenormand as supervising guardian over him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.9#As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs, they constituted a egacy bequeathed to Cosette by a dead person, who desired to remain unknown. he original legacy had consisted of five hundred and ninety-four thousand rancs; but ten thousand francs had been expended on the education of ademoiselle Euphrasie, five thousand francs of that amount having been paid to he convent. This legacy, deposited in the hands of a third party, was to be urned over to Cosette at her majority, or at the date of her marriage. This, aken as a whole, was very acceptable, as the reader will perceive, especially hen the sum due was half a million. There were some peculiarities here and here, it is true, but they were not noticed; one of the interested parties had is eyes blindfolded by love, the others by the six hundred thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.10#Cosette learned that she was not the daughter of that old man whom she had o long called father. He was merely a kinsman; another Fauchelevent was her eal father. At any other time this would have broken her heart. But at the neffable moment which she was then passing through, it cast but a slight hadow, a faint cloud, and she was so full of joy that the cloud did not last ong. She had Marius. The young man arrived, the old man was effaced; such is ife.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.11#And then, Cosette had, for long years, been habituated to seeing enigmas round her; every being who has had a mysterious childhood is always prepared or certain renunciations.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.12#Nevertheless, she continued to call Jean Valjean: Father.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.13#Cosette, happy as the angels, was enthusiastic over Father Gillenormand. t is true that he overwhelmed her with gallant compliments and presents. While ean Valjean was building up for Cosette a normal situation in society and an nassailable status, M. Gillenormand was superintending the basket of wedding ifts. Nothing so amused him as being magnificent. He had given to Cosette a obe of Binche guipure which had descended to him from his own grandmother.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.14#“These fashions come up again,” said he, “ancient things are the rage, and he young women of my old age dress like the old women of my childhood.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.15#He rifled his respectable chests of drawers in Coromandel lacquer, with welling fronts, which had not been opened for years.—“Let us hear the onfession of these dowagers,” he said, “let us see what they have in their aunches.” He noisily violated the pot-bellied drawers of all his wives, of all is mistresses and of all his grandmothers. Pekins, damasks, lampas, painted oires, robes of shot gros de Tours, India kerchiefs embroidered in gold that ould be washed, dauphines without a right or wrong side, in the piece, Genoa nd Alençon point lace, parures in antique goldsmith’s work, ivory bon-bon boxes rnamented with microscopic battles, gewgaws and ribbons—he lavished everything n Cosette. Cosette, amazed, desperately in love with Marius, and wild with ratitude towards M. Gillenormand, dreamed of a happiness without limit clothed n satin and velvet. Her wedding basket seemed to her to be upheld by seraphim. er soul flew out into the azure depths, with wings of Mechlin lace.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.16#The intoxication of the lovers was only equalled, as we have already said, y the ecstasy of the grandfather. A sort of flourish of trumpets went on in the ue des Filles-du-Calvaire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.17#Every morning, a fresh offering of bric-à-brac from the grandfather to osette. All possible knickknacks glittered around her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.18#One day Marius, who was fond of talking gravely in the midst of his bliss, aid, apropos of I know not what incident:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.19#“The men of the revolution are so great, that they have the prestige of he ages, like Cato and like Phocion, and each one of them seems to me an ntique memory.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.20#“Moire antique!” exclaimed the old gentleman. “Thanks, Marius. That is recisely the idea of which I was in search.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.21#And on the following day, a magnificent dress of tea-rose colored moire ntique was added to Cosette’s wedding presents.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.22#From these fripperies, the grandfather extracted a bit of wisdom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.23#“Love is all very well; but there must be something else to go with it. he useless must be mingled with happiness. Happiness is only the necessary. eason that enormously with the superfluous for me. A palace and her heart. Her eart and the Louvre. Her heart and the grand waterworks of Versailles. Give me y shepherdess and try to make her a duchess. Fetch me Phyllis crowned with orn-flowers, and add a hundred thousand francs income. Open for me a bucolic erspective as far as you can see, beneath a marble colonnade. I consent to the ucolic and also to the fairy spectacle of marble and gold. Dry happiness esembles dry bread. One eats, but one does not dine. I want the superfluous, he useless, the extravagant, excess, that which serves no purpose. I remember o have seen, in the Cathedral of Strasburg, a clock, as tall as a three-story ouse which marked the hours, which had the kindness to indicate the hour, but hich had not the air of being made for that; and which, after having struck idday, or midnight,—midday, the hour of the sun, or midnight, the hour of ove,—or any other hour that you like, gave you the moon and the stars, the arth and the sea, birds and fishes, Phœbus and Phœbe, and a host of things hich emerged from a niche, and the twelve apostles, and the Emperor Charles the ifth, and Éponine, and Sabinus, and a throng of little gilded goodmen, who layed on the trumpet to boot. Without reckoning delicious chimes which it prinkled through the air, on every occasion, without any one’s knowing why. Is petty bald clock-face which merely tells the hour equal to that? For my part, am of the opinion of the big clock of Strasburg, and I prefer it to the cuckoo lock from the Black Forest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.24#M. Gillenormand talked nonsense in connection with the wedding, and all he fripperies of the eighteenth century passed pell-mell through his ithyrambs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.25#“You are ignorant of the art of festivals. You do not know how to organize day of enjoyment in this age,” he exclaimed. “Your nineteenth century is weak. t lacks excess. It ignores the rich, it ignores the noble. In everything it is lean-shaven. Your third estate is insipid, colorless, odorless, and shapeless. he dreams of your bourgeois who set up, as they express it: a pretty boudoir reshly decorated, violet, ebony and calico. Make way! Make way! the Sieur urmudgeon is marrying Mademoiselle Clutch-penny. Sumptuousness and splendor. A ouis d’or has been stuck to a candle. There’s the epoch for you. My demand is hat I may flee from it beyond the Sarmatians. Ah! in 1787, I predict that all as lost, from the day when I beheld the Duc de Rohan, Prince de Léon, Duc de habot, Duc de Montbazon, Marquis de Soubise, Vicomte de Thouars, peer of rance, go to Longchamps in a tapecu! That has borne its fruits. In this entury, men attend to business, they gamble on ‘Change, they win money, they re stingy. People take care of their surfaces and varnish them; every one is ressed as though just out of a bandbox, washed, soaped, scraped, shaved, ombed, waked, smoothed, rubbed, brushed, cleaned on the outside, rreproachable, polished as a pebble, discreet, neat, and at the same time, eath of my life, in the depths of their consciences they have dung-heaps and esspools that are enough to make a cow-herd who blows his nose in his fingers, ecoil. I grant to this age the device: ‘Dirty Cleanliness.’ Don’t be vexed, arius, give me permission to speak; I say no evil of the people as you see, I m always harping on your people, but do look favorably on my dealing a bit of a lap to the bourgeoisie. I belong to it. He who loves well lashes well. hereupon, I say plainly, that nowadays people marry, but that they no longer now how to marry. Ah! it is true, I regret the grace of the ancient manners. I egret everything about them, their elegance, their chivalry, those courteous nd delicate ways, that joyous luxury which every one possessed, music forming art of the wedding, a symphony above stairs, a beating of drums below stairs, he dances, the joyous faces round the table, the fine-spun gallant compliments, he songs, the fireworks, the frank laughter, the devil’s own row, the huge nots of ribbon. I regret the bride’s garter. The bride’s garter is cousin to he girdle of Venus. On what does the war of Troy turn? On Helen’s garter, arbleu! Why did they fight, why did Diomed the divine break over the head of eriones that great brazen helmet of ten points? why did Achilles and Hector hew ach other up with vast blows of their lances? Because Helen allowed Paris to ake her garter. With Cosette’s garter, Homer would construct the _Iliad_. He ould put in his poem, a loquacious old fellow, like me, and he would call him estor. My friends, in bygone days, in those amiable days of yore, people arried wisely; they had a good contract, and then they had a good carouse. As oon as Cujas had taken his departure, Gamacho entered. But, in sooth! the tomach is an agreeable beast which demands its due, and which wants to have its edding also. People supped well, and had at table a beautiful neighbor without guimpe so that her throat was only moderately concealed. Oh! the large aughing mouths, and how gay we were in those days! youth was a bouquet; every oung man terminated in a branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses; whether he was a hepherd or a warrior; and if, by chance, one was a captain of dragoons, one ound means to call oneself Florian. People thought much of looking well. They mbroidered and tinted themselves. A bourgeois had the air of a flower, a arquis had the air of a precious stone. People had no straps to their boots, hey had no boots. They were spruce, shining, waved, lustrous, fluttering, ainty, coquettish, which did not at all prevent their wearing swords by their ides. The humming-bird has beak and claws. That was the day of the _Galland ndies_. One of the sides of that century was delicate, the other was agnificent; and by the green cabbages! people amused themselves. To-day, people re serious. The bourgeois is avaricious, the bourgeoise is a prude; your entury is unfortunate. People would drive away the Graces as being too low in he neck. Alas! beauty is concealed as though it were ugliness. Since the evolution, everything, including the ballet-dancers, has had its trousers; a ountebank dancer must be grave; your rigadoons are doctrinarian. It is ecessary to be majestic. People would be greatly annoyed if they did not carry heir chins in their cravats. The ideal of an urchin of twenty when he marries, s to resemble M. Royer-Collard. And do you know what one arrives at with that ajesty? at being petty. Learn this: joy is not only joyous; it is great. But be n love gayly then, what the deuce! marry, when you marry, with fever and iddiness, and tumult, and the uproar of happiness! Be grave in church, well and ood. But, as soon as the mass is finished, sarpejou! you must make a dream hirl around the bride. A marriage should be royal and chimerical; it should romenade its ceremony from the cathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup. have a horror of a paltry wedding. Ventregoulette! be in Olympus for that one ay, at least. Be one of the gods. Ah! people might be sylphs. Games and aughter, argiraspides; they are stupids. My friends, every recently made ridegroom ought to be Prince Aldobrandini. Profit by that unique minute in life o soar away to the empyrean with the swans and the eagles, even if you do have o fall back on the morrow into the bourgeoisie of the frogs. Don’t economize on he nuptials, do not prune them of their splendors; don’t scrimp on the day when ou beam. The wedding is not the housekeeping. Oh! if I were to carry out my ancy, it would be gallant, violins would be heard under the trees. Here is my rogramme: sky-blue and silver. I would mingle with the festival the rural ivinities, I would convoke the Dryads and the Nereids. The nuptials of mphitrite, a rosy cloud, nymphs with well dressed locks and entirely naked, an cademician offering quatrains to the goddess, a chariot drawn by marine onsters.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.26#“Triton trottait devant, et tirait de sa conque Des sons si ravissants u’il ravissait quiconque!”65
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.27#—there’s a festive programme, there’s a good one, or else I know nothing f such matters, deuce take it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.28#While the grandfather, in full lyrical effusion, was listening to himself, osette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely at each other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.29#Aunt Gillenormand surveyed all this with her imperturbable placidity. ithin the last five or six months she had experienced a certain amount of motions. Marius returned, Marius brought back bleeding, Marius brought back rom a barricade, Marius dead, then living, Marius reconciled, Marius betrothed, arius wedding a poor girl, Marius wedding a millionairess. The six hundred housand francs had been her last surprise. Then, her indifference of a girl aking her first communion returned to her. She went regularly to service, told er beads, read her euchology, mumbled _Aves_ in one corner of the house, while I love you_ was being whispered in the other, and she beheld Marius and Cosette n a vague way, like two shadows. The shadow was herself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.30#There is a certain state of inert asceticism in which the soul, eutralized by torpor, a stranger to that which may be designated as the usiness of living, receives no impressions, either human, or pleasant or ainful, with the exception of earthquakes and catastrophes. This devotion, as ather Gillenormand said to his daughter, corresponds to a cold in the head. You mell nothing of life. Neither any bad, nor any good odor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.31#Moreover, the six hundred thousand francs had settled the elderly pinster’s indecision. Her father had acquired the habit of taking her so little nto account, that he had not consulted her in the matter of consent to Marius’ arriage. He had acted impetuously, according to his wont, having, a espot-turned slave, but a single thought,—to satisfy Marius. As for the unt,—it had not even occurred to him that the aunt existed, and that she could ave an opinion of her own, and, sheep as she was, this had vexed her. Somewhat esentful in her inmost soul, but impassible externally, she had said to erself: “My father has settled the question of the marriage without reference o me; I shall settle the question of the inheritance without consulting him.” he was rich, in fact, and her father was not. She had reserved her decision on his point. It is probable that, had the match been a poor one, she would have eft him poor. “So much the worse for my nephew! he is wedding a beggar, let him e a beggar himself!” But Cosette’s half-million pleased the aunt, and altered er inward situation so far as this pair of lovers were concerned. One owes some onsideration to six hundred thousand francs, and it was evident that she could ot do otherwise than leave her fortune to these young people, since they did ot need it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.32#It was arranged that the couple should live with the grandfather—M. illenormand insisted on resigning to them his chamber, the finest in the house. That will make me young again,” he said. “It’s an old plan of mine. I have lways entertained the idea of having a wedding in my chamber.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.33#He furnished this chamber with a multitude of elegant trifles. He had the eiling and walls hung with an extraordinary stuff, which he had by him in the iece, and which he believed to have emanated from Utrecht with a uttercup-colored satin ground, covered with velvet auricula blossoms.—“It was ith that stuff,” said he, “that the bed of the Duchesse d’Anville at la oche-Guyon was draped.”—On the chimney-piece, he set a little figure in Saxe orcelain, carrying a muff against her nude stomach.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.6.34#M. Gillenormand’s library became the lawyer’s study, which Marius needed; study, it will be remembered, being required by the council of the order.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.head#CHAPTER VII—THE EFFECTS OF DREAMS MINGLED WITH HAPPINESS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.1#The lovers saw each other every day. Cosette came with M. auchelevent.—“This is reversing things,” said Mademoiselle Gillenormand, “to ave the bride come to the house to do the courting like this.” But Marius’ onvalescence had caused the habit to become established, and the armchairs of he Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, better adapted to interviews than the straw hairs of the Rue de l’Homme Armé, had rooted it. Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw ach other, but did not address each other. It seemed as though this had been greed upon. Every girl needs a chaperon. Cosette could not have come without M. auchelevent. In Marius’ eyes, M. Fauchelevent was the condition attached to osette. He accepted it. By dint of discussing political matters, vaguely and ithout precision, from the point of view of the general amelioration of the ate of all men, they came to say a little more than “yes” and “no.” Once, on he subject of education, which Marius wished to have free and obligatory, ultiplied under all forms lavished on every one, like the air and the sun in a ord, respirable for the entire population, they were in unison, and they almost onversed. M. Fauchelevent talked well, and even with a certain loftiness of anguage—still he lacked something indescribable. M. Fauchelevent possessed omething less and also something more, than a man of the world.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.2#Marius, inwardly, and in the depths of his thought, surrounded with all orts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent, who was to him simply benevolent nd cold. There were moments when doubts as to his own recollections occurred to im. There was a void in his memory, a black spot, an abyss excavated by four onths of agony.—Many things had been lost therein. He had come to the point of sking himself whether it were really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent, o serious and so calm a man, in the barricade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.3#This was not, however, the only stupor which the apparitions and the isappearances of the past had left in his mind. It must not be supposed that he as delivered from all those obsessions of the memory which force us, even when appy, even when satisfied, to glance sadly behind us. The head which does not urn backwards towards horizons that have vanished contains neither thought nor ove. At times, Marius clasped his face between his hands, and the vague and umultuous past traversed the twilight which reigned in his brain. Again he eheld Mabeuf fall, he heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot, he felt eneath his lips the cold brow of Éponine; Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, ombeferre, Bossuet, Grantaire, all his friends rose erect before him, then ispersed into thin air. Were all those dear, sorrowful, valiant, charming or ragic beings merely dreams? had they actually existed? The revolt had enveloped verything in its smoke. These great fevers create great dreams. He questioned imself; he felt himself; all these vanished realities made him dizzy. Where ere they all then? was it really true that all were dead? A fall into the hadows had carried off all except himself. It all seemed to him to have isappeared as though behind the curtain of a theatre. There are curtains like his which drop in life. God passes on to the following act.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.4#And he himself—was he actually the same man? He, the poor man, was rich; e, the abandoned, had a family; he, the despairing, was to marry Cosette. It eemed to him that he had traversed a tomb, and that he had entered into it lack and had emerged from it white, and in that tomb the others had remained. t certain moments, all these beings of the past, returned and present, formed a ircle around him, and overshadowed him; then he thought of Cosette, and ecovered his serenity; but nothing less than this felicity could have sufficed o efface that catastrophe.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.5#M. Fauchelevent almost occupied a place among these vanished beings. Marius esitated to believe that the Fauchelevent of the barricade was the same as this auchelevent in flesh and blood, sitting so gravely beside Cosette. The first as, probably, one of those nightmares occasioned and brought back by his hours f delirium. However, the natures of both men were rigid, no question from arius to M. Fauchelevent was possible. Such an idea had not even occurred to im. We have already indicated this characteristic detail.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.6#Two men who have a secret in common, and who, by a sort of tacit agreement, xchange not a word on the subject, are less rare than is commonly supposed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.7#Once only, did Marius make the attempt. He introduced into the conversation he Rue de la Chanvrerie, and, turning to M. Fauchelevent, he said to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.8#“Of course, you are acquainted with that street?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.9#“What street?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.10#“The Rue de la Chanvrerie.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.11#“I have no idea of the name of that street,” replied M. Fauchelevent, in he most natural manner in the world.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.12#The response which bore upon the name of the street and not upon the treet itself, appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it really was.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.7.13#“Decidedly,” thought he, “I have been dreaming. I have been subject to a allucination. It was some one who resembled him. M. Fauchelevent was not here.”’
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.head#CHAPTER VIII—TWO MEN IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.1#Marius’ enchantment, great as it was, could not efface from his mind other re-occupations.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.2#While the wedding was in preparation, and while awaiting the date fixed pon, he caused difficult and scrupulous retrospective researches to be ade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.3#He owed gratitude in various quarters; he owed it on his father’s account, e owed it on his own.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.4#There was Thénardier; there was the unknown man who had brought him, arius, back to M. Gillenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.5#Marius endeavored to find these two men, not intending to marry, to be appy, and to forget them, and fearing that, were these debts of gratitude not ischarged, they would leave a shadow on his life, which promised so brightly or the future.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.6#It was impossible for him to leave all these arrears of suffering behind im, and he wished, before entering joyously into the future, to obtain a uittance from the past.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.7#That Thénardier was a villain detracted nothing from the fact that he had aved Colonel Pontmercy. Thénardier was a ruffian in the eyes of all the world xcept Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.8#And Marius, ignorant of the real scene in the battle field of Waterloo, was ot aware of the peculiar detail, that his father, so far as Thénardier was oncerned was in the strange position of being indebted to the latter for his ife, without being indebted to him for any gratitude.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.9#None of the various agents whom Marius employed succeeded in discovering ny trace of Thénardier. Obliteration appeared to be complete in that quarter. adame Thénardier had died in prison pending the trial. Thénardier and his aughter Azelma, the only two remaining of that lamentable group, had plunged ack into the gloom. The gulf of the social unknown had silently closed above hose beings. On the surface there was not visible so much as that quiver, that rembling, those obscure concentric circles which announce that something has allen in, and that the plummet may be dropped.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.10#Madame Thénardier being dead, Boulatruelle being eliminated from the case, laquesous having disappeared, the principal persons accused having escaped from rison, the trial connected with the ambush in the Gorbeau house had come to othing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.11#That affair had remained rather obscure. The bench of Assizes had been bliged to content themselves with two subordinates. Panchaud, alias Printanier, lias Bigrenaille, and Demi-Liard, alias Deux-Milliards, who had been nconsistently condemned, after a hearing of both sides of the case, to ten ears in the galleys. Hard labor for life had been the sentence pronounced gainst the escaped and contumacious accomplices.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.12#Thénardier, the head and leader, had been, through contumacy, likewise ondemned to death.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.13#This sentence was the only information remaining about Thénardier, casting pon that buried name its sinister light like a candle beside a bier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.14#Moreover, by thrusting Thénardier back into the very remotest depths, hrough a fear of being re-captured, this sentence added to the density of the hadows which enveloped this man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.15#As for the other person, as for the unknown man who had saved Marius, the esearches were at first to some extent successful, then came to an abrupt onclusion. They succeeded in finding the carriage which had brought Marius to he Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire on the evening of the 6th of June.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.16#The coachman declared that, on the 6th of June, in obedience to the ommands of a police-agent, he had stood from three o’clock in the afternoon ntil nightfall on the Quai des Champs-Élysées, above the outlet of the Grand ewer; that, towards nine o’clock in the evening, the grating of the sewer, hich abuts on the bank of the river, had opened; that a man had emerged herefrom, bearing on his shoulders another man, who seemed to be dead; that the gent, who was on the watch at that point, had arrested the living man and had eized the dead man; that, at the order of the police-agent, he, the coachman, ad taken “all those folks” into his carriage; that they had first driven to the ue des Filles-du-Calvaire; that they had there deposited the dead man; that the ead man was Monsieur Marius, and that he, the coachman, recognized him erfectly, although he was alive “this time”; that afterwards, they had entered he vehicle again, that he had whipped up his horses; a few paces from the gate f the Archives, they had called to him to halt; that there, in the street, they ad paid him and left him, and that the police-agent had led the other man away; hat he knew nothing more; that the night had been very dark.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.17#Marius, as we have said, recalled nothing. He only remembered that he had een seized from behind by an energetic hand at the moment when he was falling ackwards into the barricade; then, everything vanished so far as he was oncerned.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.18#He had only regained consciousness at M. Gillenormand’s.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.19#He was lost in conjectures.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.20#He could not doubt his own identity. Still, how had it come to pass that, aving fallen in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, he had been picked up by the olice-agent on the banks of the Seine, near the Pont des Invalides?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.21#Some one had carried him from the Quartier des Halles to the hamps-Élysées. And how? Through the sewer. Unheard-of devotion!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.22#Some one? Who?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.23#This was the man for whom Marius was searching.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.24#Of this man, who was his savior, nothing; not a trace; not the faintest ndication.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.25#Marius, although forced to preserve great reserve, in that direction, ushed his inquiries as far as the prefecture of police. There, no more than lsewhere, did the information obtained lead to any enlightenment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.26#The prefecture knew less about the matter than did the hackney-coachman. hey had no knowledge of any arrest having been made on the 6th of June at the outh of the Grand Sewer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.27#No report of any agent had been received there upon this matter, which was egarded at the prefecture as a fable. The invention of this fable was ttributed to the coachman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.28#A coachman who wants a gratuity is capable of anything, even of magination. The fact was assured, nevertheless, and Marius could not doubt it, nless he doubted his own identity, as we have just said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.29#Everything about this singular enigma was inexplicable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.30#What had become of that man, that mysterious man, whom the coachman had een emerge from the grating of the Grand Sewer bearing upon his back the nconscious Marius, and whom the police-agent on the watch had arrested in the ery act of rescuing an insurgent? What had become of the agent himself?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.31#Why had this agent preserved silence? Had the man succeeded in making his scape? Had he bribed the agent? Why did this man give no sign of life to arius, who owed everything to him? His disinterestedness was no less tremendous han his devotion. Why had not that man appeared again? Perhaps he was above ompensation, but no one is above gratitude. Was he dead? Who was the man? What ort of a face had he? No one could tell him this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.32#The coachman answered: “The night was very dark.” Basque and Nicolette, ll in a flutter, had looked only at their young master all covered with lood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.33#The porter, whose candle had lighted the tragic arrival of Marius, had een the only one to take note of the man in question, and this is the escription that he gave:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.34#“That man was terrible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.35#Marius had the blood-stained clothing which he had worn when he had been rought back to his grandfather preserved, in the hope that it would prove of ervice in his researches.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.36#On examining the coat, it was found that one skirt had been torn in a ingular way. A piece was missing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.37#One evening, Marius was speaking in the presence of Cosette and Jean aljean of the whole of that singular adventure, of the innumerable inquiries hich he had made, and of the fruitlessness of his efforts. The cold countenance f “Monsieur Fauchelevent” angered him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.38#He exclaimed, with a vivacity which had something of wrath in it:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.39#“Yes, that man, whoever he may have been, was sublime. Do you know what he id, sir? He intervened like an archangel. He must have flung himself into the idst of the battle, have stolen me away, have opened the sewer, have dragged me nto it and have carried me through it! He must have traversed more than a eague and a half in those frightful subterranean galleries, bent over, weighed own, in the dark, in the cesspool,—more than a league and a half, sir, with a orpse upon his back! And with what object? With the sole object of saving the orpse. And that corpse I was. He said to himself: ‘There may still be a glimpse f life there, perchance; I will risk my own existence for that miserable park!’ And his existence he risked not once but twenty times! And every step as a danger. The proof of it is, that on emerging from the sewer, he was rrested. Do you know, sir, that that man did all this? And he had no recompense o expect. What was I? An insurgent. What was I? One of the conquered. Oh! if osette’s six hundred thousand francs were mine….”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.40#“They are yours,” interrupted Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.41#“Well,” resumed Marius, “I would give them all to find that man once ore.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.5.8.42#Jean Valjean remained silent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.head#BOOK SIXTH—THE SLEEPLESS NIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE 16TH OF FEBRUARY, 1833
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.1#The night of the 16th to the 17th of February, 1833, was a blessed night. bove its shadows heaven stood open. It was the wedding night of Marius and osette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.2#The day had been adorable.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.3#It had not been the grand festival dreamed by the grandfather, a fairy pectacle, with a confusion of cherubim and Cupids over the heads of the bridal air, a marriage worthy to form the subject of a painting to be placed over a oor; but it had been sweet and smiling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.4#The manner of marriage in 1833 was not the same as it is to-day. France had ot yet borrowed from England that supreme delicacy of carrying off one’s wife, f fleeing, on coming out of church, of hiding oneself with shame from one’s appiness, and of combining the ways of a bankrupt with the delights of the Song f Songs. People had not yet grasped to the full the chastity, exquisiteness, nd decency of jolting their paradise in a posting-chaise, of breaking up their ystery with clic-clacs, of taking for a nuptial bed the bed of an inn, and of eaving behind them, in a commonplace chamber, at so much a night, the most acred of the souvenirs of life mingled pell-mell with the tête-à-tête of the onductor of the diligence and the maid-servant of the inn.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.5#In this second half of the nineteenth century in which we are now living, he mayor and his scarf, the priest and his chasuble, the law and God no longer uffice; they must be eked out by the Postilion de Lonjumeau; a blue waistcoat urned up with red, and with bell buttons, a plaque like a vantbrace, nee-breeches of green leather, oaths to the Norman horses with their tails notted up, false galloons, varnished hat, long powdered locks, an enormous whip nd tall boots. France does not yet carry elegance to the length of doing like he English nobility, and raining down on the post-chaise of the bridal pair a ail storm of slippers trodden down at heel and of worn-out shoes, in memory of hurchill, afterwards Marlborough, or Malbrouck, who was assailed on his edding-day by the wrath of an aunt which brought him good luck. Old shoes and lippers do not, as yet, form a part of our nuptial celebrations; but patience, s good taste continues to spread, we shall come to that.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.6#In 1833, a hundred years ago, marriage was not conducted at a full rot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.7#Strange to say, at that epoch, people still imagined that a wedding was a rivate and social festival, that a patriarchal banquet does not spoil a omestic solemnity, that gayety, even in excess, provided it be honest, and ecent, does happiness no harm, and that, in short, it is a good and a venerable hing that the fusion of these two destinies whence a family is destined to pring, should begin at home, and that the household should thenceforth have its uptial chamber as its witness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.8#And people were so immodest as to marry in their own homes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.9#The marriage took place, therefore, in accordance with this now uperannuated fashion, at M. Gillenormand’s house.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.10#Natural and commonplace as this matter of marrying is, the banns to ublish, the papers to be drawn up, the mayoralty, and the church produce some omplication. They could not get ready before the 16th of February.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.11#Now, we note this detail, for the pure satisfaction of being exact, it hanced that the 16th fell on Shrove Tuesday. Hesitations, scruples, articularly on the part of Aunt Gillenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.12#“Shrove Tuesday!” exclaimed the grandfather, “so much the better. There is proverb:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.13#“‘Mariage un Mardi gras N’aura point enfants ingrats.‘66
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.14#Let us proceed. Here goes for the 16th! Do you want to delay, Marius?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.15#“No, certainly not!” replied the lover.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.16#“Let us marry, then,” cried the grandfather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.17#Accordingly, the marriage took place on the 16th, notwithstanding the ublic merrymaking. It rained that day, but there is always in the sky a tiny crap of blue at the service of happiness, which lovers see, even when the rest f creation is under an umbrella.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.18#On the preceding evening, Jean Valjean handed to Marius, in the presence f M. Gillenormand, the five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.19#As the marriage was taking place under the régime of community of roperty, the papers had been simple.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.20#Henceforth, Toussaint was of no use to Jean Valjean; Cosette inherited her nd promoted her to the rank of lady’s maid.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.21#As for Jean Valjean, a beautiful chamber in the Gillenormand house had een furnished expressly for him, and Cosette had said to him in such an rresistible manner: “Father, I entreat you,” that she had almost persuaded him o promise that he would come and occupy it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.22#A few days before that fixed on for the marriage, an accident happened to ean Valjean; he crushed the thumb of his right hand. This was not a serious atter; and he had not allowed any one to trouble himself about it, nor to dress t, nor even to see his hurt, not even Cosette. Nevertheless, this had forced im to swathe his hand in a linen bandage, and to carry his arm in a sling, and ad prevented his signing. M. Gillenormand, in his capacity of Cosette’s upervising-guardian, had supplied his place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.23#We will not conduct the reader either to the mayor’s office or to the hurch. One does not follow a pair of lovers to that extent, and one is ccustomed to turn one’s back on the drama as soon as it puts a wedding nosegay n its buttonhole. We will confine ourselves to noting an incident which, though nnoticed by the wedding party, marked the transit from the Rue des illes-du-Calvaire to the church of Saint-Paul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.24#At that epoch, the northern extremity of the Rue Saint-Louis was in rocess of repaving. It was barred off, beginning with the Rue du Parc-Royal. It as impossible for the wedding carriages to go directly to Saint-Paul. They were bliged to alter their course, and the simplest way was to turn through the oulevard. One of the invited guests observed that it was Shrove Tuesday, and hat there would be a jam of vehicles.—“Why?” asked M. Gillenormand—“Because of he maskers.”—“Capital,” said the grandfather, “let us go that way. These young olks are on the way to be married; they are about to enter the serious part of ife. This will prepare them for seeing a bit of the masquerade.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.25#They went by way of the boulevard. The first wedding coach held Cosette nd Aunt Gillenormand, M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean. Marius, still separated rom his betrothed according to usage, did not come until the second. The uptial train, on emerging from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, became entangled n a long procession of vehicles which formed an endless chain from the adeleine to the Bastille, and from the Bastille to the Madeleine. Maskers bounded on the boulevard. In spite of the fact that it was raining at ntervals, Merry-Andrew, Pantaloon and Clown persisted. In the good humor of hat winter of 1833, Paris had disguised itself as Venice. Such Shrove Tuesdays re no longer to be seen nowadays. Everything which exists being a scattered arnival, there is no longer any Carnival.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.26#The sidewalks were overflowing with pedestrians and the windows with urious spectators. The terraces which crown the peristyles of the theatres were ordered with spectators. Besides the maskers, they stared at that rocession—peculiar to Shrove Tuesday as to Longchamps,—of vehicles of every escription, citadines, tapissières, carioles, cabriolets marching in order, igorously riveted to each other by the police regulations, and locked into ails, as it were. Any one in these vehicles is at once a spectator and a pectacle. Police sergeants maintained, on the sides of the boulevard, these two nterminable parallel files, moving in contrary directions, and saw to it that othing interfered with that double current, those two brooks of carriages, lowing, the one downstream, the other upstream, the one towards the Chaussée ’Antin, the other towards the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. The carriages of the eers of France and of the Ambassadors, emblazoned with coats of arms, held the iddle of the way, going and coming freely. Certain joyous and magnificent rains, notably that of the Bœuf Gras, had the same privilege. In this gayety of aris, England cracked her whip; Lord Seymour’s post-chaise, harassed by a ickname from the populace, passed with great noise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.27#In the double file, along which the municipal guards galloped like heep-dogs, honest family coaches, loaded down with great-aunts and randmothers, displayed at their doors fresh groups of children in disguise, lowns of seven years of age, Columbines of six, ravishing little creatures, who elt that they formed an official part of the public mirth, who were imbued with he dignity of their harlequinade, and who possessed the gravity of unctionaries.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.28#From time to time, a hitch arose somewhere in the procession of vehicles; ne or other of the two lateral files halted until the knot was disentangled; ne carriage delayed sufficed to paralyze the whole line. Then they set out gain on the march.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.29#The wedding carriages were in the file proceeding towards the Bastille, nd skirting the right side of the Boulevard. At the top of the Pont-aux-Choux, here was a stoppage. Nearly at the same moment, the other file, which was roceeding towards the Madeleine, halted also. At that point of the file there as a carriage-load of maskers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.30#These carriages, or to speak more correctly, these wagon-loads of maskers re very familiar to Parisians. If they were missing on a Shrove Tuesday, or at he Mid-Lent, it would be taken in bad part, and people would say: “There’s omething behind that. Probably the ministry is about to undergo a change.” A ile of Cassandras, Harlequins and Columbines, jolted along high above the assers-by, all possible grotesquenesses, from the Turk to the savage, Hercules upporting Marquises, fishwives who would have made Rabelais stop up his ears ust as the Mænads made Aristophanes drop his eyes, tow wigs, pink tights, andified hats, spectacles of a grimacer, three-cornered hats of Janot tormented ith a butterfly, shouts directed at pedestrians, fists on hips, bold attitudes, are shoulders, immodesty unchained; a chaos of shamelessness driven by a oachman crowned with flowers; this is what that institution was like.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.31#Greece stood in need of the chariot of Thespis, France stands in need of he hackney-coach of Vadé.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.32#Everything can be parodied, even parody. The Saturnalia, that grimace of ntique beauty, ends, through exaggeration after exaggeration, in Shrove uesday; and the Bacchanal, formerly crowned with sprays of vine leaves and rapes, inundated with sunshine, displaying her marble breast in a divine emi-nudity, having at the present day lost her shape under the soaked rags of he North, has finally come to be called the Jack-pudding.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.33#The tradition of carriage-loads of maskers runs back to the most ancient ays of the monarchy. The accounts of Louis XI. allot to the bailiff of the alace “twenty sous, Tournois, for three coaches of mascarades in the rossroads.” In our day, these noisy heaps of creatures are accustomed to have hemselves driven in some ancient cuckoo carriage, whose imperial they load own, or they overwhelm a hired landau, with its top thrown back, with their umultuous groups. Twenty of them ride in a carriage intended for six. They ling to the seats, to the rumble, on the cheeks of the hood, on the shafts. hey even bestride the carriage lamps. They stand, sit, lie, with their knees rawn up in a knot, and their legs hanging. The women sit on the men’s laps. Far way, above the throng of heads, their wild pyramid is visible. These arriage-loads form mountains of mirth in the midst of the rout. Collé, Panard nd Piron flow from it, enriched with slang. This carriage which has become olossal through its freight, has an air of conquest. Uproar reigns in front, umult behind. People vociferate, shout, howl, there they break forth and writhe ith enjoyment; gayety roars; sarcasm flames forth, joviality is flaunted like a ed flag; two jades there drag farce blossomed forth into an apotheosis; it is he triumphal car of laughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.34#A laughter that is too cynical to be frank. In truth, this laughter is uspicious. This laughter has a mission. It is charged with proving the Carnival o the Parisians.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.35#These fishwife vehicles, in which one feels one knows not what shadows, et the philosopher to thinking. There is government therein. There one lays ne’s finger on a mysterious affinity between public men and public women.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.36#It certainly is sad that turpitude heaped up should give a sum total of ayety, that by piling ignominy upon opprobrium the people should be enticed, hat the system of spying, and serving as caryatids to prostitution should amuse he rabble when it confronts them, that the crowd loves to behold that monstrous iving pile of tinsel rags, half dung, half light, roll by on four wheels owling and laughing, that they should clap their hands at this glory composed f all shames, that there would be no festival for the populace, did not the olice promenade in their midst these sorts of twenty-headed hydras of joy. But hat can be done about it? These be-ribboned and be-flowered tumbrils of mire re insulted and pardoned by the laughter of the public. The laughter of all is he accomplice of universal degradation. Certain unhealthy festivals isaggregate the people and convert them into the populace. And populaces, like yrants, require buffoons. The King has Roquelaure, the populace has the erry-Andrew. Paris is a great, mad city on every occasion that it is a great ublime city. There the Carnival forms part of politics. Paris,—let us confess t—willingly allows infamy to furnish it with comedy. She only demands of her asters—when she has masters—one thing: “Paint me the mud.” Rome was of the same ind. She loved Nero. Nero was a titanic lighterman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.37#Chance ordained, as we have just said, that one of these shapeless lusters of masked men and women, dragged about on a vast calash, should halt on he left of the boulevard, while the wedding train halted on the right. The arriage-load of masks caught sight of the wedding carriage containing the ridal party opposite them on the other side of the boulevard.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.38#“Hullo!” said a masker, “here’s a wedding.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.39#“A sham wedding,” retorted another. “We are the genuine article.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.40#And, being too far off to accost the wedding party, and fearing also, the ebuke of the police, the two maskers turned their eyes elsewhere.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.41#At the end of another minute, the carriage-load of maskers had their hands ull, the multitude set to yelling, which is the crowd’s caress to masquerades; nd the two maskers who had just spoken had to face the throng with their omrades, and did not find the entire repertory of projectiles of the ishmarkets too extensive to retort to the enormous verbal attacks of the opulace. A frightful exchange of metaphors took place between the maskers and he crowd.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.42#In the meanwhile, two other maskers in the same carriage, a Spaniard with n enormous nose, an elderly air, and huge black moustache, and a gaunt ishwife, who was quite a young girl, masked with a _loup_,67 had also noticed he wedding, and while their companions and the passers-by were exchanging nsults, they had held a dialogue in a low voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.43#Their aside was covered by the tumult and was lost in it. The gusts of ain had drenched the front of the vehicle, which was wide open; the breezes of ebruary are not warm; as the fishwife, clad in a low-necked gown, replied to he Spaniard, she shivered, laughed and coughed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.44#Here is their dialogue:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.45#“Say, now.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.46#“What, daddy?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.47#“Do you see that old cove?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.48#“What old cove?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.49#“Yonder, in the first wedding-cart, on our side.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.50#“The one with his arm hung up in a black cravat?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.51#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.52#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.53#“I’m sure that I know him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.54#“Ah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.55#“I’m willing that they should cut my throat, and I’m ready to swear that I ever said either you, thou, or I, in my life, if I don’t know that Parisian.” _pantinois_.]
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.56#“Paris in Pantin to-day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.57#“Can you see the bride if you stoop down?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.58#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.59#“And the bridegroom?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.60#“There’s no bridegroom in that trap.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.61#“Bah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.62#“Unless it’s the old fellow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.63#“Try to get a sight of the bride by stooping very low.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.64#“I can’t.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.65#“Never mind, that old cove who has something the matter with his paw I now, and that I’m positive.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.66#“And what good does it do to know him?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.67#“No one can tell. Sometimes it does!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.68#“I don’t care a hang for old fellows, that I don’t!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.69#“I know him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.70#“Know him, if you want to.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.71#“How the devil does he come to be one of the wedding party?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.72#“We are in it, too.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.73#“Where does that wedding come from?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.74#“How should I know?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.75#“Listen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.76#“Well, what?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.77#“There’s one thing you ought to do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.78#“What’s that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.79#“Get off of our trap and spin that wedding.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.80#“What for?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.81#“To find out where it goes, and what it is. Hurry up and jump down, trot, y girl, your legs are young.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.82#“I can’t quit the vehicle.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.83#“Why not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.84#“I’m hired.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.85#“Ah, the devil!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.86#“I owe my fishwife day to the prefecture.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.87#“That’s true.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.88#“If I leave the cart, the first inspector who gets his eye on me will rrest me. You know that well enough.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.89#“Yes, I do.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.90#“I’m bought by the government for to-day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.91#“All the same, that old fellow bothers me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.92#“Do the old fellows bother you? But you’re not a young girl.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.93#“He’s in the first carriage.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.94#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.95#“In the bride’s trap.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.96#“What then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.97#“So he is the father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.98#“What concern is that of mine?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.99#“I tell you that he’s the father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.100#“As if he were the only father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.101#“Listen.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.102#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.103#“I can’t go out otherwise than masked. Here I’m concealed, no one knows hat I’m here. But to-morrow, there will be no more maskers. It’s Ash Wednesday. run the risk of being nabbed. I must sneak back into my hole. But you are ree.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.104#“Not particularly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.105#“More than I am, at any rate.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.106#“Well, what of that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.107#“You must try to find out where that wedding party went to.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.108#“Where it went?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.109#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.110#“I know.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.111#“Where is it going then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.112#“To the Cadran-Bleu.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.113#“In the first place, it’s not in that direction.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.114#“Well! to la Rapée.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.115#“Or elsewhere.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.116#“It’s free. Wedding parties are at liberty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.117#“That’s not the point at all. I tell you that you must try to learn for e what that wedding is, who that old cove belongs to, and where that wedding air lives.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.118#“I like that! that would be queer. It’s so easy to find out a wedding arty that passed through the street on a Shrove Tuesday, a week afterwards. A in in a hay-mow! It ain’t possible!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.119#“That don’t matter. You must try. You understand me, Azelma.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.1.120#The two files resumed their movement on both sides of the boulevard, in pposite directions, and the carriage of the maskers lost sight of the “trap” of he bride.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.head#CHAPTER II—JEAN VALJEAN STILL WEARS HIS ARM IN A SLING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.1#To realize one’s dream. To whom is this accorded? There must be elections or this in heaven; we are all candidates, unknown to ourselves; the angels ote. Cosette and Marius had been elected.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.2#Cosette, both at the mayor’s office and at church, was dazzling and ouching. Toussaint, assisted by Nicolette, had dressed her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.3#Cosette wore over a petticoat of white taffeta, her robe of Binche guipure, veil of English point, a necklace of fine pearls, a wreath of orange flowers; ll this was white, and, from the midst of that whiteness she beamed forth. It as an exquisite candor expanding and becoming transfigured in the light. One ould have pronounced her a virgin on the point of turning into a goddess.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.4#Marius’ handsome hair was lustrous and perfumed; here and there, beneath he thick curls, pale lines—the scars of the barricade—were visible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.5#The grandfather, haughty, with head held high, amalgamating more than ever n his toilet and his manners all the elegances of the epoch of Barras, escorted osette. He took the place of Jean Valjean, who, on account of his arm being till in a sling, could not give his hand to the bride.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.6#Jean Valjean, dressed in black, followed them with a smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.7#“Monsieur Fauchelevent,” said the grandfather to him, “this is a fine day. vote for the end of afflictions and sorrows. Henceforth, there must be no adness anywhere. Pardieu, I decree joy! Evil has no right to exist. That there hould be any unhappy men is, in sooth, a disgrace to the azure of the sky. Evil oes not come from man, who is good at bottom. All human miseries have for their apital and central government hell, otherwise, known as the Devil’s Tuileries. ood, here I am uttering demagogical words! As far as I am concerned, I have no onger any political opinions; let all men be rich, that is to say, mirthful, nd I confine myself to that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.8#When, at the conclusion of all the ceremonies, after having pronounced efore the mayor and before the priest all possible “yesses,” after having igned the registers at the municipality and at the sacristy, after having xchanged their rings, after having knelt side by side under the pall of white oire in the smoke of the censer, they arrived, hand in hand, admired and envied y all, Marius in black, she in white, preceded by the suisse, with the epaulets f a colonel, tapping the pavement with his halberd, between two rows of stonished spectators, at the portals of the church, both leaves of which were hrown wide open, ready to enter their carriage again, and all being finished, osette still could not believe that it was real. She looked at Marius, she ooked at the crowd, she looked at the sky: it seemed as though she feared that he should wake up from her dream. Her amazed and uneasy air added something ndescribably enchanting to her beauty. They entered the same carriage to return ome, Marius beside Cosette; M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean sat opposite them; unt Gillenormand had withdrawn one degree, and was in the second vehicle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.9#“My children,” said the grandfather, “here you are, Monsieur le Baron and adame la Baronne, with an income of thirty thousand livres.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.10#And Cosette, nestling close to Marius, caressed his ear with an angelic hisper: “So it is true. My name is Marius. I am Madame Thou.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.11#These two creatures were resplendent. They had reached that irrevocable nd irrecoverable moment, at the dazzling intersection of all youth and all joy. hey realized the verses of Jean Prouvaire; they were forty years old taken ogether. It was marriage sublimated; these two children were two lilies. They id not see each other, they did not contemplate each other. Cosette perceived arius in the midst of a glory; Marius perceived Cosette on an altar. And on hat altar, and in that glory, the two apotheoses mingling, in the background, ne knows not how, behind a cloud for Cosette, in a flash for Marius, there was he ideal thing, the real thing, the meeting of the kiss and the dream, the uptial pillow. All the torments through which they had passed came back to them n intoxication. It seemed to them that their sorrows, their sleepless nights, heir tears, their anguish, their terrors, their despair, converted into aresses and rays of light, rendered still more charming the charming hour which as approaching; and that their griefs were but so many handmaidens who were reparing the toilet of joy. How good it is to have suffered! Their unhappiness ormed a halo round their happiness. The long agony of their love was erminating in an ascension.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.12#It was the same enchantment in two souls, tinged with voluptuousness in arius, and with modesty in Cosette. They said to each other in low tones: “We ill go back to take a look at our little garden in the Rue Plumet.” The folds f Cosette’s gown lay across Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.13#Such a day is an ineffable mixture of dream and of reality. One possesses nd one supposes. One still has time before one to divine. The emotion on that ay, of being at midday and of dreaming of midnight is indescribable. The elights of these two hearts overflowed upon the crowd, and inspired the assers-by with cheerfulness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.14#People halted in the Rue Saint-Antoine, in front of Saint-Paul, to gaze hrough the windows of the carriage at the orange-flowers quivering on Cosette’s ead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.15#Then they returned home to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire. Marius, riumphant and radiant, mounted side by side with Cosette the staircase up which e had been borne in a dying condition. The poor, who had trooped to the door, nd who shared their purses, blessed them. There were flowers everywhere. The ouse was no less fragrant than the church; after the incense, roses. They hought they heard voices carolling in the infinite; they had God in their earts; destiny appeared to them like a ceiling of stars; above their heads they eheld the light of a rising sun. All at once, the clock struck. Marius glanced t Cosette’s charming bare arm, and at the rosy things which were vaguely isible through the lace of her bodice, and Cosette, intercepting Marius’ lance, blushed to her very hair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.16#Quite a number of old family friends of the Gillenormand family had been nvited; they pressed about Cosette. Each one vied with the rest in saluting her s Madame la Baronne.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.17#The officer, Théodule Gillenormand, now a captain, had come from Chartres, here he was stationed in garrison, to be present at the wedding of his cousin ontmercy. Cosette did not recognize him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.18#He, on his side, habituated as he was to have women consider him handsome, etained no more recollection of Cosette than of any other woman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.19#“How right I was not to believe in that story about the lancer!” said ather Gillenormand, to himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.20#Cosette had never been more tender with Jean Valjean. She was in unison ith Father Gillenormand; while he erected joy into aphorisms and maxims, she xhaled goodness like a perfume. Happiness desires that all the world should be appy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.21#She regained, for the purpose of addressing Jean Valjean, inflections of oice belonging to the time when she was a little girl. She caressed him with er smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.22#A banquet had been spread in the dining-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.23#Illumination as brilliant as the daylight is the necessary seasoning of a reat joy. Mist and obscurity are not accepted by the happy. They do not consent o be black. The night, yes; the shadows, no. If there is no sun, one must be ade.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.24#The dining-room was full of gay things. In the centre, above the white and littering table, was a Venetian lustre with flat plates, with all sorts of olored birds, blue, violet, red, and green, perched amid the candles; around he chandelier, girandoles, on the walls, sconces with triple and quintuple ranches; mirrors, silverware, glassware, plate, porcelain, faïence, pottery, old and silversmith’s work, all was sparkling and gay. The empty spaces between he candelabra were filled in with bouquets, so that where there was not a ight, there was a flower.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.25#In the antechamber, three violins and a flute softly played quartettes by aydn.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.26#Jean Valjean had seated himself on a chair in the drawing-room, behind the oor, the leaf of which folded back upon him in such a manner as to nearly onceal him. A few moments before they sat down to table, Cosette came, as hough inspired by a sudden whim, and made him a deep courtesy, spreading out er bridal toilet with both hands, and with a tenderly roguish glance, she asked im:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.27#“Father, are you satisfied?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.28#“Yes,” said Jean Valjean, “I am content!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.29#“Well, then, laugh.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.30#Jean Valjean began to laugh.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.31#A few moments later, Basque announced that dinner was served.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.32#The guests, preceded by M. Gillenormand with Cosette on his arm, entered he dining-room, and arranged themselves in the proper order around the able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.33#Two large armchairs figured on the right and left of the bride, the first or M. Gillenormand, the other for Jean Valjean. M. Gillenormand took his seat. he other armchair remained empty.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.34#They looked about for M. Fauchelevent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.35#He was no longer there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.36#M. Gillenormand questioned Basque.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.37#“Do you know where M. Fauchelevent is?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.38#“Sir,” replied Basque, “I do, precisely. M. Fauchelevent told me to say to ou, sir, that he was suffering, his injured hand was paining him somewhat, and hat he could not dine with Monsieur le Baron and Madame la Baronne. That he egged to be excused, that he would come to-morrow. He has just taken his eparture.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.39#That empty armchair chilled the effusion of the wedding feast for a oment. But, if M. Fauchelevent was absent, M. Gillenormand was present, and the randfather beamed for two. He affirmed that M. Fauchelevent had done well to etire early, if he were suffering, but that it was only a slight ailment. This eclaration sufficed. Moreover, what is an obscure corner in such a submersion f joy? Cosette and Marius were passing through one of those egotistical and lessed moments when no other faculty is left to a person than that of receiving appiness. And then, an idea occurred to M. Gillenormand.—“Pardieu, this rmchair is empty. Come hither, Marius. Your aunt will permit it, although she as a right to you. This armchair is for you. That is legal and delightful. ortunatus beside Fortunata.”—Applause from the whole table. Marius took Jean aljean’s place beside Cosette, and things fell out so that Cosette, who had, at irst, been saddened by Jean Valjean’s absence, ended by being satisfied with t. From the moment when Marius took his place, and was the substitute, Cosette ould not have regretted God himself. She set her sweet little foot, shod in hite satin, on Marius’ foot.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.40#The armchair being occupied, M. Fauchelevent was obliterated; and nothing as lacking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.41#And, five minutes afterward, the whole table from one end to the other, as laughing with all the animation of forgetfulness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.42#At dessert, M. Gillenormand, rising to his feet, with a glass of champagne n his hand—only half full so that the palsy of his eighty years might not cause n overflow,—proposed the health of the married pair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.43#“You shall not escape two sermons,” he exclaimed. “This morning you had ne from the curé, this evening you shall have one from your grandfather. Listen o me; I will give you a bit of advice: Adore each other. I do not make a pack f gyrations, I go straight to the mark, be happy. In all creation, only the urtledoves are wise. Philosophers say: ‘Moderate your joys.’ I say: ‘Give rein o your joys.’ Be as much smitten with each other as fiends. Be in a rage about t. The philosophers talk stuff and nonsense. I should like to stuff their hilosophy down their gullets again. Can there be too many perfumes, too many pen rose-buds, too many nightingales singing, too many green leaves, too much urora in life? can people love each other too much? can people please each ther too much? Take care, Estelle, thou art too pretty! Have a care, Nemorin, hou art too handsome! Fine stupidity, in sooth! Can people enchant each other oo much, cajole each other too much, charm each other too much? Can one be too uch alive, too happy? Moderate your joys. Ah, indeed! Down with the hilosophers! Wisdom consists in jubilation. Make merry, let us make merry. Are e happy because we are good, or are we good because we are happy? Is the Sancy iamond called the Sancy because it belonged to Harley de Sancy, or because it eighs six hundred carats? I know nothing about it, life is full of such roblems; the important point is to possess the Sancy and happiness. Let us be appy without quibbling and quirking. Let us obey the sun blindly. What is the un? It is love. He who says love, says woman. Ah! ah! behold omnipotence—women. sk that demagogue of a Marius if he is not the slave of that little tyrant of a osette. And of his own free will, too, the coward! Woman! There is no obespierre who keeps his place but woman reigns. I am no longer Royalist except owards that royalty. What is Adam? The kingdom of Eve. No ’89 for Eve. There as been the royal sceptre surmounted by a fleur-de-lys, there has been the mperial sceptre surmounted by a globe, there has been the sceptre of harlemagne, which was of iron, there has been the sceptre of Louis the Great, hich was of gold,—the revolution twisted them between its thumb and forefinger, a’penny straws; it is done with, it is broken, it lies on the earth, there is o longer any sceptre, but make me a revolution against that little embroidered andkerchief, which smells of patchouli! I should like to see you do it. Try. hy is it so solid? Because it is a gewgaw. Ah! you are the nineteenth century? ell, what then? And we have been as foolish as you. Do not imagine that you ave effected much change in the universe, because your trip-gallant is called he cholera-morbus, and because your _pourrée_ is called the cachuca. In fact, he women must always be loved. I defy you to escape from that. These friends re our angels. Yes, love, woman, the kiss forms a circle from which I defy you o escape; and, for my own part, I should be only too happy to re-enter it. hich of you has seen the planet Venus, the coquette of the abyss, the Célimène f the ocean, rise in the infinite, calming all here below? The ocean is a rough lcestis. Well, grumble as he will, when Venus appears he is forced to smile. hat brute beast submits. We are all made so. Wrath, tempest, claps of thunder, oam to the very ceiling. A woman enters on the scene, a planet rises; flat on our face! Marius was fighting six months ago; to-day he is married. That is ell. Yes, Marius, yes, Cosette, you are in the right. Exist boldly for each ther, make us burst with rage that we cannot do the same, idealize each other, atch in your beaks all the tiny blades of felicity that exist on earth, and rrange yourselves a nest for life. Pardi, to love, to be loved, what a fine iracle when one is young! Don’t imagine that you have invented that. I, too, ave had my dream, I, too, have meditated, I, too, have sighed; I, too, have had moonlight soul. Love is a child six thousand years old. Love has the right to long white beard. Methusalem is a street arab beside Cupid. For sixty enturies men and women have got out of their scrape by loving. The devil, who s cunning, took to hating man; man, who is still more cunning, took to loving oman. In this way he does more good than the devil does him harm. This craft as discovered in the days of the terrestrial paradise. The invention is old, my riends, but it is perfectly new. Profit by it. Be Daphnis and Chloe, while aiting to become Philemon and Baucis. Manage so that, when you are with each ther, nothing shall be lacking to you, and that Cosette may be the sun for arius, and that Marius may be the universe to Cosette. Cosette, let your fine eather be the smile of your husband; Marius, let your rain be your wife’s ears. And let it never rain in your household. You have filched the winning umber in the lottery; you have gained the great prize, guard it well, keep it nder lock and key, do not squander it, adore each other and snap your fingers t all the rest. Believe what I say to you. It is good sense. And good sense annot lie. Be a religion to each other. Each man has his own fashion of adoring od. Saperlotte! the best way to adore God is to love one’s wife. _I love thee!_ hat’s my catechism. He who loves is orthodox. The oath of Henri IV. places anctity somewhere between feasting and drunkenness. Ventre-saint-gris! I don’t elong to the religion of that oath. Woman is forgotten in it. This astonishes e on the part of Henri IV. My friends, long live women! I am old, they say; t’s astonishing how much I feel in the mood to be young. I should like to go nd listen to the bagpipes in the woods. Children who contrive to be beautiful nd contented,—that intoxicates me. I would like greatly to get married, if any ne would have me. It is impossible to imagine that God could have made us for nything but this: to idolize, to coo, to preen ourselves, to be dove-like, to e dainty, to bill and coo our loves from morn to night, to gaze at one’s image n one’s little wife, to be proud, to be triumphant, to plume oneself; that is he aim of life. There, let not that displease you which we used to think in our ay, when we were young folks. Ah! vertu-bamboche! what charming women there ere in those days, and what pretty little faces and what lovely lasses! I ommitted my ravages among them. Then love each other. If people did not love ach other, I really do not see what use there would be in having any pringtime; and for my own part, I should pray the good God to shut up all the eautiful things that he shows us, and to take away from us and put back in his ox, the flowers, the birds, and the pretty maidens. My children, receive an old an’s blessing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.44#The evening was gay, lively and agreeable. The grandfather’s sovereign ood humor gave the key-note to the whole feast, and each person regulated his onduct on that almost centenarian cordiality. They danced a little, they aughed a great deal; it was an amiable wedding. Goodman Days of Yore might have een invited to it. However, he was present in the person of Father illenormand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.45#There was a tumult, then silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.46#The married pair disappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.47#A little after midnight, the Gillenormand house became a temple.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.48#Here we pause. On the threshold of wedding nights stands a smiling angel ith his finger on his lips.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.49#The soul enters into contemplation before that sanctuary where the elebration of love takes place.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.50#There should be flashes of light athwart such houses. The joy which they ontain ought to make its escape through the stones of the walls in brilliancy, nd vaguely illuminate the gloom. It is impossible that this sacred and fatal estival should not give off a celestial radiance to the infinite. Love is the ublime crucible wherein the fusion of the man and the woman takes place; the eing one, the being triple, the being final, the human trinity proceeds from t. This birth of two souls into one, ought to be an emotion for the gloom. The over is the priest; the ravished virgin is terrified. Something of that joy scends to God. Where true marriage is, that is to say, where there is love, the deal enters in. A nuptial bed makes a nook of dawn amid the shadows. If it were iven to the eye of the flesh to scan the formidable and charming visions of the pper life, it is probable that we should behold the forms of night, the winged nknowns, the blue passers of the invisible, bend down, a throng of sombre eads, around the luminous house, satisfied, showering benedictions, pointing ut to each other the virgin wife gently alarmed, sweetly terrified, and bearing he reflection of human bliss upon their divine countenances. If at that supreme our, the wedded pair, dazzled with voluptuousness and believing themselves lone, were to listen, they would hear in their chamber a confused rustling of ings. Perfect happiness implies a mutual understanding with the angels. That ark little chamber has all heaven for its ceiling. When two mouths, rendered acred by love, approach to create, it is impossible that there should not be, bove that ineffable kiss, a quivering throughout the immense mystery of tars.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.51#These felicities are the true ones. There is no joy outside of these joys. ove is the only ecstasy. All the rest weeps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.2.52#To love, or to have loved,—this suffices. Demand nothing more. There is no ther pearl to be found in the shadowy folds of life. To love is a ulfilment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.head#CHAPTER III—THE INSEPARABLE
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.1#What had become of Jean Valjean?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.2#Immediately after having laughed, at Cosette’s graceful command, when no ne was paying any heed to him, Jean Valjean had risen and had gained the ntechamber unperceived. This was the very room which, eight months before, he ad entered black with mud, with blood and powder, bringing back the grandson to he grandfather. The old wainscoting was garlanded with foliage and flowers; the usicians were seated on the sofa on which they had laid Marius down. Basque, in black coat, knee-breeches, white stockings and white gloves, was arranging oses round all of the dishes that were to be served. Jean Valjean pointed to is arm in its sling, charged Basque to explain his absence, and went away.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.3#The long windows of the dining-room opened on the street. Jean Valjean tood for several minutes, erect and motionless in the darkness, beneath those adiant windows. He listened. The confused sounds of the banquet reached his ar. He heard the loud, commanding tones of the grandfather, the violins, the latter of the plates, the bursts of laughter, and through all that merry proar, he distinguished Cosette’s sweet and joyous voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.4#He quitted the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, and returned to the Rue de ’Homme Armé.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.5#In order to return thither, he took the Rue Saint-Louis, the Rue ulture-Sainte-Catherine, and the Blancs-Manteaux; it was a little longer, but t was the road through which, for the last three months, he had become ccustomed to pass every day on his way from the Rue de l’Homme Armé to the Rue es Filles-du-Calvaire, in order to avoid the obstructions and the mud in the ue Vieille-du-Temple.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.6#This road, through which Cosette had passed, excluded for him all ossibility of any other itinerary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.7#Jean Valjean entered his lodgings. He lighted his candle and mounted the tairs. The apartment was empty. Even Toussaint was no longer there. Jean aljean’s step made more noise than usual in the chambers. All the cupboards tood open. He penetrated to Cosette’s bedroom. There were no sheets on the bed. he pillow, covered with ticking, and without a case or lace, was laid on the lankets folded up on the foot of the mattress, whose covering was visible, and n which no one was ever to sleep again. All the little feminine objects which osette was attached to had been carried away; nothing remained except the heavy urniture and the four walls. Toussaint’s bed was despoiled in like manner. One ed only was made up, and seemed to be waiting some one, and this was Jean aljean’s bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.8#Jean Valjean looked at the walls, closed some of the cupboard doors, and ent and came from one room to another.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.9#Then he sought his own chamber once more, and set his candle on a able.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.10#He had disengaged his arm from the sling, and he used his right hand as hough it did not hurt him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.11#He approached his bed, and his eyes rested, was it by chance? was it ntentionally? on the _inseparable_ of which Cosette had been jealous, on the ittle portmanteau which never left him. On his arrival in the Rue de l’Homme rmé, on the 4th of June, he had deposited it on a round table near the head of is bed. He went to this table with a sort of vivacity, took a key from his ocket, and opened the valise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.12#From it he slowly drew forth the garments in which, ten years before, osette had quitted Montfermeil; first the little gown, then the black fichu, hen the stout, coarse child’s shoes which Cosette might almost have worn still, o tiny were her feet, then the fustian bodice, which was very thick, then the nitted petticoat, next the apron with pockets, then the woollen stockings. hese stockings, which still preserved the graceful form of a tiny leg, were no onger than Jean Valjean’s hand. All this was black of hue. It was he who had rought those garments to Montfermeil for her. As he removed them from the alise, he laid them on the bed. He fell to thinking. He called up memories. It as in winter, in a very cold month of December, she was shivering, half-naked, n rags, her poor little feet were all red in their wooden shoes. He, Jean aljean, had made her abandon those rags to clothe herself in these mourning abiliments. The mother must have felt pleased in her grave, to see her daughter earing mourning for her, and, above all, to see that she was properly clothed, nd that she was warm. He thought of that forest of Montfermeil; they had raversed it together, Cosette and he; he thought of what the weather had been, f the leafless trees, of the wood destitute of birds, of the sunless sky; it attered not, it was charming. He arranged the tiny garments on the bed, the ichu next to the petticoat, the stockings beside the shoes, and he looked at hem, one after the other. She was no taller than that, she had her big doll in er arms, she had put her louis d’or in the pocket of that apron, she had aughed, they walked hand in hand, she had no one in the world but him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.3.13#Then his venerable, white head fell forward on the bed, that stoical old eart broke, his face was engulfed, so to speak, in Cosette’s garments, and if ny one had passed up the stairs at that moment, he would have heard frightful obs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.head#CHAPTER IV—THE IMMORTAL LIVER 68
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.1#The old and formidable struggle, of which we have already witnessed so many hases, began once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.2#Jacob struggled with the angel but one night. Alas! how many times have we eheld Jean Valjean seized bodily by his conscience, in the darkness, and truggling desperately against it!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.3#Unheard-of conflict! At certain moments the foot slips; at other moments he ground crumbles away underfoot. How many times had that conscience, mad for he good, clasped and overthrown him! How many times had the truth set her knee nexorably upon his breast! How many times, hurled to earth by the light, had he egged for mercy! How many times had that implacable spark, lighted within him, nd upon him by the Bishop, dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind! ow many times had he risen to his feet in the combat, held fast to the rock, eaning against sophism, dragged in the dust, now getting the upper hand of his onscience, again overthrown by it! How many times, after an equivoque, after he specious and treacherous reasoning of egotism, had he heard his irritated onscience cry in his ear: “A trip! you wretch!” How many times had his efractory thoughts rattled convulsively in his throat, under the evidence of uty! Resistance to God. Funereal sweats. What secret wounds which he alone felt leed! What excoriations in his lamentable existence! How many times he had isen bleeding, bruised, broken, enlightened, despair in his heart, serenity in is soul! and, vanquished, he had felt himself the conqueror. And, after having islocated, broken, and rent his conscience with red-hot pincers, it had said to im, as it stood over him, formidable, luminous, and tranquil: “Now, go in eace!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.4#But on emerging from so melancholy a conflict, what a lugubrious peace, las!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.5#Nevertheless, that night Jean Valjean felt that he was passing through his inal combat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.6#A heart-rending question presented itself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.7#Predestinations are not all direct; they do not open out in a straight venue before the predestined man; they have blind courts, impassable alleys, bscure turns, disturbing crossroads offering the choice of many ways. Jean aljean had halted at that moment at the most perilous of these crossroads.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.8#He had come to the supreme crossing of good and evil. He had that gloomy ntersection beneath his eyes. On this occasion once more, as had happened to im already in other sad vicissitudes, two roads opened out before him, the one empting, the other alarming.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.9#Which was he to take?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.10#He was counselled to the one which alarmed him by that mysterious index inger which we all perceive whenever we fix our eyes on the darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.11#Once more, Jean Valjean had the choice between the terrible port and the miling ambush.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.12#Is it then true? the soul may recover; but not fate. Frightful thing! an ncurable destiny!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.13#This is the problem which presented itself to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.14#In what manner was Jean Valjean to behave in relation to the happiness of osette and Marius? It was he who had willed that happiness, it was he who had rought it about; he had, himself, buried it in his entrails, and at that oment, when he reflected on it, he was able to enjoy the sort of satisfaction hich an armorer would experience on recognizing his factory mark on a knife, on ithdrawing it, all smoking, from his own breast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.15#Cosette had Marius, Marius possessed Cosette. They had everything, even iches. And this was his doing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.16#But what was he, Jean Valjean, to do with this happiness, now that it xisted, now that it was there? Should he force himself on this happiness? hould he treat it as belonging to him? No doubt, Cosette did belong to another; ut should he, Jean Valjean, retain of Cosette all that he could retain? Should e remain the sort of father, half seen but respected, which he had hitherto een? Should he, without saying a word, bring his past to that future? Should he resent himself there, as though he had a right, and should he seat himself, eiled, at that luminous fireside? Should he take those innocent hands into his ragic hands, with a smile? Should he place upon the peaceful fender of the illenormand drawing-room those feet of his, which dragged behind them the isgraceful shadow of the law? Should he enter into participation in the fair ortunes of Cosette and Marius? Should he render the obscurity on his brow and he cloud upon theirs still more dense? Should he place his catastrophe as a hird associate in their felicity? Should he continue to hold his peace? In a ord, should he be the sinister mute of destiny beside these two happy eings?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.17#We must have become habituated to fatality and to encounters with it, in rder to have the daring to raise our eyes when certain questions appear to us n all their horrible nakedness. Good or evil stands behind this severe nterrogation point. What are you going to do? demands the sphinx.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.18#This habit of trial Jean Valjean possessed. He gazed intently at the phinx.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.19#He examined the pitiless problem under all its aspects.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.20#Cosette, that charming existence, was the raft of this shipwreck. What was e to do? To cling fast to it, or to let go his hold?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.21#If he clung to it, he should emerge from disaster, he should ascend again nto the sunlight, he should let the bitter water drip from his garments and his air, he was saved, he should live.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.22#And if he let go his hold?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.23#Then the abyss.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.24#Thus he took sad council with his thoughts. Or, to speak more correctly, e fought; he kicked furiously internally, now against his will, now against his onviction.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.25#Happily for Jean Valjean that he had been able to weep. That relieved him, ossibly. But the beginning was savage. A tempest, more furious than the one hich had formerly driven him to Arras, broke loose within him. The past surged p before him facing the present; he compared them and sobbed. The silence of ears once opened, the despairing man writhed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.26#He felt that he had been stopped short.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.27#Alas! in this fight to the death between our egotism and our duty, when we hus retreat step by step before our immutable ideal, bewildered, furious, xasperated at having to yield, disputing the ground, hoping for a possible light, seeking an escape, what an abrupt and sinister resistance does the foot f the wall offer in our rear!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.28#To feel the sacred shadow which forms an obstacle!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.29#The invisible inexorable, what an obsession!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.30#Then, one is never done with conscience. Make your choice, Brutus; make our choice, Cato. It is fathomless, since it is God. One flings into that well he labor of one’s whole life, one flings in one’s fortune, one flings in one’s iches, one flings in one’s success, one flings in one’s liberty or fatherland, ne flings in one’s well-being, one flings in one’s repose, one flings in one’s oy! More! more! more! Empty the vase! tip the urn! One must finish by flinging n one’s heart.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.31#Somewhere in the fog of the ancient hells, there is a tun like that.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.32#Is not one pardonable, if one at last refuses! Can the inexhaustible have ny right? Are not chains which are endless above human strength? Who would lame Sisyphus and Jean Valjean for saying: “It is enough!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.33#The obedience of matter is limited by friction; is there no limit to the bedience of the soul? If perpetual motion is impossible, can perpetual elf-sacrifice be exacted?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.34#The first step is nothing, it is the last which is difficult. What was the hampmathieu affair in comparison with Cosette’s marriage and of that which it ntailed? What is a re-entrance into the galleys, compared to entrance into the oid?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.35#Oh, first step that must be descended, how sombre art thou! Oh, second tep, how black art thou!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.36#How could he refrain from turning aside his head this time?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.37#Martyrdom is sublimation, corrosive sublimation. It is a torture which onsecrates. One can consent to it for the first hour; one seats oneself on the hrone of glowing iron, one places on one’s head the crown of hot iron, one ccepts the globe of red hot iron, one takes the sceptre of red hot iron, but he mantle of flame still remains to be donned, and comes there not a moment hen the miserable flesh revolts and when one abdicates from suffering?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.38#At length, Jean Valjean entered into the peace of exhaustion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.39#He weighed, he reflected, he considered the alternatives, the mysterious alance of light and darkness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.40#Should he impose his galleys on those two dazzling children, or should he onsummate his irremediable engulfment by himself? On one side lay the sacrifice f Cosette, on the other that of himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.41#At what solution should he arrive? What decision did he come to?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.42#What resolution did he take? What was his own inward definitive response o the unbribable interrogatory of fatality? What door did he decide to open? hich side of his life did he resolve upon closing and condemning? Among all the nfathomable precipices which surrounded him, which was his choice? What xtremity did he accept? To which of the gulfs did he nod his head?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.43#His dizzy reverie lasted all night long.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.44#He remained there until daylight, in the same attitude, bent double over hat bed, prostrate beneath the enormity of fate, crushed, perchance, alas! with lenched fists, with arms outspread at right angles, like a man crucified who as been un-nailed, and flung face down on the earth. There he remained for welve hours, the twelve long hours of a long winter’s night, ice-cold, without nce raising his head, and without uttering a word. He was as motionless as a orpse, while his thoughts wallowed on the earth and soared, now like the hydra, ow like the eagle. Any one to behold him thus motionless would have pronounced im dead; all at once he shuddered convulsively, and his mouth, glued to osette’s garments, kissed them; then it could be seen that he was alive.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.45#Who could see? Since Jean Valjean was alone, and there was no one here.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.6.4.46#The One who is in the shadows.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.head#BOOK SEVENTH—THE LAST DRAUGHT FROM THE CUP
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.1#The days that follow weddings are solitary. People respect the meditations f the happy pair. And also, their tardy slumbers, to some degree. The tumult of isits and congratulations only begins later on. On the morning of the 17th of ebruary, it was a little past midday when Basque, with napkin and eather-duster under his arm, busy in setting his antechamber to rights, heard a ight tap at the door. There had been no ring, which was discreet on such a day. asque opened the door, and beheld M. Fauchelevent. He introduced him into the rawing-room, still encumbered and topsy-turvy, and which bore the air of a ield of battle after the joys of the preceding evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.2#“_Dame_, sir,” remarked Basque, “we all woke up late.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.3#“Is your master up?” asked Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.4#“How is Monsieur’s arm?” replied Basque.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.5#“Better. Is your master up?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.6#“Which one? the old one or the new one?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.7#“Monsieur Pontmercy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.8#“Monsieur le Baron,” said Basque, drawing himself up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.9#A man is a Baron most of all to his servants. He counts for something with hem; they are what a philosopher would call, bespattered with the title, and hat flatters them. Marius, be it said in passing, a militant republican as he ad proved, was now a Baron in spite of himself. A small revolution had taken lace in the family in connection with this title. It was now M. Gillenormand ho clung to it, and Marius who detached himself from it. But Colonel Pontmercy ad written: “My son will bear my title.” Marius obeyed. And then, Cosette, in hom the woman was beginning to dawn, was delighted to be a Baroness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.10#“Monsieur le Baron?” repeated Basque. “I will go and see. I will tell him hat M. Fauchelevent is here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.11#“No. Do not tell him that it is I. Tell him that some one wishes to speak o him in private, and mention no name.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.12#“Ah!” ejaculated Basque.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.13#“I wish to surprise him.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.14#“Ah!” ejaculated Basque once more, emitting his second “ah!” as an xplanation of the first.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.15#And he left the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.16#Jean Valjean remained alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.17#The drawing-room, as we have just said, was in great disorder. It seemed s though, by lending an ear, one might still hear the vague noise of the edding. On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowers which had fallen from arlands and head-dresses. The wax candles, burned to stumps, added stalactites f wax to the crystal drops of the chandeliers. Not a single piece of furniture as in its place. In the corners, three or four armchairs, drawn close together n a circle, had the appearance of continuing a conversation. The whole effect as cheerful. A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast. It has been a appy thing. On the chairs in disarray, among those fading flowers, beneath hose extinct lights, people have thought of joy. The sun had succeeded to the handelier, and made its way gayly into the drawing-room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.18#Several minutes elapsed. Jean Valjean stood motionless on the spot where asque had left him. He was very pale. His eyes were hollow, and so sunken in is head by sleeplessness that they nearly disappeared in their orbits. His lack coat bore the weary folds of a garment that has been up all night. The lbows were whitened with the down which the friction of cloth against linen eaves behind it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.19#Jean Valjean stared at the window outlined on the polished floor at his eet by the sun.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.20#There came a sound at the door, and he raised his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.21#Marius entered, his head well up, his mouth smiling, an indescribable ight on his countenance, his brow expanded, his eyes triumphant. He had not lept either.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.22#“It is you, father!” he exclaimed, on catching sight of Jean Valjean; that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air! But you have come too early. t is only half past twelve. Cosette is asleep.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.23#That word: “Father,” said to M. Fauchelevent by Marius, signified: supreme elicity. There had always existed, as the reader knows, a lofty wall, a oldness and a constraint between them; ice which must be broken or melted. arius had reached that point of intoxication when the wall was lowered, when he ice dissolved, and when M. Fauchelevent was to him, as to Cosette, a ather.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.24#He continued: his words poured forth, as is the peculiarity of divine aroxysms of joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.25#“How glad I am to see you! If you only knew how we missed you yesterday! ood morning, father. How is your hand? Better, is it not?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.26#And, satisfied with the favorable reply which he had made to himself, he ursued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.27#“We have both been talking about you. Cosette loves you so dearly! You ust not forget that you have a chamber here, We want nothing more to do with he Rue de l’Homme Armé. We will have no more of it at all. How could you go to ive in a street like that, which is sickly, which is disagreeable, which is gly, which has a barrier at one end, where one is cold, and into which one annot enter? You are to come and install yourself here. And this very day. Or ou will have to deal with Cosette. She means to lead us all by the nose, I warn ou. You have your own chamber here, it is close to ours, it opens on the arden; the trouble with the clock has been attended to, the bed is made, it is ll ready, you have only to take possession of it. Near your bed Cosette has laced a huge, old, easy-chair covered with Utrecht velvet and she has said to t: ‘Stretch out your arms to him.’ A nightingale comes to the clump of acacias pposite your windows, every spring. In two months more you will have it. You ill have its nest on your left and ours on your right. By night it will sing, nd by day Cosette will prattle. Your chamber faces due South. Cosette will rrange your books for you, your Voyages of Captain Cook and the ther,—Vancouver’s and all your affairs. I believe that there is a little valise o which you are attached, I have fixed upon a corner of honor for that. You ave conquered my grandfather, you suit him. We will live together. Do you play hist? you will overwhelm my grandfather with delight if you play whist. It is ou who shall take Cosette to walk on the days when I am at the courts, you hall give her your arm, you know, as you used to, in the Luxembourg. We are bsolutely resolved to be happy. And you shall be included in it, in our appiness, do you hear, father? Come, will you breakfast with us to-day?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.28#“Sir,” said Jean Valjean, “I have something to say to you. I am an x-convict.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.29#The limit of shrill sounds perceptible can be overleaped, as well in the ase of the mind as in that of the ear. These words: “I am an ex-convict,” roceeding from the mouth of M. Fauchelevent and entering the ear of Marius vershot the possible. It seemed to him that something had just been said to im; but he did not know what. He stood with his mouth wide open.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.30#Then he perceived that the man who was addressing him was frightful. holly absorbed in his own dazzled state, he had not, up to that moment, bserved the other man’s terrible pallor.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.31#Jean Valjean untied the black cravat which supported his right arm, nrolled the linen from around his hand, bared his thumb and showed it to arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.32#“There is nothing the matter with my hand,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.33#Marius looked at the thumb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.34#“There has not been anything the matter with it,” went on Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.35#There was, in fact, no trace of any injury.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.36#Jean Valjean continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.37#“It was fitting that I should be absent from your marriage. I absented yself as much as was in my power. So I invented this injury in order that I ight not commit a forgery, that I might not introduce a flaw into the marriage ocuments, in order that I might escape from signing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.38#Marius stammered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.39#“What is the meaning of this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.40#“The meaning of it is,” replied Jean Valjean, “that I have been in the alleys.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.41#“You are driving me mad!” exclaimed Marius in terror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.42#“Monsieur Pontmercy,” said Jean Valjean, “I was nineteen years in the alleys. For theft. Then, I was condemned for life for theft, for a second ffence. At the present moment, I have broken my ban.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.43#In vain did Marius recoil before the reality, refuse the fact, resist the vidence, he was forced to give way. He began to understand, and, as always appens in such cases, he understood too much. An inward shudder of hideous nlightenment flashed through him; an idea which made him quiver traversed his ind. He caught a glimpse of a wretched destiny for himself in the future.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.44#“Say all, say all!” he cried. “You are Cosette’s father!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.45#And he retreated a couple of paces with a movement of indescribable orror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.46#Jean Valjean elevated his head with so much majesty of attitude that he eemed to grow even to the ceiling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.47#“It is necessary that you should believe me here, sir; although our oath o others may not be received in law . . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.48#Here he paused, then, with a sort of sovereign and sepulchral authority, e added, articulating slowly, and emphasizing the syllables:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.49#“. . . You will believe me. I the father of Cosette! before God, no. onsieur le Baron Pontmercy, I am a peasant of Faverolles. I earned my living by runing trees. My name is not Fauchelevent, but Jean Valjean. I am not related o Cosette. Reassure yourself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.50#Marius stammered:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.51#“Who will prove that to me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.52#“I. Since I tell you so.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.53#Marius looked at the man. He was melancholy yet tranquil. No lie could roceed from such a calm. That which is icy is sincere. The truth could be felt n that chill of the tomb.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.54#“I believe you,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.55#Jean Valjean bent his head, as though taking note of this, and ontinued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.56#“What am I to Cosette? A passer-by. Ten years ago, I did not know that she as in existence. I love her, it is true. One loves a child whom one has seen hen very young, being old oneself. When one is old, one feels oneself a randfather towards all little children. You may, it seems to me, suppose that I ave something which resembles a heart. She was an orphan. Without either father r mother. She needed me. That is why I began to love her. Children are so weak hat the first comer, even a man like me, can become their protector. I have ulfilled this duty towards Cosette. I do not think that so slight a thing can e called a good action; but if it be a good action, well, say that I have done t. Register this attenuating circumstance. To-day, Cosette passes out of my ife; our two roads part. Henceforth, I can do nothing for her. She is Madame ontmercy. Her providence has changed. And Cosette gains by the change. All is ell. As for the six hundred thousand francs, you do not mention them to me, but forestall your thought, they are a deposit. How did that deposit come into my ands? What does that matter? I restore the deposit. Nothing more can be emanded of me. I complete the restitution by announcing my true name. That oncerns me. I have a reason for desiring that you should know who I am.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.57#And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.58#All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent. Certain gusts f destiny produce these billows in our souls.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.59#We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within us is ispersed; we say the first things that occur to us, which are not always recisely those which should be said. There are sudden revelations which one annot bear, and which intoxicate like baleful wine. Marius was stupefied by the ovel situation which presented itself to him, to the point of addressing that an almost like a person who was angry with him for this avowal.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.60#“But why,” he exclaimed, “do you tell me all this? Who forces you to do o? You could have kept your secret to yourself. You are neither denounced, nor racked nor pursued. You have a reason for wantonly making such a revelation. onclude. There is something more. In what connection do you make this onfession? What is your motive?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.61#“My motive?” replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that one ould have said that he was talking to himself rather than to Marius. “From what otive, in fact, has this convict just said ‘I am a convict’? Well, yes! the otive is strange. It is out of honesty. Stay, the unfortunate point is that I ave a thread in my heart, which keeps me fast. It is when one is old that that ort of thread is particularly solid. All life falls in ruin around one; one esists. Had I been able to tear out that thread, to break it, to undo the knot r to cut it, to go far away, I should have been safe. I had only to go away; here are diligences in the Rue Bouloy; you are happy; I am going. I have tried o break that thread, I have jerked at it, it would not break, I tore my heart ith it. Then I said: ‘I cannot live anywhere else than here.’ I must stay. ell, yes, you are right, I am a fool, why not simply remain here? You offer me chamber in this house, Madame Pontmercy is sincerely attached to me, she said o the armchair: ‘Stretch out your arms to him,’ your grandfather demands othing better than to have me, I suit him, we shall live together, and take our eals in common, I shall give Cosette my arm . . . Madame Pontmercy, excuse me, t is a habit, we shall have but one roof, one table, one fire, the same himney-corner in winter, the same promenade in summer, that is joy, that is appiness, that is everything. We shall live as one family. One family!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.62#At that word, Jean Valjean became wild. He folded his arms, glared at the loor beneath his feet as though he would have excavated an abyss therein, and is voice suddenly rose in thundering tones:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.63#“As one family! No. I belong to no family. I do not belong to yours. I do ot belong to any family of men. In houses where people are among themselves, I m superfluous. There are families, but there is nothing of the sort for me. I m an unlucky wretch; I am left outside. Did I have a father and mother? I lmost doubt it. On the day when I gave that child in marriage, all came to an nd. I have seen her happy, and that she is with a man whom she loves, and that here exists here a kind old man, a household of two angels, and all joys in hat house, and that it was well, I said to myself: ‘Enter thou not.’ I could ave lied, it is true, have deceived you all, and remained Monsieur auchelevent. So long as it was for her, I could lie; but now it would be for yself, and I must not. It was sufficient for me to hold my peace, it is true, nd all would go on. You ask me what has forced me to speak? a very odd thing; y conscience. To hold my peace was very easy, however. I passed the night in rying to persuade myself to it; you questioned me, and what I have just said to ou is so extraordinary that you have the right to do it; well, yes, I have assed the night in alleging reasons to myself, and I gave myself very good easons, I have done what I could. But there are two things in which I have not ucceeded; in breaking the thread that holds me fixed, riveted and sealed here y the heart, or in silencing some one who speaks softly to me when I am alone. hat is why I have come hither to tell you everything this morning. Everything r nearly everything. It is useless to tell you that which concerns only myself; keep that to myself. You know the essential points. So I have taken my mystery nd have brought it to you. And I have disembowelled my secret before your eyes. t was not a resolution that was easy to take. I struggled all night long. Ah! ou think that I did not tell myself that this was no Champmathieu affair, that y concealing my name I was doing no one any injury, that the name of auchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself, out of gratitude for service rendered to him, and that I might assuredly keep it, and that I should e happy in that chamber which you offer me, that I should not be in any one’s ay, that I should be in my own little corner, and that, while you would have osette, I should have the idea that I was in the same house with her. Each one f us would have had his share of happiness. If I continued to be Monsieur auchelevent, that would arrange everything. Yes, with the exception of my soul. here was joy everywhere upon my surface, but the bottom of my soul remained lack. It is not enough to be happy, one must be content. Thus I should have emained Monsieur Fauchelevent, thus I should have concealed my true visage, hus, in the presence of your expansion, I should have had an enigma, thus, in he midst of your full noonday, I should have had shadows, thus, without crying ’ware,’ I should have simply introduced the galleys to your fireside, I should ave taken my seat at your table with the thought that if you knew who I was, ou would drive me from it, I should have allowed myself to be served by omestics who, had they known, would have said: ‘How horrible!’ I should have ouched you with my elbow, which you have a right to dislike, I should have ilched your clasps of the hand! There would have existed in your house a ivision of respect between venerable white locks and tainted white locks; at our most intimate hours, when all hearts thought themselves open to the very ottom to all the rest, when we four were together, your grandfather, you two nd myself, a stranger would have been present! I should have been side by side ith you in your existence, having for my only care not to disarrange the cover f my dreadful pit. Thus, I, a dead man, should have thrust myself upon you who re living beings. I should have condemned her to myself forever. You and osette and I would have had all three of our heads in the green cap! Does it ot make you shudder? I am only the most crushed of men; I should have been the ost monstrous of men. And I should have committed that crime every day! And I hould have had that face of night upon my visage every day! every day! And I hould have communicated to you a share in my taint every day! every day! to ou, my dearly beloved, my children, to you, my innocent creatures! Is it othing to hold one’s peace? is it a simple matter to keep silence? No, it is ot simple. There is a silence which lies. And my lie, and my fraud and my ndignity, and my cowardice and my treason and my crime, I should have drained rop by drop, I should have spit it out, then swallowed it again, I should have inished at midnight and have begun again at midday, and my ‘good morning’ would ave lied, and my ‘good night’ would have lied, and I should have slept on it, I hould have eaten it, with my bread, and I should have looked Cosette in the ace, and I should have responded to the smile of the angel by the smile of the amned soul, and I should have been an abominable villain! Why should I do it? n order to be happy. In order to be happy. Have I the right to be happy? I tand outside of life, sir.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.64#Jean Valjean paused. Marius listened. Such chains of ideas and of nguishes cannot be interrupted. Jean Valjean lowered his voice once more, but t was no longer a dull voice—it was a sinister voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.65#“You ask why I speak? I am neither denounced, nor pursued, nor tracked, ou say. Yes! I am denounced! yes! I am tracked! By whom? By myself. It is I who ar the passage to myself, and I drag myself, and I push myself, and I arrest yself, and I execute myself, and when one holds oneself, one is firmly eld.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.66#And, seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck and xtending it towards Marius:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.67#“Do you see that fist?” he continued. “Don’t you think that it holds that ollar in such a wise as not to release it? Well! conscience is another grasp! f one desires to be happy, sir, one must never understand duty; for, as soon as ne has comprehended it, it is implacable. One would say that it punished you or comprehending it; but no, it rewards you; for it places you in a hell, where ou feel God beside you. One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is t peace with himself.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.68#And, with a poignant accent, he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.69#“Monsieur Pontmercy, this is not common sense, I am an honest man. It is y degrading myself in your eyes that I elevate myself in my own. This has appened to me once before, but it was less painful then; it was a mere nothing. es, an honest man. I should not be so if, through my fault, you had continued o esteem me; now that you despise me, I am so. I have that fatality hanging ver me that, not being able to ever have anything but stolen consideration, hat consideration humiliates me, and crushes me inwardly, and, in order that I ay respect myself, it is necessary that I should be despised. Then I straighten p again. I am a galley-slave who obeys his conscience. I know well that that is ost improbable. But what would you have me do about it? it is the fact. I have ntered into engagements with myself; I keep them. There are encounters which ind us, there are chances which involve us in duties. You see, Monsieur ontmercy, various things have happened to me in the course of my life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.70#Again Jean Valjean paused, swallowing his saliva with an effort, as though is words had a bitter after-taste, and then he went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.71#“When one has such a horror hanging over one, one has not the right to ake others share it without their knowledge, one has not the right to make them lip over one’s own precipice without their perceiving it, one has not the right o let one’s red blouse drag upon them, one has no right to slyly encumber with ne’s misery the happiness of others. It is hideous to approach those who are ealthy, and to touch them in the dark with one’s ulcer. In spite of the fact hat Fauchelevent lent me his name, I have no right to use it; he could give it o me, but I could not take it. A name is an _I_. You see, sir, that I have hought somewhat, I have read a little, although I am a peasant; and you see hat I express myself properly. I understand things. I have procured myself an ducation. Well, yes, to abstract a name and to place oneself under it is ishonest. Letters of the alphabet can be filched, like a purse or a watch. To e a false signature in flesh and blood, to be a living false key, to enter the ouse of honest people by picking their lock, never more to look traightforward, to forever eye askance, to be infamous within the _I_, no! no! o! no! no! It is better to suffer, to bleed, to weep, to tear one’s skin from he flesh with one’s nails, to pass nights writhing in anguish, to devour neself body and soul. That is why I have just told you all this. Wantonly, as ou say.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.72#He drew a painful breath, and hurled this final word:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.73#“In days gone by, I stole a loaf of bread in order to live; to-day, in rder to live, I will not steal a name.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.74#“To live!” interrupted Marius. “You do not need that name in order to ive?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.75#“Ah! I understand the matter,” said Jean Valjean, raising and lowering his ead several times in succession.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.76#A silence ensued. Both held their peace, each plunged in a gulf of houghts. Marius was sitting near a table and resting the corner of his mouth on ne of his fingers, which was folded back. Jean Valjean was pacing to and fro. e paused before a mirror, and remained motionless. Then, as though replying to ome inward course of reasoning, he said, as he gazed at the mirror, which he id not see:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.77#“While, at present, I am relieved.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.78#He took up his march again, and walked to the other end of the rawing-room. At the moment when he turned round, he perceived that Marius was atching his walk. Then he said, with an inexpressible intonation:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.79#“I drag my leg a little. Now you understand why!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.80#Then he turned fully round towards Marius:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.81#“And now, sir, imagine this: I have said nothing, I have remained Monsieur auchelevent, I have taken my place in your house, I am one of you, I am in my hamber, I come to breakfast in the morning in slippers, in the evening all hree of us go to the play, I accompany Madame Pontmercy to the Tuileries, and o the Place Royale, we are together, you think me your equal; one fine day you re there, and I am there, we are conversing, we are laughing; all at once, you ear a voice shouting this name: ‘Jean Valjean!’ and behold, that terrible hand, he police, darts from the darkness, and abruptly tears off my mask!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.82#Again he paused; Marius had sprung to his feet with a shudder. Jean aljean resumed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.83#“What do you say to that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.84#Marius’ silence answered for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.85#Jean Valjean continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.86#“You see that I am right in not holding my peace. Be happy, be in heaven, e the angel of an angel, exist in the sun, be content therewith, and do not rouble yourself about the means which a poor damned wretch takes to open his reast and force his duty to come forth; you have before you, sir, a wretched an.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.87#Marius slowly crossed the room, and, when he was quite close to Jean aljean, he offered the latter his hand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.88#But Marius was obliged to step up and take that hand which was not ffered, Jean Valjean let him have his own way, and it seemed to Marius that he ressed a hand of marble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.89#“My grandfather has friends,” said Marius; “I will procure your ardon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.90#“It is useless,” replied Jean Valjean. “I am believed to be dead, and that uffices. The dead are not subjected to surveillance. They are supposed to rot n peace. Death is the same thing as pardon.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.91#And, disengaging the hand which Marius held, he added, with a sort of nexorable dignity:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.92#“Moreover, the friend to whom I have recourse is the doing of my duty; and need but one pardon, that of my conscience.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.93#At that moment, a door at the other end of the drawing-room opened gently alf way, and in the opening Cosette’s head appeared. They saw only her sweet ace, her hair was in charming disorder, her eyelids were still swollen with leep. She made the movement of a bird, which thrusts its head out of its nest, lanced first at her husband, then at Jean Valjean, and cried to them with a mile, so that they seemed to behold a smile at the heart of a rose:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.94#“I will wager that you are talking politics. How stupid that is, instead f being with me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.95#Jean Valjean shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.96#“Cosette! . . .” stammered Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.97#And he paused. One would have said that they were two criminals.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.98#Cosette, who was radiant, continued to gaze at both of them. There was omething in her eyes like gleams of paradise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.99#“I have caught you in the very act,” said Cosette. “Just now, I heard my ather Fauchelevent through the door saying: ‘Conscience . . . doing my duty . . ’ That is politics, indeed it is. I will not have it. People should not talk olitics the very next day. It is not right.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.100#“You are mistaken. Cosette,” said Marius, “we are talking business. We re discussing the best investment of your six hundred thousand francs . . ”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.101#“That is not it at all,” interrupted Cosette. “I am coming. Does anybody ant me here?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.102#And, passing resolutely through the door, she entered the drawing-room. he was dressed in a voluminous white dressing-gown, with a thousand folds and arge sleeves which, starting from the neck, fell to her feet. In the golden eavens of some ancient gothic pictures, there are these charming sacks fit to lothe the angels.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.103#She contemplated herself from head to foot in a long mirror, then xclaimed, in an outburst of ineffable ecstasy:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.104#“There was once a King and a Queen. Oh! how happy I am!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.105#That said, she made a curtsey to Marius and to Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.106#“There,” said she, “I am going to install myself near you in an asy-chair, we breakfast in half an hour, you shall say anything you like, I now well that men must talk, and I will be very good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.107#Marius took her by the arm and said lovingly to her:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.108#“We are talking business.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.109#“By the way,” said Cosette, “I have opened my window, a flock of pierrots as arrived in the garden,—Birds, not maskers. To-day is Ash-Wednesday; but not or the birds.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.110#“I tell you that we are talking business, go, my little Cosette, leave us lone for a moment. We are talking figures. That will bore you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.111#“You have a charming cravat on this morning, Marius. You are very andified, monseigneur. No, it will not bore me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.112#“I assure you that it will bore you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.113#“No. Since it is you. I shall not understand you, but I shall listen to ou. When one hears the voices of those whom one loves, one does not need to nderstand the words that they utter. That we should be here together—that is ll that I desire. I shall remain with you, bah!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.114#“You are my beloved Cosette! Impossible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.115#“Impossible!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.116#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.117#“Very good,” said Cosette. “I was going to tell you some news. I could ave told you that your grandfather is still asleep, that your aunt is at mass, hat the chimney in my father Fauchelevent’s room smokes, that Nicolette has ent for the chimney-sweep, that Toussaint and Nicolette have already uarrelled, that Nicolette makes sport of Toussaint’s stammer. Well, you shall now nothing. Ah! it is impossible? you shall see, gentlemen, that I, in my urn, can say: It is impossible. Then who will be caught? I beseech you, my ittle Marius, let me stay here with you two.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.118#“I swear to you, that it is indispensable that we should be alone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.119#“Well, am I anybody?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.120#Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word. Cosette turned to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.121#“In the first place, father, I want you to come and embrace me. What do ou mean by not saying anything instead of taking my part? who gave me such a ather as that? You must perceive that my family life is very unhappy. My usband beats me. Come, embrace me instantly.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.122#Jean Valjean approached.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.123#Cosette turned toward Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.124#“As for you, I shall make a face at you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.125#Then she presented her brow to Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.126#Jean Valjean advanced a step toward her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.127#Cosette recoiled.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.128#“Father, you are pale. Does your arm hurt you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.129#“It is well,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.130#“Did you sleep badly?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.131#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.132#“Are you sad?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.133#“No.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.134#“Embrace me if you are well, if you sleep well, if you are content, I ill not scold you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.135#And again she offered him her brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.136#Jean Valjean dropped a kiss upon that brow whereon rested a celestial leam.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.137#“Smile.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.138#Jean Valjean obeyed. It was the smile of a spectre.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.139#“Now, defend me against my husband.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.140#“Cosette! . . .” ejaculated Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.141#“Get angry, father. Say that I must stay. You can certainly talk before e. So you think me very silly. What you say is astonishing! business, placing oney in a bank a great matter truly. Men make mysteries out of nothing. I am ery pretty this morning. Look at me, Marius.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.142#And with an adorable shrug of the shoulders, and an indescribably xquisite pout, she glanced at Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.143#“I love you!” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.144#“I adore you!” said Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.145#And they fell irresistibly into each other’s arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.146#“Now,” said Cosette, adjusting a fold of her dressing-gown, with a riumphant little grimace, “I shall stay.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.147#“No, not that,” said Marius, in a supplicating tone. “We have to finish omething.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.148#“Still no?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.149#Marius assumed a grave tone:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.150#“I assure you, Cosette, that it is impossible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.151#“Ah! you put on your man’s voice, sir. That is well, I go. You, father, ave not upheld me. Monsieur my father, monsieur my husband, you are tyrants. I hall go and tell grandpapa. If you think that I am going to return and talk latitudes to you, you are mistaken. I am proud. I shall wait for you now. You hall see, that it is you who are going to be bored without me. I am going, it s well.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.152#And she left the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.153#Two seconds later, the door opened once more, her fresh and rosy head was gain thrust between the two leaves, and she cried to them:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.154#“I am very angry indeed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.155#The door closed again, and the shadows descended once more.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.156#It was as though a ray of sunlight should have suddenly traversed the ight, without itself being conscious of it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.157#Marius made sure that the door was securely closed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.158#“Poor Cosette!” he murmured, “when she finds out . . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.159#At that word Jean Valjean trembled in every limb. He fixed on Marius a ewildered eye.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.160#“Cosette! oh yes, it is true, you are going to tell Cosette about this. hat is right. Stay, I had not thought of that. One has the strength for one hing, but not for another. Sir, I conjure you, I entreat now, sir, give me your ost sacred word of honor, that you will not tell her. Is it not enough that you hould know it? I have been able to say it myself without being forced to it, I ould have told it to the universe, to the whole world,—it was all one to me. ut she, she does not know what it is, it would terrify her. What, a convict! we hould be obliged to explain matters to her, to say to her: ‘He is a man who has een in the galleys.’ She saw the chain-gang pass by one day. Oh! My God!” . . . e dropped into an armchair and hid his face in his hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.161#His grief was not audible, but from the quivering of his shoulders it was vident that he was weeping. Silent tears, terrible tears.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.162#There is something of suffocation in the sob. He was seized with a sort f convulsion, he threw himself against the back of the chair as though to gain reath, letting his arms fall, and allowing Marius to see his face inundated ith tears, and Marius heard him murmur, so low that his voice seemed to issue rom fathomless depths:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.163#“Oh! would that I could die!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.164#“Be at your ease,” said Marius, “I will keep your secret for myself lone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.165#And, less touched, perhaps, than he ought to have been, but forced, for he last hour, to familiarize himself with something as unexpected as it was readful, gradually beholding the convict superposed before his very eyes, upon . Fauchelevent, overcome, little by little, by that lugubrious reality, and ed, by the natural inclination of the situation, to recognize the space which ad just been placed between that man and himself, Marius added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.166#“It is impossible that I should not speak a word to you with regard to he deposit which you have so faithfully and honestly remitted. That is an act f probity. It is just that some recompense should be bestowed on you. Fix the um yourself, it shall be counted out to you. Do not fear to set it very igh.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.167#“I thank you, sir,” replied Jean Valjean, gently.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.168#He remained in thought for a moment, mechanically passing the tip of his ore-finger across his thumb-nail, then he lifted up his voice:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.169#“All is nearly over. But one last thing remains for me . . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.170#“What is it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.171#Jean Valjean struggled with what seemed a last hesitation, and, without oice, without breath, he stammered rather than said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.172#“Now that you know, do you think, sir, you, who are the master, that I ught not to see Cosette any more?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.173#“I think that would be better,” replied Marius coldly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.174#“I shall never see her more,” murmured Jean Valjean. And he directed his teps towards the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.175#He laid his hand on the knob, the latch yielded, the door opened. Jean aljean pushed it open far enough to pass through, stood motionless for a econd, then closed the door again and turned to Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.176#He was no longer pale, he was livid. There were no longer any tears in is eyes, but only a sort of tragic flame. His voice had regained a strange omposure.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.177#“Stay, sir,” he said. “If you will allow it, I will come to see her. I ssure you that I desire it greatly. If I had not cared to see Cosette, I should ot have made to you the confession that I have made, I should have gone away; ut, as I desired to remain in the place where Cosette is, and to continue to ee her, I had to tell you about it honestly. You follow my reasoning, do you ot? it is a matter easily understood. You see, I have had her with me for more han nine years. We lived first in that hut on the boulevard, then in the onvent, then near the Luxembourg. That was where you saw her for the first ime. You remember her blue plush hat. Then we went to the Quartier des nvalides, where there was a railing on a garden, the Rue Plumet. I lived in a ittle back court-yard, whence I could hear her piano. That was my life. We ever left each other. That lasted for nine years and some months. I was like er own father, and she was my child. I do not know whether you understand, onsieur Pontmercy, but to go away now, never to see her again, never to speak o her again, to no longer have anything, would be hard. If you do not isapprove of it, I will come to see Cosette from time to time. I will not come ften. I will not remain long. You shall give orders that I am to be received in he little waiting-room. On the ground floor. I could enter perfectly well by he back door, but that might create surprise perhaps, and it would be better, I hink, for me to enter by the usual door. Truly, sir, I should like to see a ittle more of Cosette. As rarely as you please. Put yourself in my place, I ave nothing left but that. And then, we must be cautious. If I no longer come t all, it would produce a bad effect, it would be considered singular. What I an do, by the way, is to come in the afternoon, when night is beginning to all.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.178#“You shall come every evening,” said Marius, “and Cosette will be waiting or you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.179#“You are kind, sir,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.1.180#Marius saluted Jean Valjean, happiness escorted despair to the door, and hese two men parted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.head#CHAPTER II—THE OBSCURITIES WHICH A REVELATION CAN CONTAIN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.1#Marius was quite upset.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.2#The sort of estrangement which he had always felt towards the man beside hom he had seen Cosette, was now explained to him. There was something nigmatic about that person, of which his instinct had warned him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.3#This enigma was the most hideous of disgraces, the galleys. This M. auchelevent was the convict Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.4#To abruptly find such a secret in the midst of one’s happiness resembles he discovery of a scorpion in a nest of turtledoves.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.5#Was the happiness of Marius and Cosette thenceforth condemned to such a eighborhood? Was this an accomplished fact? Did the acceptance of that man form part of the marriage now consummated? Was there nothing to be done?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.6#Had Marius wedded the convict as well?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.7#In vain may one be crowned with light and joy, in vain may one taste the rand purple hour of life, happy love, such shocks would force even the rchangel in his ecstasy, even the demigod in his glory, to shudder.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.8#As is always the case in changes of view of this nature, Marius asked imself whether he had nothing with which to reproach himself. Had he been anting in divination? Had he been wanting in prudence? Had he involuntarily ulled his wits? A little, perhaps. Had he entered upon this love affair, which ad ended in his marriage to Cosette, without taking sufficient precautions to hrow light upon the surroundings? He admitted,—it is thus, by a series of uccessive admissions of ourselves in regard to ourselves, that life amends us, ittle by little,—he admitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature, a ort of internal cloud peculiar to many organizations, and which, in paroxysms f passion and sorrow, dilates as the temperature of the soul changes, and nvades the entire man, to such a degree as to render him nothing more than a onscience bathed in a mist. We have more than once indicated this haracteristic element of Marius’ individuality.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.9#He recalled that, in the intoxication of his love, in the Rue Plumet, uring those six or seven ecstatic weeks, he had not even spoken to Cosette of hat drama in the Gorbeau hovel, where the victim had taken up such a singular ine of silence during the struggle and the ensuing flight. How had it happened hat he had not mentioned this to Cosette? Yet it was so near and so terrible! ow had it come to pass that he had not even named the Thénardiers, and, articularly, on the day when he had encountered Éponine? He now found it almost ifficult to explain his silence of that time. Nevertheless, he could account or it. He recalled his benumbed state, his intoxication with Cosette, love bsorbing everything, that catching away of each other into the ideal, and erhaps also, like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingled with this iolent and charming state of the soul, a vague, dull instinct impelling him to onceal and abolish in his memory that redoubtable adventure, contact with which e dreaded, in which he did not wish to play any part, his agency in which he ad kept secret, and in which he could be neither narrator nor witness without eing an accuser.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.10#Moreover, these few weeks had been a flash of lightning; there had been no ime for anything except love.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.11#In short, having weighed everything, turned everything over in his mind, xamined everything, whatever might have been the consequences if he had told osette about the Gorbeau ambush, even if he had discovered that Jean Valjean as a convict, would that have changed him, Marius? Would that have changed her, osette? Would he have drawn back? Would he have adored her any the less? Would e have refrained from marrying her? No. Then there was nothing to regret, othing with which he need reproach himself. All was well. There is a deity for hose drunken men who are called lovers. Marius blind, had followed the path hich he would have chosen had he been in full possession of his sight. Love had andaged his eyes, in order to lead him whither? To paradise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.12#But this paradise was henceforth complicated with an infernal ccompaniment.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.13#Marius’ ancient estrangement towards this man, towards this Fauchelevent ho had turned into Jean Valjean, was at present mingled with horror.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.14#In this horror, let us state, there was some pity, and even a certain urprise.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.15#This thief, this thief guilty of a second offence, had restored that eposit. And what a deposit! Six hundred thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.16#He alone was in the secret of that deposit. He might have kept it all, he ad restored it all.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.17#Moreover, he had himself revealed his situation. Nothing forced him to his. If any one learned who he was, it was through himself. In this avowal here was something more than acceptance of humiliation, there was acceptance of eril. For a condemned man, a mask is not a mask, it is a shelter. A false name s security, and he had rejected that false name. He, the galley-slave, might ave hidden himself forever in an honest family; he had withstood this emptation. And with what motive? Through a conscientious scruple. He himself xplained this with the irresistible accents of truth. In short, whatever this ean Valjean might be, he was, undoubtedly, a conscience which was awakening. here existed some mysterious re-habilitation which had begun; and, to all ppearances, scruples had for a long time already controlled this man. Such fits f justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgar natures. An awakening f conscience is grandeur of soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.18#Jean Valjean was sincere. This sincerity, visible, palpable, irrefragable, vident from the very grief that it caused him, rendered inquiries useless, and onferred authority on all that that man had said.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.19#Here, for Marius, there was a strange reversal of situations. What reathed from M. Fauchelevent? distrust. What did Jean Valjean inspire? onfidence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.20#In the mysterious balance of this Jean Valjean which the pensive Marius truck, he admitted the active principle, he admitted the passive principle, and e tried to reach a balance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.21#But all this went on as in a storm. Marius, while endeavoring to form a lear idea of this man, and while pursuing Jean Valjean, so to speak, in the epths of his thought, lost him and found him again in a fatal mist.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.22#The deposit honestly restored, the probity of the confession—these were ood. This produced a lightening of the cloud, then the cloud became black once ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.23#Troubled as were Marius’ memories, a shadow of them returned to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.24#After all, what was that adventure in the Jondrette attic? Why had that an taken to flight on the arrival of the police, instead of entering a omplaint?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.25#Here Marius found the answer. Because that man was a fugitive from ustice, who had broken his ban.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.26#Another question: Why had that man come to the barricade?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.27#For Marius now once more distinctly beheld that recollection which had eappeared in his emotions like sympathetic ink at the application of heat. This an had been in the barricade. He had not fought there. What had he come there or? In the presence of this question a spectre sprang up and replied: Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.28#Marius recalled perfectly now that funereal sight of Jean Valjean dragging he pinioned Javert out of the barricade, and he still heard behind the corner f the little Rue Mondétour that frightful pistol shot. Obviously, there was atred between that police spy and the galley-slave. The one was in the other’s ay. Jean Valjean had gone to the barricade for the purpose of revenging imself. He had arrived late. He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there. he Corsican vendetta has penetrated to certain lower strata and has become the aw there; it is so simple that it does not astonish souls which are but half urned towards good; and those hearts are so constituted that a criminal, who is n the path of repentance, may be scrupulous in the matter of theft and nscrupulous in the matter of vengeance. Jean Valjean had killed Javert. At east, that seemed to be evident.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.29#This was the final question, to be sure; but to this there was no reply. his question Marius felt like pincers. How had it come to pass that Jean aljean’s existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a period?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.30#What melancholy sport of Providence was that which had placed that child n contact with that man? Are there then chains for two which are forged on igh? and does God take pleasure in coupling the angel with the demon? So a rime and an innocence can be room-mates in the mysterious galleys of retchedness? In that defiling of condemned persons which is called human estiny, can two brows pass side by side, the one ingenuous, the other ormidable, the one all bathed in the divine whiteness of dawn, the other orever blemished by the flash of an eternal lightning? Who could have arranged hat inexplicable pairing off? In what manner, in consequence of what prodigy, ad any community of life been established between this celestial little reature and that old criminal?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.31#Who could have bound the lamb to the wolf, and, what was still more ncomprehensible, have attached the wolf to the lamb? For the wolf loved the amb, for the fierce creature adored the feeble one, for, during the space of ine years, the angel had had the monster as her point of support. Cosette’s hildhood and girlhood, her advent in the daylight, her virginal growth towards ife and light, had been sheltered by that hideous devotion. Here questions xfoliated, so to speak, into innumerable enigmas, abysses yawned at the bottoms f abysses, and Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean without becoming izzy. What was this man-precipice?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.32#The old symbols of Genesis are eternal; in human society, such as it now xists, and until a broader day shall effect a change in it, there will always e two men, the one superior, the other subterranean; the one which is according o good is Abel; the other which is according to evil is Cain. What was this ender Cain? What was this ruffian religiously absorbed in the adoration of a irgin, watching over her, rearing her, guarding her, dignifying her, and nveloping her, impure as he was himself, with purity?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.33#What was that cesspool which had venerated that innocence to such a point s not to leave upon it a single spot? What was this Jean Valjean educating osette? What was this figure of the shadows which had for its only object the reservation of the rising of a star from every shadow and from every cloud?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.34#That was Jean Valjean’s secret; that was also God’s secret.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.35#In the presence of this double secret, Marius recoiled. The one, in some ort, reassured him as to the other. God was as visible in this affair as was ean Valjean. God has his instruments. He makes use of the tool which he wills. e is not responsible to men. Do we know how God sets about the work? Jean aljean had labored over Cosette. He had, to some extent, made that soul. That as incontestable. Well, what then? The workman was horrible; but the work was dmirable. God produces his miracles as seems good to him. He had constructed hat charming Cosette, and he had employed Jean Valjean. It had pleased him to hoose this strange collaborator for himself. What account have we to demand of im? Is this the first time that the dung-heap has aided the spring to create he rose?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.36#Marius made himself these replies, and declared to himself that they were ood. He had not dared to press Jean Valjean on all the points which we have ust indicated, but he did not confess to himself that he did not dare to do it. e adored Cosette, he possessed Cosette, Cosette was splendidly pure. That was ufficient for him. What enlightenment did he need? Cosette was a light. Does ight require enlightenment? He had everything; what more could he desire? ll,—is not that enough? Jean Valjean’s personal affairs did not concern im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.37#And bending over the fatal shadow of that man, he clung fast, onvulsively, to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch: “I am nothing to osette. Ten years ago I did not know that she was in existence.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.38#Jean Valjean was a passer-by. He had said so himself. Well, he had passed. hatever he was, his part was finished.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.39#Henceforth, there remained Marius to fulfil the part of Providence to osette. Cosette had sought the azure in a person like herself, in her lover, er husband, her celestial male. Cosette, as she took her flight, winged and ransfigured, left behind her on the earth her hideous and empty chrysalis, Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.40#In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved, he always returned to a ertain horror for Jean Valjean. A sacred horror, perhaps, for, as we have just ointed out, he felt a _quid divinum_ in that man. But do what he would, and eek what extenuation he would, he was certainly forced to fall back upon this: he man was a convict; that is to say, a being who has not even a place in the ocial ladder, since he is lower than the very lowest rung. After the very last f men comes the convict. The convict is no longer, so to speak, in the emblance of the living. The law has deprived him of the entire quantity of umanity of which it can deprive a man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.41#Marius, on penal questions, still held to the inexorable system, though he as a democrat and he entertained all the ideas of the law on the subject of hose whom the law strikes. He had not yet accomplished all progress, we admit. e had not yet come to distinguish between that which is written by man and that hich is written by God, between law and right. He had not examined and weighed he right which man takes to dispose of the irrevocable and the irreparable. He as not shocked by the word _vindicte_. He found it quite simple that certain reaches of the written law should be followed by eternal suffering, and he ccepted, as the process of civilization, social damnation. He still stood at his point, though safe to advance infallibly later on, since his nature was ood, and, at bottom, wholly formed of latent progress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.42#In this stage of his ideas, Jean Valjean appeared to him hideous and epulsive. He was a man reproved, he was the convict. That word was for him like he sound of the trump on the Day of Judgment; and, after having reflected upon ean Valjean for a long time, his final gesture had been to turn away his head. Vade retro_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.43#Marius, if we must recognize and even insist upon the fact, while nterrogating Jean Valjean to such a point that Jean Valjean had said: “You are onfessing me,” had not, nevertheless, put to him two or three decisive uestions.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.44#It was not that they had not presented themselves to his mind, but that he ad been afraid of them. The Jondrette attic? The barricade? Javert? Who knows here these revelations would have stopped? Jean Valjean did not seem like a man ho would draw back, and who knows whether Marius, after having urged him on, ould not have himself desired to hold him back?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.45#Has it not happened to all of us, in certain supreme conjunctures, to stop ur ears in order that we may not hear the reply, after we have asked a uestion? It is especially when one loves that one gives way to these xhibitions of cowardice. It is not wise to question sinister situations to the ast point, particularly when the indissoluble side of our life is fatally ntermingled with them. What a terrible light might have proceeded from the espairing explanations of Jean Valjean, and who knows whether that hideous lare would not have darted forth as far as Cosette? Who knows whether a sort of nfernal glow would not have lingered behind it on the brow of that angel? The pattering of a lightning-flash is of the thunder also. Fatality has points of uncture where innocence itself is stamped with crime by the gloomy law of the eflections which give color. The purest figures may forever preserve the eflection of a horrible association. Rightly or wrongly, Marius had been fraid. He already knew too much. He sought to dull his senses rather than to ain further light.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.46#In dismay he bore off Cosette in his arms and shut his eyes to Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.47#That man was the night, the living and horrible night. How should he dare o seek the bottom of it? It is a terrible thing to interrogate the shadow. Who nows what its reply will be? The dawn may be blackened forever by it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.48#In this state of mind the thought that that man would, henceforth, come nto any contact whatever with Cosette was a heartrending perplexity to arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.49#He now almost reproached himself for not having put those formidable uestions, before which he had recoiled, and from which an implacable and efinitive decision might have sprung. He felt that he was too good, too gentle, oo weak, if we must say the word. This weakness had led him to an imprudent oncession. He had allowed himself to be touched. He had been in the wrong. He ught to have simply and purely rejected Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean played the art of fire, and that is what he should have done, and have freed his house rom that man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.50#He was vexed with himself, he was angry with that whirlwind of emotions hich had deafened, blinded, and carried him away. He was displeased with imself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.51#What was he to do now? Jean Valjean’s visits were profoundly repugnant to im. What was the use in having that man in his house? What did the man want? ere, he became dismayed, he did not wish to dig down, he did not wish to enetrate deeply; he did not wish to sound himself. He had promised, he had llowed himself to be drawn into a promise; Jean Valjean held his promise; one ust keep one’s word even to a convict, above all to a convict. Still, his first uty was to Cosette. In short, he was carried away by the repugnance which ominated him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.52#Marius turned over all this confusion of ideas in his mind, passing from ne to the other, and moved by all of them. Hence arose a profound trouble.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.53#It was not easy for him to hide this trouble from Cosette, but love is a alent, and Marius succeeded in doing it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.7.2.54#However, without any apparent object, he questioned Cosette, who was as andid as a dove is white and who suspected nothing; he talked of her childhood nd her youth, and he became more and more convinced that that convict had been verything good, paternal and respectable that a man can be towards Cosette. All hat Marius had caught a glimpse of and had surmised was real. That sinister ettle had loved and protected that lily.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.head#BOOK EIGHTH—FADING AWAY OF THE TWILIGHT
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.head#CHAPTER I—THE LOWER CHAMBER
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.1#On the following day, at nightfall, Jean Valjean knocked at the carriage ate of the Gillenormand house. It was Basque who received him. Basque was in he courtyard at the appointed hour, as though he had received his orders. It ometimes happens that one says to a servant: “You will watch for Mr. So and So, hen he arrives.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.2#Basque addressed Jean Valjean without waiting for the latter to approach im:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.3#“Monsieur le Baron has charged me to inquire whether monsieur desires to go pstairs or to remain below?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.4#“I will remain below,” replied Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.5#Basque, who was perfectly respectful, opened the door of the waiting-room nd said:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.6#“I will go and inform Madame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.7#The room which Jean Valjean entered was a damp, vaulted room on the ground loor, which served as a cellar on occasion, which opened on the street, was aved with red squares and was badly lighted by a grated window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.8#This chamber was not one of those which are harassed by the feather-duster, he pope’s head brush, and the broom. The dust rested tranquilly there. ersecution of the spiders was not organized there. A fine web, which spread far nd wide, and was very black and ornamented with dead flies, formed a wheel on ne of the window-panes. The room, which was small and low-ceiled, was furnished ith a heap of empty bottles piled up in one corner.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.9#The wall, which was daubed with an ochre yellow wash, was scaling off in arge flakes. At one end there was a chimney-piece painted in black with a arrow shelf. A fire was burning there; which indicated that Jean Valjean’s eply: “I will remain below,” had been foreseen.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.10#Two armchairs were placed at the two corners of the fireplace. Between the hairs an old bedside rug, which displayed more foundation thread than wool, had een spread by way of a carpet.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.11#The chamber was lighted by the fire on the hearth and the twilight falling hrough the window.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.12#Jean Valjean was fatigued. For days he had neither eaten nor slept. He hrew himself into one of the armchairs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.13#Basque returned, set a lighted candle on the chimney-piece and retired. ean Valjean, his head drooping and his chin resting on his breast, perceived either Basque nor the candle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.14#All at once, he drew himself up with a start. Cosette was standing beside im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.15#He had not seen her enter, but he had felt that she was there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.16#He turned round. He gazed at her. She was adorably lovely. But what he was ontemplating with that profound gaze was not her beauty but her soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.17#“Well,” exclaimed Cosette, “father, I knew that you were peculiar, but I ever should have expected this. What an idea! Marius told me that you wish me o receive you here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.18#“Yes, it is my wish.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.19#“I expected that reply. Good. I warn you that I am going to make a scene or you. Let us begin at the beginning. Embrace me, father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.20#And she offered him her cheek.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.21#Jean Valjean remained motionless.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.22#“You do not stir. I take note of it. Attitude of guilt. But never mind, I ardon you. Jesus Christ said: Offer the other cheek. Here it is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.23#And she presented her other cheek.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.24#Jean Valjean did not move. It seemed as though his feet were nailed to the avement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.25#“This is becoming serious,” said Cosette. “What have I done to you? I eclare that I am perplexed. You owe me reparation. You will dine with us.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.26#“I have dined.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.27#“That is not true. I will get M. Gillenormand to scold you. Grandfathers re made to reprimand fathers. Come. Go upstairs with me to the drawing-room. mmediately.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.28#“Impossible.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.29#Here Cosette lost ground a little. She ceased to command and passed to uestioning.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.30#“But why? and you choose the ugliest chamber in the house in which to see e. It’s horrible here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.31#“Thou knowest . . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.32#Jean Valjean caught himself up.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.33#“You know, madame, that I am peculiar, I have my freaks.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.34#Cosette struck her tiny hands together.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.35#“Madame! . . . You know! . . . more novelties! What is the meaning of his?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.36#Jean Valjean directed upon her that heartrending smile to which he ccasionally had recourse:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.37#“You wished to be Madame. You are so.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.38#“Not for you, father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.39#“Do not call me father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.40#“What?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.41#“Call me ‘Monsieur Jean.’ ‘Jean,’ if you like.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.42#“You are no longer my father? I am no longer Cosette? ‘Monsieur Jean’? hat does this mean? why, these are revolutions, aren’t they? what has taken lace? come, look me in the face. And you won’t live with us! And you won’t have y chamber! What have I done to you? Has anything happened?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.43#“Nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.44#“Well then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.45#“Everything is as usual.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.46#“Why do you change your name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.47#“You have changed yours, surely.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.48#He smiled again with the same smile as before and added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.49#“Since you are Madame Pontmercy, I certainly can be Monsieur Jean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.50#“I don’t understand anything about it. All this is idiotic. I shall ask ermission of my husband for you to be ‘Monsieur Jean.’ I hope that he will not onsent to it. You cause me a great deal of pain. One does have freaks, but one oes not cause one’s little Cosette grief. That is wrong. You have no right to e wicked, you who are so good.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.51#He made no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.52#She seized his hands with vivacity, and raising them to her face with an rresistible movement, she pressed them against her neck beneath her chin, which s a gesture of profound tenderness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.53#“Oh!” she said to him, “be good!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.54#And she went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.55#“This is what I call being good: being nice and coming and living ere,—there are birds here as there are in the Rue Plumet,—living with us, uitting that hole of a Rue de l’Homme Armé, not giving us riddles to guess, eing like all the rest of the world, dining with us, breakfasting with us, eing my father.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.56#He loosed her hands.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.57#“You no longer need a father, you have a husband.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.58#Cosette became angry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.59#“I no longer need a father! One really does not know what to say to things ike that, which are not common sense!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.60#“If Toussaint were here,” resumed Jean Valjean, like a person who is riven to seek authorities, and who clutches at every branch, “she would be the irst to agree that it is true that I have always had ways of my own. There is othing new in this. I always have loved my black corner.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.61#“But it is cold here. One cannot see distinctly. It is abominable, that it s, to wish to be Monsieur Jean! I will not have you say ‘you’ to me.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.62#“Just now, as I was coming hither,” replied Jean Valjean, “I saw a piece f furniture in the Rue Saint Louis. It was at a cabinet-maker’s. If I were a retty woman, I would treat myself to that bit of furniture. A very neat toilet able in the reigning style. What you call rosewood, I think. It is inlaid. The irror is quite large. There are drawers. It is pretty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.63#“Hou! the villainous bear!” replied Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.64#And with supreme grace, setting her teeth and drawing back her lips, she lew at Jean Valjean. She was a Grace copying a cat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.65#“I am furious,” she resumed. “Ever since yesterday, you have made me rage, ll of you. I am greatly vexed. I don’t understand. You do not defend me against arius. Marius will not uphold me against you. I am all alone. I arrange a hamber prettily. If I could have put the good God there I would have done it. y chamber is left on my hands. My lodger sends me into bankruptcy. I order a ice little dinner of Nicolette. We will have nothing to do with your dinner, adame. And my father Fauchelevent wants me to call him ‘Monsieur Jean,’ and to eceive him in a frightful, old, ugly cellar, where the walls have beards, and here the crystal consists of empty bottles, and the curtains are of spiders’ ebs! You are singular, I admit, that is your style, but people who get married re granted a truce. You ought not to have begun being singular again instantly. o you are going to be perfectly contented in your abominable Rue de l’Homme rmé. I was very desperate indeed there, that I was. What have you against me? ou cause me a great deal of grief. Fi!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.66#And, becoming suddenly serious, she gazed intently at Jean Valjean and dded:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.67#“Are you angry with me because I am happy?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.68#Ingenuousness sometimes unconsciously penetrates deep. This question, hich was simple for Cosette, was profound for Jean Valjean. Cosette had meant o scratch, and she lacerated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.69#Jean Valjean turned pale.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.70#He remained for a moment without replying, then, with an inexpressible ntonation, and speaking to himself, he murmured:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.71#“Her happiness was the object of my life. Now God may sign my dismissal. osette, thou art happy; my day is over.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.72#“Ah, you have said _thou_ to me!” exclaimed Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.73#And she sprang to his neck.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.74#Jean Valjean, in bewilderment, strained her wildly to his breast. It lmost seemed to him as though he were taking her back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.75#“Thanks, father!” said Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.76#This enthusiastic impulse was on the point of becoming poignant for Jean aljean. He gently removed Cosette’s arms, and took his hat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.77#“Well?” said Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.78#“I leave you, Madame, they are waiting for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.79#And, from the threshold, he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.80#“I have said _thou_ to you. Tell your husband that this shall not happen gain. Pardon me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.1.81#Jean Valjean quitted the room, leaving Cosette stupefied at this nigmatical farewell.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.head#CHAPTER II—ANOTHER STEP BACKWARDS
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.1#On the following day, at the same hour, Jean Valjean came.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.2#Cosette asked him no questions, was no longer astonished, no longer xclaimed that she was cold, no longer spoke of the drawing-room, she avoided aying either “father” or “Monsieur Jean.” She allowed herself to be addressed s _you_. She allowed herself to be called Madame. Only, her joy had undergone a ertain diminution. She would have been sad, if sadness had been possible to er.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.3#It is probable that she had had with Marius one of those conversations in hich the beloved man says what he pleases, explains nothing, and satisfies the eloved woman. The curiosity of lovers does not extend very far beyond their own ove.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.4#The lower room had made a little toilet. Basque had suppressed the bottles, nd Nicolette the spiders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.5#All the days which followed brought Jean Valjean at the same hour. He came very day, because he had not the strength to take Marius’ words otherwise than iterally. Marius arranged matters so as to be absent at the hours when Jean aljean came. The house grew accustomed to the novel ways of M. Fauchelevent. oussaint helped in this direction: “Monsieur has always been like that,” she epeated. The grandfather issued this decree:—“He’s an original.” And all was aid. Moreover, at the age of ninety-six, no bond is any longer possible, all is erely juxtaposition; a newcomer is in the way. There is no longer any room; all abits are acquired. M. Fauchelevent, M. Tranchelevent, Father Gillenormand sked nothing better than to be relieved from “that gentleman.” He dded:—“Nothing is more common than those originals. They do all sorts of queer hings. They have no reason. The Marquis de Canaples was still worse. He bought palace that he might lodge in the garret. These are fantastic appearances that eople affect.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.6#No one caught a glimpse of the sinister foundation. And moreover, who could ave guessed such a thing? There are marshes of this description in India. The ater seems extraordinary, inexplicable, rippling though there is no wind, and gitated where it should be calm. One gazes at the surface of these causeless bullitions; one does not perceive the hydra which crawls on the bottom.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.7#Many men have a secret monster in this same manner, a dragon which gnaws hem, a despair which inhabits their night. Such a man resembles other men, he oes and comes. No one knows that he bears within him a frightful parasitic pain ith a thousand teeth, which lives within the unhappy man, and of which he is ying. No one knows that this man is a gulf. He is stagnant but deep. From time o time, a trouble of which the onlooker understands nothing appears on his urface. A mysterious wrinkle is formed, then vanishes, then reappears; an ir-bubble rises and bursts. It is the breathing of the unknown beast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.8#Certain strange habits: arriving at the hour when other people are taking heir leave, keeping in the background when other people are displaying hemselves, preserving on all occasions what may be designated as the all-colored mantle, seeking the solitary walk, preferring the deserted street, voiding any share in conversation, avoiding crowds and festivals, seeming at ne’s ease and living poorly, having one’s key in one’s pocket, and one’s candle t the porter’s lodge, however rich one may be, entering by the side door, scending the private staircase,—all these insignificant singularities, fugitive olds on the surface, often proceed from a formidable foundation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.9#Many weeks passed in this manner. A new life gradually took possession of osette: the relations which marriage creates, visits, the care of the house, leasures, great matters. Cosette’s pleasures were not costly, they consisted in ne thing: being with Marius. The great occupation of her life was to go out ith him, to remain with him. It was for them a joy that was always fresh, to go ut arm in arm, in the face of the sun, in the open street, without hiding hemselves, before the whole world, both of them completely alone.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.10#Cosette had one vexation. Toussaint could not get on with Nicolette, the oldering of two elderly maids being impossible, and she went away. The randfather was well; Marius argued a case here and there; Aunt Gillenormand eacefully led that life aside which sufficed for her, beside the new household. ean Valjean came every day.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.11#The address as _thou_ disappeared, the _you_, the “Madame,” the “Monsieur ean,” rendered him another person to Cosette. The care which he had himself aken to detach her from him was succeeding. She became more and more gay and ess and less tender. Yet she still loved him sincerely, and he felt it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.12#One day she said to him suddenly: “You used to be my father, you are no onger my father, you were my uncle, you are no longer my uncle, you were onsieur Fauchelevent, you are Jean. Who are you then? I don’t like all this. If did not know how good you are, I should be afraid of you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.13#He still lived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, because he could not make up is mind to remove to a distance from the quarter where Cosette dwelt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.14#At first, he only remained a few minutes with Cosette, and then went way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.15#Little by little he acquired the habit of making his visits less brief. ne would have said that he was taking advantage of the authorization of the ays which were lengthening, he arrived earlier and departed later.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.2.16#One day Cosette chanced to say “father” to him. A flash of joy illuminated ean Valjean’s melancholy old countenance. He caught her up: “Say Jean.”—“Ah! ruly,” she replied with a burst of laughter, “Monsieur Jean.”—“That is right,” aid he. And he turned aside so that she might not see him wipe his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.head#CHAPTER III—THEY RECALL THE GARDEN OF THE RUE PLUMET
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.1#This was the last time. After that last flash of light, complete extinction nsued. No more familiarity, no more good-morning with a kiss, never more that ord so profoundly sweet: “My father!” He was at his own request and through his wn complicity driven out of all his happinesses one after the other; and he had his sorrow, that after having lost Cosette wholly in one day, he was afterwards bliged to lose her again in detail.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.2#The eye eventually becomes accustomed to the light of a cellar. In short, t sufficed for him to have an apparition of Cosette every day. His whole life as concentrated in that one hour.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.3#He seated himself close to her, he gazed at her in silence, or he talked to er of years gone by, of her childhood, of the convent, of her little friends of hose bygone days.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.4#One afternoon,—it was on one of those early days in April, already warm and resh, the moment of the sun’s great gayety, the gardens which surrounded the indows of Marius and Cosette felt the emotion of waking, the hawthorn was on he point of budding, a jewelled garniture of gillyflowers spread over the ncient walls, snapdragons yawned through the crevices of the stones, amid the rass there was a charming beginning of daisies, and buttercups, the white utterflies of the year were making their first appearance, the wind, that instrel of the eternal wedding, was trying in the trees the first notes of that rand, auroral symphony which the old poets called the springtide,—Marius said o Cosette:—“We said that we would go back to take a look at our garden in the ue Plumet. Let us go thither. We must not be ungrateful.”—And away they litted, like two swallows towards the spring. This garden of the Rue Plumet roduced on them the effect of the dawn. They already had behind them in life omething which was like the springtime of their love. The house in the Rue lumet being held on a lease, still belonged to Cosette. They went to that arden and that house. There they found themselves again, there they forgot hemselves. That evening, at the usual hour, Jean Valjean came to the Rue des illes-du-Calvaire.—“Madame went out with Monsieur and has not yet returned,” asque said to him. He seated himself in silence, and waited an hour. Cosette id not return. He departed with drooping head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.5#Cosette was so intoxicated with her walk to “their garden,” and so joyous t having “lived a whole day in her past,” that she talked of nothing else on he morrow. She did not notice that she had not seen Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.6#“In what way did you go thither?” Jean Valjean asked her.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.7#“On foot.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.8#“And how did you return?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.9#“In a hackney carriage.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.10#For some time, Jean Valjean had noticed the economical life led by the oung people. He was troubled by it. Marius’ economy was severe, and that word ad its absolute meaning for Jean Valjean. He hazarded a query:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.11#“Why do you not have a carriage of your own? A pretty coupé would only ost you five hundred francs a month. You are rich.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.12#“I don’t know,” replied Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.13#“It is like Toussaint,” resumed Jean Valjean. “She is gone. You have not eplaced her. Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.14#“Nicolette suffices.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.15#“But you ought to have a maid.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.16#“Have I not Marius?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.17#“You ought to have a house of your own, your own servants, a carriage, a ox at the theatre. There is nothing too fine for you. Why not profit by your iches? Wealth adds to happiness.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.18#Cosette made no reply.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.19#Jean Valjean’s visits were not abridged. Far from it. When it is the heart hich is slipping, one does not halt on the downward slope.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.20#When Jean Valjean wished to prolong his visit and to induce forgetfulness f the hour, he sang the praises of Marius; he pronounced him handsome, noble, ourageous, witty, eloquent, good. Cosette outdid him. Jean Valjean began again. hey were never weary. Marius—that word was inexhaustible; those six letters ontained volumes. In this manner, Jean Valjean contrived to remain a long ime.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.21#It was so sweet to see Cosette, to forget by her side! It alleviated his ounds. It frequently happened that Basque came twice to announce: “M. illenormand sends me to remind Madame la Baronne that dinner is served.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.22#On those days, Jean Valjean was very thoughtful on his return home.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.23#Was there, then, any truth in that comparison of the chrysalis which had resented itself to the mind of Marius? Was Jean Valjean really a chrysalis who ould persist, and who would come to visit his butterfly?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.24#One day he remained still longer than usual. On the following day he bserved that there was no fire on the hearth.—“Hello!” he thought. “No ire.”—And he furnished the explanation for himself.—“It is perfectly simple. It s April. The cold weather has ceased.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.25#“Heavens! how cold it is here!” exclaimed Cosette when she entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.26#“Why, no,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.27#“Was it you who told Basque not to make a fire then?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.28#“Yes, since we are now in the month of May.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.29#“But we have a fire until June. One is needed all the year in this ellar.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.30#“I thought that a fire was unnecessary.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.31#“That is exactly like one of your ideas!” retorted Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.32#On the following day there was a fire. But the two armchairs were arranged t the other end of the room near the door. “—What is the meaning of this?” hought Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.33#He went for the armchairs and restored them to their ordinary place near he hearth.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.34#This fire lighted once more encouraged him, however. He prolonged the onversation even beyond its customary limits. As he rose to take his leave, osette said to him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.35#“My husband said a queer thing to me yesterday.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.36#“What was it?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.37#“He said to me: ‘Cosette, we have an income of thirty thousand livres. wenty-seven that you own, and three that my grandfather gives me.’ I replied: That makes thirty.’ He went on: ‘Would you have the courage to live on the hree thousand?’ I answered: ‘Yes, on nothing. Provided that it was with you.’ nd then I asked: ‘Why do you say that to me?’ He replied: ‘I wanted to now.’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.38#Jean Valjean found not a word to answer. Cosette probably expected some xplanation from him; he listened in gloomy silence. He went back to the Rue de ’Homme Armé; he was so deeply absorbed that he mistook the door and instead of ntering his own house, he entered the adjoining dwelling. It was only after aving ascended nearly two stories that he perceived his error and went down gain.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.39#His mind was swarming with conjectures. It was evident that Marius had his oubts as to the origin of the six hundred thousand francs, that he feared some ource that was not pure, who knows? that he had even, perhaps, discovered that he money came from him, Jean Valjean, that he hesitated before this suspicious ortune, and was disinclined to take it as his own,—preferring that both he and osette should remain poor, rather than that they should be rich with wealth hat was not clean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.40#Moreover, Jean Valjean began vaguely to surmise that he was being shown he door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.41#On the following day, he underwent something like a shock on entering the round-floor room. The armchairs had disappeared. There was not a single chair f any sort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.42#“Ah, what’s this!” exclaimed Cosette as she entered, “no chairs! Where are he armchairs?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.43#“They are no longer here,” replied Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.44#“This is too much!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.45#Jean Valjean stammered:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.46#“It was I who told Basque to remove them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.47#“And your reason?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.48#“I have only a few minutes to stay to-day.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.49#“A brief stay is no reason for remaining standing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.50#“I think that Basque needed the chairs for the drawing-room.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.51#“Why?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.52#“You have company this evening, no doubt.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.53#“We expect no one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.54#Jean Valjean had not another word to say.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.55#Cosette shrugged her shoulders.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.56#“To have the chairs carried off! The other day you had the fire put out. ow odd you are!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.57#“Adieu!” murmured Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.58#He did not say: “Adieu, Cosette.” But he had not the strength to say: Adieu, Madame.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.59#He went away utterly overwhelmed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.60#This time he had understood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.61#On the following day he did not come. Cosette only observed the fact in he evening.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.62#“Why,” said she, “Monsieur Jean has not been here today.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.63#And she felt a slight twinge at her heart, but she hardly perceived it, eing immediately diverted by a kiss from Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.64#On the following day he did not come.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.65#Cosette paid no heed to this, passed her evening and slept well that ight, as usual, and thought of it only when she woke. She was so happy! She peedily despatched Nicolette to M. Jean’s house to inquire whether he were ill, nd why he had not come on the previous evening. Nicolette brought back the eply of M. Jean that he was not ill. He was busy. He would come soon. As soon s he was able. Moreover, he was on the point of taking a little journey. Madame ust remember that it was his custom to take trips from time to time. They were ot to worry about him. They were not to think of him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.66#Nicolette on entering M. Jean’s had repeated to him her mistress’ very ords. That Madame had sent her to inquire why M. Jean had not come on the receding evening. ”—It is two days since I have been there,” said Jean Valjean ently.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.3.67#But the remark passed unnoticed by Nicolette, who did not report it to osette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.head#CHAPTER IV—ATTRACTION AND EXTINCTION
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.1#During the last months of spring and the first months of summer in 1833, he rare passers-by in the Marais, the petty shopkeepers, the loungers on hresholds, noticed an old man neatly clad in black, who emerged every day at he same hour, towards nightfall, from the Rue de l’Homme Armé, on the side of he Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie, passed in front of the Blancs Manteaux, ained the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine, and, on arriving at the Rue de ‘Écharpe, turned to the left, and entered the Rue Saint-Louis.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.2#There he walked at a slow pace, with his head strained forward, seeing othing, hearing nothing, his eye immovably fixed on a point which seemed to be star to him, which never varied, and which was no other than the corner of the ue des Filles-du-Calvaire. The nearer he approached the corner of the street he more his eye lighted up; a sort of joy illuminated his pupils like an inward urora, he had a fascinated and much affected air, his lips indulged in obscure ovements, as though he were talking to some one whom he did not see, he smiled aguely and advanced as slowly as possible. One would have said that, while esirous of reaching his destination, he feared the moment when he should be lose at hand. When only a few houses remained between him and that street which ppeared to attract him his pace slackened, to such a degree that, at times, one ight have thought that he was no longer advancing at all. The vacillation of is head and the fixity of his eyeballs suggested the thought of the magnetic eedle seeking the pole. Whatever time he spent on arriving, he was obliged to rrive at last; he reached the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire; then he halted, he rembled, he thrust his head with a sort of melancholy timidity round the corner f the last house, and gazed into that street, and there was in that tragic look omething which resembled the dazzling light of the impossible, and the eflection from a paradise that was closed to him. Then a tear, which had slowly athered in the corner of his lids, and had become large enough to fall, rickled down his cheek, and sometimes stopped at his mouth. The old man tasted ts bitter flavor. Thus he remained for several minutes as though made of stone, hen he returned by the same road and with the same step, and, in proportion as e retreated, his glance died out.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.3#Little by little, this old man ceased to go as far as the corner of the Rue es Filles-du-Calvaire; he halted half way in the Rue Saint-Louis; sometimes a ittle further off, sometimes a little nearer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.4#One day he stopped at the corner of the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine and ooked at the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire from a distance. Then he shook his head lowly from right to left, as though refusing himself something, and retraced is steps.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.5#Soon he no longer came as far as the Rue Saint-Louis. He got as far as the ue Pavée, shook his head and turned back; then he went no further than the Rue es Trois-Pavillons; then he did not overstep the Blancs-Manteaux. One would ave said that he was a pendulum which was no longer wound up, and whose scillations were growing shorter before ceasing altogether.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.6#Every day he emerged from his house at the same hour, he undertook the same rip, but he no longer completed it, and, perhaps without himself being aware of he fact, he constantly shortened it. His whole countenance expressed this ingle idea: What is the use?—His eye was dim; no more radiance. His tears were lso exhausted; they no longer collected in the corner of his eye-lid; that houghtful eye was dry. The old man’s head was still craned forward; his chin oved at times; the folds in his gaunt neck were painful to behold. Sometimes, hen the weather was bad, he had an umbrella under his arm, but he never opened t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.8.4.7#The good women of the quarter said: “He is an innocent.” The children ollowed him and laughed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.head#BOOK NINTH—SUPREME SHADOW, SUPREME DAWN
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.head#CHAPTER I—PITY FOR THE UNHAPPY, BUT INDULGENCE FOR THE HAPPY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.1#It is a terrible thing to be happy! How content one is! How all-sufficient ne finds it! How, being in possession of the false object of life, happiness, ne forgets the true object, duty!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.2#Let us say, however, that the reader would do wrong were he to blame arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.3#Marius, as we have explained, before his marriage, had put no questions to . Fauchelevent, and, since that time, he had feared to put any to Jean Valjean. e had regretted the promise into which he had allowed himself to be drawn. He ad often said to himself that he had done wrong in making that concession to espair. He had confined himself to gradually estranging Jean Valjean from his ouse and to effacing him, as much as possible, from Cosette’s mind. He had, in manner, always placed himself between Cosette and Jean Valjean, sure that, in his way, she would not perceive nor think of the latter. It was more than ffacement, it was an eclipse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.4#Marius did what he considered necessary and just. He thought that he had erious reasons which the reader has already seen, and others which will be seen ater on, for getting rid of Jean Valjean without harshness, but without eakness.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.5#Chance having ordained that he should encounter, in a case which he had rgued, a former employee of the Laffitte establishment, he had acquired ysterious information, without seeking it, which he had not been able, it is rue, to probe, out of respect for the secret which he had promised to guard, nd out of consideration for Jean Valjean’s perilous position. He believed at hat moment that he had a grave duty to perform: the restitution of the six undred thousand francs to some one whom he sought with all possible discretion. n the meanwhile, he abstained from touching that money.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.6#As for Cosette, she had not been initiated into any of these secrets; but t would be harsh to condemn her also.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.7#There existed between Marius and her an all-powerful magnetism, which aused her to do, instinctively and almost mechanically, what Marius wished. She as conscious of Marius’ will in the direction of “Monsieur Jean,” she conformed o it. Her husband had not been obliged to say anything to her; she yielded to he vague but clear pressure of his tacit intentions, and obeyed blindly. Her bedience in this instance consisted in not remembering what Marius forgot. She as not obliged to make any effort to accomplish this. Without her knowing why erself, and without his having any cause to accuse her of it, her soul had ecome so wholly her husband’s that that which was shrouded in gloom in Marius’ ind became overcast in hers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.8#Let us not go too far, however; in what concerns Jean Valjean, this orgetfulness and obliteration were merely superficial. She was rather heedless han forgetful. At bottom, she was sincerely attached to the man whom she had so ong called her father; but she loved her husband still more dearly. This was hat had somewhat disturbed the balance of her heart, which leaned to one side nly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.9#It sometimes happened that Cosette spoke of Jean Valjean and expressed her urprise. Then Marius calmed her: “He is absent, I think. Did not he say that he as setting out on a journey?”—“That is true,” thought Cosette. “He had a habit f disappearing in this fashion. But not for so long.” Two or three times she espatched Nicolette to inquire in the Rue de l’Homme Armé whether M. Jean had eturned from his journey. Jean Valjean caused the answer “no” to be given.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.10#Cosette asked nothing more, since she had but one need on earth, arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.11#Let us also say that, on their side, Cosette and Marius had also been bsent. They had been to Vernon. Marius had taken Cosette to his father’s rave.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.12#Marius gradually won Cosette away from Jean Valjean. Cosette allowed t.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.1.13#Moreover that which is called, far too harshly in certain cases, the ngratitude of children, is not always a thing so deserving of reproach as it is upposed. It is the ingratitude of nature. Nature, as we have elsewhere said, looks before her.” Nature divides living beings into those who are arriving and hose who are departing. Those who are departing are turned towards the shadows, hose who are arriving towards the light. Hence a gulf which is fatal on the art of the old, and involuntary on the part of the young. This breach, at first nsensible, increases slowly, like all separations of branches. The boughs, ithout becoming detached from the trunk, grow away from it. It is no fault of heirs. Youth goes where there is joy, festivals, vivid lights, love. Old age oes towards the end. They do not lose sight of each other, but there is no onger a close connection. Young people feel the cooling off of life; old eople, that of the tomb. Let us not blame these poor children.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.head#CHAPTER II—LAST FLICKERINGS OF A LAMP WITHOUT OIL
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.1#One day, Jean Valjean descended his staircase, took three steps in the treet, seated himself on a post, on that same stone post where Gavroche had ound him meditating on the night between the 5th and the 6th of June; he emained there a few moments, then went upstairs again. This was the last scillation of the pendulum. On the following day he did not leave his partment. On the day after that, he did not leave his bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.2#His portress, who prepared his scanty repasts, a few cabbages or potatoes ith bacon, glanced at the brown earthenware plate and exclaimed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.3#“But you ate nothing yesterday, poor, dear man!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.4#“Certainly I did,” replied Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.5#“The plate is quite full.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.6#“Look at the water jug. It is empty.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.7#“That proves that you have drunk; it does not prove that you have aten.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.8#“Well,” said Jean Valjean, “what if I felt hungry only for water?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.9#“That is called thirst, and, when one does not eat at the same time, it is alled fever.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.10#“I will eat to-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.11#“Or at Trinity day. Why not to-day? Is it the thing to say: ‘I will eat o-morrow’? The idea of leaving my platter without even touching it! My ady-finger potatoes were so good!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.12#Jean Valjean took the old woman’s hand:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.13#“I promise you that I will eat them,” he said, in his benevolent oice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.14#“I am not pleased with you,” replied the portress.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.15#Jean Valjean saw no other human creature than this good woman. There are treets in Paris through which no one ever passes, and houses to which no one ver comes. He was in one of those streets and one of those houses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.16#While he still went out, he had purchased of a coppersmith, for a few ous, a little copper crucifix which he had hung up on a nail opposite his bed. hat gibbet is always good to look at.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.17#A week passed, and Jean Valjean had not taken a step in his room. He still emained in bed. The portress said to her husband:—“The good man upstairs yonder oes not get up, he no longer eats, he will not last long. That man has his orrows, that he has. You won’t get it out of my head that his daughter has made bad marriage.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.18#The porter replied, with the tone of marital sovereignty:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.19#“If he’s rich, let him have a doctor. If he is not rich, let him go ithout. If he has no doctor he will die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.20#“And if he has one?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.21#“He will die,” said the porter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.22#The portress set to scraping away the grass from what she called her avement, with an old knife, and, as she tore out the blades, she grumbled:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.23#“It’s a shame. Such a neat old man! He’s as white as a chicken.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.24#She caught sight of the doctor of the quarter as he passed the end of the treet; she took it upon herself to request him to come upstairs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.25#“It’s on the second floor,” said she. “You have only to enter. As the good an no longer stirs from his bed, the door is always unlocked.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.26#The doctor saw Jean Valjean and spoke with him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.27#When he came down again the portress interrogated him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.28#“Well, doctor?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.29#“Your sick man is very ill indeed.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.30#“What is the matter with him?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.31#“Everything and nothing. He is a man who, to all appearances, has lost ome person who is dear to him. People die of that.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.32#“What did he say to you?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.33#“He told me that he was in good health.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.34#“Shall you come again, doctor?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.2.35#“Yes,” replied the doctor. “But some one else besides must come.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.head#CHAPTER III—A PEN IS HEAVY TO THE MAN WHO LIFTED THE FAUCHELEVENT’S ART
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.1#One evening Jean Valjean found difficulty in raising himself on his elbow; e felt of his wrist and could not find his pulse; his breath was short and alted at times; he recognized the fact that he was weaker than he had ever been efore. Then, no doubt under the pressure of some supreme preoccupation, he made n effort, drew himself up into a sitting posture and dressed himself. He put on is old workingman’s clothes. As he no longer went out, he had returned to them nd preferred them. He was obliged to pause many times while dressing himself; erely putting his arms through his waistcoat made the perspiration trickle from is forehead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.2#Since he had been alone, he had placed his bed in the antechamber, in order o inhabit that deserted apartment as little as possible.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.3#He opened the valise and drew from it Cosette’s outfit.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.4#He spread it out on his bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.5#The Bishop’s candlesticks were in their place on the chimney-piece. He took rom a drawer two wax candles and put them in the candlesticks. Then, although t was still broad daylight,—it was summer,—he lighted them. In the same way andles are to be seen lighted in broad daylight in chambers where there is a orpse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.6#Every step that he took in going from one piece of furniture to another xhausted him, and he was obliged to sit down. It was not ordinary fatigue which xpends the strength only to renew it; it was the remnant of all movement ossible to him, it was life drained which flows away drop by drop in verwhelming efforts and which will never be renewed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.7#The chair into which he allowed himself to fall was placed in front of that irror, so fatal for him, so providential for Marius, in which he had read osette’s reversed writing on the blotting book. He caught sight of himself in his mirror, and did not recognize himself. He was eighty years old; before arius’ marriage, he would have hardly been taken for fifty; that year had ounted for thirty. What he bore on his brow was no longer the wrinkles of age, t was the mysterious mark of death. The hollowing of that pitiless nail could e felt there. His cheeks were pendulous; the skin of his face had the color hich would lead one to think that it already had earth upon it; the corners of is mouth drooped as in the mask which the ancients sculptured on tombs. He azed into space with an air of reproach; one would have said that he was one of hose grand tragic beings who have cause to complain of some one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.8#He was in that condition, the last phase of dejection, in which sorrow no onger flows; it is coagulated, so to speak; there is something on the soul like clot of despair.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.9#Night had come. He laboriously dragged a table and the old armchair to the ireside, and placed upon the table a pen, some ink and some paper.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.10#That done, he had a fainting fit. When he recovered consciousness, he was hirsty. As he could not lift the jug, he tipped it over painfully towards his outh, and swallowed a draught.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.11#As neither the pen nor the ink had been used for a long time, the point of he pen had curled up, the ink had dried away, he was forced to rise and put a ew drops of water in the ink, which he did not accomplish without pausing and itting down two or three times, and he was compelled to write with the back of he pen. He wiped his brow from time to time.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.12#Then he turned towards the bed, and, still seated, for he could not stand, e gazed at the little black gown and all those beloved objects.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.13#These contemplations lasted for hours which seemed minutes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.14#All at once he shivered, he felt that a child was taking possession of im; he rested his elbows on the table, which was illuminated by the Bishop’s andles and took up the pen. His hand trembled. He wrote slowly the few ollowing lines:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.15#“Cosette, I bless thee. I am going to explain to thee. Thy husband was ight in giving me to understand that I ought to go away; but there is a little rror in what he believed, though he was in the right. He is excellent. Love him ell even after I am dead. Monsieur Pontmercy, love my darling child well. osette, this paper will be found; this is what I wish to say to thee, thou wilt ee the figures, if I have the strength to recall them, listen well, this money s really thine. Here is the whole matter: White jet comes from Norway, black et comes from England, black glass jewellery comes from Germany. Jet is the ightest, the most precious, the most costly. Imitations can be made in France s well as in Germany. What is needed is a little anvil two inches square, and a amp burning spirits of wine to soften the wax. The wax was formerly made with esin and lampblack, and cost four livres the pound. I invented a way of making t with gum shellac and turpentine. It does not cost more than thirty sous, and s much better. Buckles are made with a violet glass which is stuck fast, by eans of this wax, to a little framework of black iron. The glass must be violet or iron jewellery, and black for gold jewellery. Spain buys a great deal of it. t is the country of jet . . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.16#Here he paused, the pen fell from his fingers, he was seized by one of hose sobs which at times welled up from the very depths of his being; the poor an clasped his head in both hands, and meditated.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.3.17#“Oh!” he exclaimed within himself [lamentable cries, heard by God alone], all is over. I shall never see her more. She is a smile which passed over me. I m about to plunge into the night without even seeing her again. Oh! one minute, ne instant, to hear her voice, to touch her dress, to gaze upon her, upon her, he angel! and then to die! It is nothing to die, what is frightful is to die ithout seeing her. She would smile on me, she would say a word to me, would hat do any harm to any one? No, all is over, and forever. Here I am all alone. y God! My God! I shall never see her again!” At that moment there came a knock t the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.head#CHAPTER IV—A BOTTLE OF INK WHICH ONLY SUCCEEDED IN WHITENING
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.1#That same day, or to speak more accurately, that same evening, as Marius eft the table, and was on the point of withdrawing to his study, having a case o look over, Basque handed him a letter saying: “The person who wrote the etter is in the antechamber.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.2#Cosette had taken the grandfather’s arm and was strolling in the arden.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.3#A letter, like a man, may have an unprepossessing exterior. Coarse paper, oarsely folded—the very sight of certain missives is displeasing.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.4#The letter which Basque had brought was of this sort.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.5#Marius took it. It smelled of tobacco. Nothing evokes a memory like an dor. Marius recognized that tobacco. He looked at the superscription: “To onsieur, Monsieur le Baron Pommerci. At his hotel.” The recognition of the obacco caused him to recognize the writing as well. It may be said that mazement has its lightning flashes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.6#Marius was, as it were, illuminated by one of these flashes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.7#The sense of smell, that mysterious aid to memory, had just revived a whole orld within him. This was certainly the paper, the fashion of folding, the dull int of ink; it was certainly the well-known handwriting, especially was it the ame tobacco.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.8#The Jondrette garret rose before his mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.9#Thus, strange freak of chance! one of the two scents which he had so iligently sought, the one in connection with which he had lately again exerted o many efforts and which he supposed to be forever lost, had come and presented tself to him of its own accord.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.10#He eagerly broke the seal, and read:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.11#“Monsieur le Baron:—If the Supreme Being had given me the talents, I might ave been baron Thénard, member of the Institute [acadenmy of ciences], but I am ot. I only bear the same as him, happy if this memory recommends me to the ccellence of your kindnesses. The benefit with which you will honor me will be eciprocle. I am in possession of a secret concerning an individual. This ndividual concerns you. I hold the secret at your disposal desiring to have the onor to be huseful to you. I will furnish you with the simple means of driving rom your honorabel family that individual who has no right there, madame la aronne being of lofty birth. The sanctuary of virtue cannot cohabit longer with rime without abdicating.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.12#“I awate in the entichamber the orders of monsieur le baron.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.13#“With respect.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.14#The letter was signed “Thénard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.15#This signature was not false. It was merely a trifle abridged.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.16#Moreover, the rigmarole and the orthography completed the revelation. The ertificate of origin was complete.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.17#Marius’ emotion was profound. After a start of surprise, he underwent a eeling of happiness. If he could now but find that other man of whom he was in earch, the man who had saved him, Marius, there would be nothing left for him o desire.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.18#He opened the drawer of his secretary, took out several bank-notes, put hem in his pocket, closed the secretary again, and rang the bell. Basque half pened the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.19#“Show the man in,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.20#Basque announced:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.21#“Monsieur Thénard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.22#A man entered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.23#A fresh surprise for Marius. The man who entered was an utter stranger to im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.24#This man, who was old, moreover, had a thick nose, his chin swathed in a ravat, green spectacles with a double screen of green taffeta over his eyes, nd his hair was plastered and flattened down on his brow on a level with his yebrows like the wigs of English coachmen in “high life.” His hair was gray. He as dressed in black from head to foot, in garments that were very threadbare ut clean; a bunch of seals depending from his fob suggested the idea of a atch. He held in his hand an old hat! He walked in a bent attitude, and the urve in his spine augmented the profundity of his bow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.25#The first thing that struck the observer was, that this personage’s coat, hich was too ample although carefully buttoned, had not been made for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.26#Here a short digression becomes necessary.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.27#There was in Paris at that epoch, in a low-lived old lodging in the Rue eautreillis, near the Arsenal, an ingenious Jew whose profession was to change illains into honest men. Not for too long, which might have proved embarrassing or the villain. The change was on sight, for a day or two, at the rate of hirty sous a day, by means of a costume which resembled the honesty of the orld in general as nearly as possible. This costumer was called “the Changer”; he pickpockets of Paris had given him this name and knew him by no other. He ad a tolerably complete wardrobe. The rags with which he tricked out people ere almost probable. He had specialties and categories; on each nail of his hop hung a social status, threadbare and worn; here the suit of a magistrate, here the outfit of a Curé, beyond the outfit of a banker, in one corner the ostume of a retired military man, elsewhere the habiliments of a man of etters, and further on the dress of a statesman.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.28#This creature was the costumer of the immense drama which knavery plays in aris. His lair was the green-room whence theft emerged, and into which roguery etreated. A tattered knave arrived at this dressing-room, deposited his thirty ous and selected, according to the part which he wished to play, the costume hich suited him, and on descending the stairs once more, the knave was a omebody. On the following day, the clothes were faithfully returned, and the hanger, who trusted the thieves with everything, was never robbed. There was ne inconvenience about these clothes, they “did not fit”; not having been made or those who wore them, they were too tight for one, too loose for another and id not adjust themselves to any one. Every pickpocket who exceeded or fell hort of the human average was ill at his ease in the Changer’s costumes. It was ecessary that one should not be either too fat or too lean. The Changer had oreseen only ordinary men. He had taken the measure of the species from the irst rascal who came to hand, who is neither stout nor thin, neither tall nor hort. Hence adaptations which were sometimes difficult and from which the hanger’s clients extricated themselves as best they might. So much the worse or the exceptions! The suit of the statesman, for instance, black from head to oot, and consequently proper, would have been too large for Pitt and too small or Castelcicala. The costume of a statesman was designated as follows in the hanger’s catalogue; we copy:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.29#“A coat of black cloth, trowsers of black wool, a silk waistcoat, boots nd linen.” On the margin there stood: _ex-ambassador_, and a note which we also opy: “In a separate box, a neatly frizzed peruke, green glasses, seals, and two mall quills an inch long, wrapped in cotton.” All this belonged to the tatesman, the ex-ambassador. This whole costume was, if we may so express urselves, debilitated; the seams were white, a vague button-hole yawned at one f the elbows; moreover, one of the coat buttons was missing on the breast; but his was only detail; as the hand of the statesman should always be thrust into is coat and laid upon his heart, its function was to conceal the absent utton.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.30#If Marius had been familiar with the occult institutions of Paris, he ould instantly have recognized upon the back of the visitor whom Basque had ust shown in, the statesman’s suit borrowed from the pick-me-down-that shop of he Changer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.31#Marius’ disappointment on beholding another man than the one whom he xpected to see turned to the newcomer’s disadvantage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.32#He surveyed him from head to foot, while that personage made exaggerated ows, and demanded in a curt tone:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.33#“What do you want?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.34#The man replied with an amiable grin of which the caressing smile of a rocodile will furnish some idea:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.35#“It seems to me impossible that I should not have already had the honor of eeing Monsieur le Baron in society. I think I actually did meet monsieur ersonally, several years ago, at the house of Madame la Princesse Bagration and n the drawing-rooms of his Lordship the Vicomte Dambray, peer of France.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.36#It is always a good bit of tactics in knavery to pretend to recognize some ne whom one does not know.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.37#Marius paid attention to the manner of this man’s speech. He spied on his ccent and gesture, but his disappointment increased; the pronunciation was asal and absolutely unlike the dry, shrill tone which he had expected.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.38#He was utterly routed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.39#“I know neither Madame Bagration nor M. Dambray,” said he. “I have never et foot in the house of either of them in my life.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.40#The reply was ungracious. The personage, determined to be gracious at any ost, insisted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.41#“Then it must have been at Chateaubriand’s that I have seen Monsieur! I now Chateaubriand very well. He is very affable. He sometimes says to me: Thénard, my friend . . . won’t you drink a glass of wine with me?’”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.42#Marius’ brow grew more and more severe:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.43#“I have never had the honor of being received by M. de Chateaubriand. Let s cut it short. What do you want?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.44#The man bowed lower at that harsh voice.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.45#“Monsieur le Baron, deign to listen to me. There is in America, in a istrict near Panama, a village called la Joya. That village is composed of a ingle house, a large, square house of three stories, built of bricks dried in he sun, each side of the square five hundred feet in length, each story etreating twelve feet back of the story below, in such a manner as to leave in ront a terrace which makes the circuit of the edifice, in the centre an inner ourt where the provisions and munitions are kept; no windows, loopholes, no oors, ladders, ladders to mount from the ground to the first terrace, and from he first to the second, and from the second to the third, ladders to descend nto the inner court, no doors to the chambers, trap-doors, no staircases to the hambers, ladders; in the evening the traps are closed, the ladders are ithdrawn, carbines and blunderbusses trained from the loopholes; no means of ntering, a house by day, a citadel by night, eight hundred inhabitants,—that is he village. Why so many precautions? because the country is dangerous; it is ull of cannibals. Then why do people go there? because the country is arvellous; gold is found there.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.46#“What are you driving at?” interrupted Marius, who had passed from isappointment to impatience.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.47#“At this, Monsieur le Baron. I am an old and weary diplomat. Ancient ivilization has thrown me on my own devices. I want to try savages.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.48#“Well?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.49#“Monsieur le Baron, egotism is the law of the world. The proletarian easant woman, who toils by the day, turns round when the diligence passes by, he peasant proprietress, who toils in her field, does not turn round. The dog f the poor man barks at the rich man, the dog of the rich man barks at the poor an. Each one for himself. Self-interest—that’s the object of men. Gold, that’s he loadstone.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.50#“What then? Finish.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.51#“I should like to go and establish myself at la Joya. There are three of s. I have my spouse and my young lady; a very beautiful girl. The journey is ong and costly. I need a little money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.52#“What concern is that of mine?” demanded Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.53#The stranger stretched his neck out of his cravat, a gesture haracteristic of the vulture, and replied with an augmented smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.54#“Has not Monsieur le Baron perused my letter?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.55#There was some truth in this. The fact is, that the contents of the pistle had slipped Marius’ mind. He had seen the writing rather than read the etter. He could hardly recall it. But a moment ago a fresh start had been given im. He had noted that detail: “my spouse and my young lady.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.56#He fixed a penetrating glance on the stranger. An examining judge could ot have done the look better. He almost lay in wait for him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.57#He confined himself to replying:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.58#“State the case precisely.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.59#The stranger inserted his two hands in both his fobs, drew himself up ithout straightening his dorsal column, but scrutinizing Marius in his turn, ith the green gaze of his spectacles.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.60#“So be it, Monsieur le Baron. I will be precise. I have a secret to sell o you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.61#“A secret?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.62#“A secret.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.63#“Which concerns me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.64#“Somewhat.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.65#“What is the secret?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.66#Marius scrutinized the man more and more as he listened to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.67#“I commence gratis,” said the stranger. “You will see that I am nteresting.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.68#“Speak.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.69#“Monsieur le Baron, you have in your house a thief and an assassin.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.70#Marius shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.71#“In my house? no,” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.72#The imperturbable stranger brushed his hat with his elbow and went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.73#“An assassin and a thief. Remark, Monsieur le Baron, that I do not here peak of ancient deeds, deeds of the past which have lapsed, which can be ffaced by limitation before the law and by repentance before God. I speak of ecent deeds, of actual facts as still unknown to justice at this hour. I ontinue. This man has insinuated himself into your confidence, and almost into our family under a false name. I am about to tell you his real name. And to ell it to you for nothing.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.74#“I am listening.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.75#“His name is Jean Valjean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.76#“I know it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.77#“I am going to tell you, equally for nothing, who he is.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.78#“Say on.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.79#“He is an ex-convict.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.80#“I know it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.81#“You know it since I have had the honor of telling you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.82#“No. I knew it before.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.83#Marius’ cold tone, that double reply of “I know it,” his laconicism, which as not favorable to dialogue, stirred up some smouldering wrath in the tranger. He launched a furious glance on the sly at Marius, which was instantly xtinguished. Rapid as it was, this glance was of the kind which a man ecognizes when he has once beheld it; it did not escape Marius. Certain flashes an only proceed from certain souls; the eye, that vent-hole of the thought, lows with it; spectacles hide nothing; try putting a pane of glass over ell!
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.84#The stranger resumed with a smile:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.85#“I will not permit myself to contradict Monsieur le Baron. In any case, ou ought to perceive that I am well informed. Now what I have to tell you is nown to myself alone. This concerns the fortune of Madame la Baronne. It is an xtraordinary secret. It is for sale—I make you the first offer of it. Cheap. wenty thousand francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.86#“I know that secret as well as the others,” said Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.87#The personage felt the necessity of lowering his price a trifle.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.88#“Monsieur le Baron, say ten thousand francs and I will speak.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.89#“I repeat to you that there is nothing which you can tell me. I know what ou wish to say to me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.90#A fresh flash gleamed in the man’s eye. He exclaimed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.91#“But I must dine to-day, nevertheless. It is an extraordinary secret, I ell you. Monsieur le Baron, I will speak. I speak. Give me twenty francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.92#Marius gazed intently at him:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.93#“I know your extraordinary secret, just as I knew Jean Valjean’s name, ust as I know your name.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.94#“My name?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.95#“Yes.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.96#“That is not difficult, Monsieur le Baron. I had the honor to write to you nd to tell it to you. Thénard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.97#“—Dier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.98#“Hey?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.99#“Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.100#“Who’s that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.101#In danger the porcupine bristles up, the beetle feigns death, the old uard forms in a square; this man burst into laughter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.102#Then he flicked a grain of dust from the sleeve of his coat with a illip.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.103#Marius continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.104#“You are also Jondrette the workman, Fabantou the comedian, Genflot the oet, Don Alvarès the Spaniard, and Mistress Balizard.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.105#“Mistress what?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.106#“And you kept a pot-house at Montfermeil.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.107#“A pot-house! Never.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.108#“And I tell you that your name is Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.109#“I deny it.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.110#“And that you are a rascal. Here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.111#And Marius drew a bank-note from his pocket and flung it in his face.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.112#“Thanks! Pardon me! five hundred francs! Monsieur le Baron!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.113#And the man, overcome, bowed, seized the note and examined it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.114#“Five hundred francs!” he began again, taken aback. And he stammered in a ow voice: “An honest rustler."69
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.115#Then brusquely:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.116#“Well, so be it!” he exclaimed. “Let us put ourselves at our ease.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.117#And with the agility of a monkey, flinging back his hair, tearing off his pectacles, and withdrawing from his nose by sleight of hand the two quills of hich mention was recently made, and which the reader has also met with on nother page of this book, he took off his face as the man takes off his at.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.118#His eye lighted up; his uneven brow, with hollows in some places and umps in others, hideously wrinkled at the top, was laid bare, his nose had ecome as sharp as a beak; the fierce and sagacious profile of the man of prey eappeared.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.119#“Monsieur le Baron is infallible,” he said in a clear voice whence all asal twang had disappeared, “I am Thénardier.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.120#And he straightened up his crooked back.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.121#Thénardier, for it was really he, was strangely surprised; he would have een troubled, had he been capable of such a thing. He had come to bring stonishment, and it was he who had received it. This humiliation had been worth ive hundred francs to him, and, taking it all in all, he accepted it; but he as nonetheless bewildered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.122#He beheld this Baron Pontmercy for the first time, and, in spite of his isguise, this Baron Pontmercy recognized him, and recognized him thoroughly. nd not only was this Baron perfectly informed as to Thénardier, but he seemed ell posted as to Jean Valjean. Who was this almost beardless young man, who was o glacial and so generous, who knew people’s names, who knew all their names, nd who opened his purse to them, who bullied rascals like a judge, and who paid hem like a dupe?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.123#Thénardier, the reader will remember, although he had been Marius’ eighbor, had never seen him, which is not unusual in Paris; he had formerly, in vague way, heard his daughters talk of a very poor young man named Marius who ived in the house. He had written to him, without knowing him, the letter with hich the reader is acquainted.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.124#No connection between that Marius and M. le Baron Pontmercy was possible n his mind.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.125#As for the name Pontmercy, it will be recalled that, on the battlefield f Waterloo, he had only heard the last two syllables, for which he always ntertained the legitimate scorn which one owes to what is merely an expression f thanks.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.126#However, through his daughter Azelma, who had started on the scent of the arried pair on the 16th of February, and through his own personal researches, e had succeeded in learning many things, and, from the depths of his own gloom, e had contrived to grasp more than one mysterious clew. He had discovered, by int of industry, or, at least, by dint of induction, he had guessed who the man as whom he had encountered on a certain day in the Grand Sewer. From the man he ad easily reached the name. He knew that Madame la Baronne Pontmercy was osette. But he meant to be discreet in that quarter.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.127#Who was Cosette? He did not know exactly himself. He did, indeed, catch n inkling of illegitimacy, the history of Fantine had always seemed to him quivocal; but what was the use of talking about that? in order to cause himself o be paid for his silence? He had, or thought he had, better wares than that or sale. And, according to all appearances, if he were to come and make to the aron Pontmercy this revelation—and without proof: “Your wife is a bastard,” the nly result would be to attract the boot of the husband towards the loins of the evealer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.128#From Thénardier’s point of view, the conversation with Marius had not yet egun. He ought to have drawn back, to have modified his strategy, to have bandoned his position, to have changed his front; but nothing essential had een compromised as yet, and he had five hundred francs in his pocket. Moreover, e had something decisive to say, and, even against this very well-informed and ell-armed Baron Pontmercy, he felt himself strong. For men of Thénardier’s ature, every dialogue is a combat. In the one in which he was about to engage, hat was his situation? He did not know to whom he was speaking, but he did know f what he was speaking, he made this rapid review of his inner forces, and fter having said: “I am Thénardier,” he waited.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.129#Marius had become thoughtful. So he had hold of Thénardier at last. That an whom he had so greatly desired to find was before him. He could honor olonel Pontmercy’s recommendation.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.130#He felt humiliated that that hero should have owned anything to this illain, and that the letter of change drawn from the depths of the tomb by his ather upon him, Marius, had been protested up to that day. It also seemed to im, in the complex state of his mind towards Thénardier, that there was ccasion to avenge the Colonel for the misfortune of having been saved by such a ascal. In any case, he was content. He was about to deliver the Colonel’s shade rom this unworthy creditor at last, and it seemed to him that he was on the oint of rescuing his father’s memory from the debtors’ prison. By the side of his duty there was another—to elucidate, if possible, the source of Cosette’s ortune. The opportunity appeared to present itself. Perhaps Thénardier knew omething. It might prove useful to see the bottom of this man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.131#He commenced with this.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.132#Thénardier had caused the “honest rustler” to disappear in his fob, and as gazing at Marius with a gentleness that was almost tender.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.133#Marius broke the silence.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.134#“Thénardier, I have told you your name. Now, would you like to have me ell you your secret—the one that you came here to reveal to me? I have nformation of my own, also. You shall see that I know more about it than you o. Jean Valjean, as you have said, is an assassin and a thief. A thief, because e robbed a wealthy manufacturer, whose ruin he brought about. An assassin, ecause he assassinated police-agent Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.135#“I don’t understand, sir,” ejaculated Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.136#“I will make myself intelligible. In a certain arrondissement of the Pas e Calais, there was, in 1822, a man who had fallen out with justice, and who, nder the name of M. Madeleine, had regained his status and rehabilitated imself. This man had become a just man in the full force of the term. In a rade, the manufacture of black glass goods, he made the fortune of an entire ity. As far as his personal fortune was concerned he made that also, but as a econdary matter, and in some sort, by accident. He was the foster-father of the oor. He founded hospitals, opened schools, visited the sick, dowered young irls, supported widows, and adopted orphans; he was like the guardian angel of he country. He refused the cross, he was appointed Mayor. A liberated convict new the secret of a penalty incurred by this man in former days; he denounced im, and had him arrested, and profited by the arrest to come to Paris and cause he banker Laffitte,—I have the fact from the cashier himself,—by means of a alse signature, to hand over to him the sum of over half a million which elonged to M. Madeleine. This convict who robbed M. Madeleine was Jean Valjean. s for the other fact, you have nothing to tell me about it either. Jean Valjean illed the agent Javert; he shot him with a pistol. I, the person who is peaking to you, was present.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.137#Thénardier cast upon Marius the sovereign glance of a conquered man who ays his hand once more upon the victory, and who has just regained, in one nstant, all the ground which he has lost. But the smile returned instantly. The nferior’s triumph in the presence of his superior must be wheedling.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.138#Thénardier contented himself with saying to Marius:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.139#“Monsieur le Baron, we are on the wrong track.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.140#And he emphasized this phrase by making his bunch of seals execute an xpressive whirl.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.141#“What!” broke forth Marius, “do you dispute that? These are facts.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.142#“They are chimæras. The confidence with which Monsieur le Baron honors me enders it my duty to tell him so. Truth and justice before all things. I do not ike to see folks accused unjustly. Monsieur le Baron, Jean Valjean did not rob . Madeleine and Jean Valjean did not kill Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.143#“This is too much! How is this?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.144#“For two reasons.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.145#“What are they? Speak.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.146#“This is the first: he did not rob M. Madeleine, because it is Jean aljean himself who was M. Madeleine.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.147#“What tale are you telling me?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.148#“And this is the second: he did not assassinate Javert, because the erson who killed Javert was Javert.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.149#“What do you mean to say?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.150#“That Javert committed suicide.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.151#“Prove it! prove it!” cried Marius beside himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.152#Thénardier resumed, scanning his phrase after the manner of the ancient lexandrine measure:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.153#“Police-agent-Ja-vert-was-found-drowned-un-der-a-boat-of-the-Pont-au- hange.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.154#“But prove it!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.155#Thénardier drew from his pocket a large envelope of gray paper, which eemed to contain sheets folded in different sizes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.156#“I have my papers,” he said calmly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.157#And he added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.158#“Monsieur le Baron, in your interests I desired to know Jean Valjean horoughly. I say that Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine are one and the same man, nd I say that Javert had no other assassin than Javert. If I speak, it is ecause I have proofs. Not manuscript proofs—writing is suspicious, handwriting s complaisant,—but printed proofs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.159#As he spoke, Thénardier extracted from the envelope two copies of ewspapers, yellow, faded, and strongly saturated with tobacco. One of these two ewspapers, broken at every fold and falling into rags, seemed much older than he other.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.160#“Two facts, two proofs,” remarked Thénardier. And he offered the two ewspapers, unfolded, to Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.161#The reader is acquainted with these two papers. One, the most ancient, a umber of the _Drapeau Blanc_ of the 25th of July, 1823, the text of which can e seen in the first volume, established the identity of M. Madeleine and Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.162#The other, a _Moniteur_ of the 15th of June, 1832, announced the suicide f Javert, adding that it appeared from a verbal report of Javert to the prefect hat, having been taken prisoner in the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, e had owed his life to the magnanimity of an insurgent who, holding him under is pistol, had fired into the air, instead of blowing out his brains.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.163#Marius read. He had evidence, a certain date, irrefragable proof, these wo newspapers had not been printed expressly for the purpose of backing up hénardier’s statements; the note printed in the _Moniteur_ had been an dministrative communication from the Prefecture of Police. Marius could not oubt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.164#The information of the cashier-clerk had been false, and he himself had een deceived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.165#Jean Valjean, who had suddenly grown grand, emerged from his cloud. arius could not repress a cry of joy.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.166#“Well, then this unhappy wretch is an admirable man! the whole of that ortune really belonged to him! he is Madeleine, the providence of a whole ountryside! he is Jean Valjean, Javert’s savior! he is a hero! he is a aint!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.167#“He’s not a saint, and he’s not a hero!” said Thénardier. “He’s an ssassin and a robber.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.168#And he added, in the tone of a man who begins to feel that he possesses ome authority:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.169#“Let us be calm.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.170#Robber, assassin—those words which Marius thought had disappeared and hich returned, fell upon him like an ice-cold shower-bath.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.171#“Again!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.172#“Always,” ejaculated Thénardier. “Jean Valjean did not rob Madeleine, but e is a thief. He did not kill Javert, but he is a murderer.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.173#“Will you speak,” retorted Marius, “of that miserable theft, committed orty years ago, and expiated, as your own newspapers prove, by a whole life of epentance, of self-abnegation and of virtue?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.174#“I say assassination and theft, Monsieur le Baron, and I repeat that I am peaking of actual facts. What I have to reveal to you is absolutely unknown. It elongs to unpublished matter. And perhaps you will find in it the source of the ortune so skilfully presented to Madame la Baronne by Jean Valjean. I say kilfully, because, by a gift of that nature it would not be so very unskilful o slip into an honorable house whose comforts one would then share, and, at the ame stroke, to conceal one’s crime, and to enjoy one’s theft, to bury one’s ame and to create for oneself a family.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.175#“I might interrupt you at this point,” said Marius, “but go on.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.176#“Monsieur le Baron, I will tell you all, leaving the recompense to your enerosity. This secret is worth massive gold. You will say to me: ‘Why do not ou apply to Jean Valjean?’ For a very simple reason; I know that he has tripped himself, and stripped himself in your favor, and I consider the ombination ingenious; but he has no longer a son, he would show me his empty ands, and, since I am in need of some money for my trip to la Joya, I prefer ou, you who have it all, to him who has nothing. I am a little fatigued, permit e to take a chair.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.177#Marius seated himself and motioned to him to do the same.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.178#Thénardier installed himself on a tufted chair, picked up his two ewspapers, thrust them back into their envelope, and murmured as he pecked at he _Drapeau Blanc_ with his nail: “It cost me a good deal of trouble to get his one.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.179#That done he crossed his legs and stretched himself out on the back of he chair, an attitude characteristic of people who are sure of what they are aying, then he entered upon his subject gravely, emphasizing his words:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.180#“Monsieur le Baron, on the 6th of June, 1832, about a year ago, on the ay of the insurrection, a man was in the Grand Sewer of Paris, at the point here the sewer enters the Seine, between the Pont des Invalides and the Pont de éna.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.181#Marius abruptly drew his chair closer to that of Thénardier. Thénardier oticed this movement and continued with the deliberation of an orator who holds is interlocutor and who feels his adversary palpitating under his words:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.182#“This man, forced to conceal himself, and for reasons, moreover, which re foreign to politics, had adopted the sewer as his domicile and had a key to t. It was, I repeat, on the 6th of June; it might have been eight o’clock in he evening. The man hears a noise in the sewer. Greatly surprised, he hides imself and lies in wait. It was the sound of footsteps, some one was walking in he dark, and coming in his direction. Strange to say, there was another man in he sewer besides himself. The grating of the outlet from the sewer was not far ff. A little light which fell through it permitted him to recognize the ewcomer, and to see that the man was carrying something on his back. He was alking in a bent attitude. The man who was walking in a bent attitude was an x-convict, and what he was dragging on his shoulders was a corpse. ssassination caught in the very act, if ever there was such a thing. As for the heft, that is understood; one does not kill a man gratis. This convict was on is way to fling the body into the river. One fact is to be noticed, that before eaching the exit grating, this convict, who had come a long distance in the ewer, must, necessarily, have encountered a frightful quagmire where it seems s though he might have left the body, but the sewermen would have found the ssassinated man the very next day, while at work on the quagmire, and that did ot suit the assassin’s plans. He had preferred to traverse that quagmire with is burden, and his exertions must have been terrible, for it is impossible to isk one’s life more completely; I don’t understand how he could have come out f that alive.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.183#Marius’ chair approached still nearer. Thénardier took advantage of this o draw a long breath. He went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.184#“Monsieur le Baron, a sewer is not the Champ de Mars. One lacks verything there, even room. When two men are there, they must meet. That is hat happened. The man domiciled there and the passer-by were forced to bid each ther good-day, greatly to the regret of both. The passer-by said to the nhabitant:—“You see what I have on my back, I must get out, you have the key, ive it to me.” That convict was a man of terrible strength. There was no way of efusing. Nevertheless, the man who had the key parleyed, simply to gain time. e examined the dead man, but he could see nothing, except that the latter was oung, well dressed, with the air of being rich, and all disfigured with blood. hile talking, the man contrived to tear and pull off behind, without the ssassin perceiving it, a bit of the assassinated man’s coat. A document for onviction, you understand; a means of recovering the trace of things and of ringing home the crime to the criminal. He put this document for conviction in is pocket. After which he opened the grating, made the man go out with his mbarrassment on his back, closed the grating again, and ran off, not caring to e mixed up with the remainder of the adventure and above all, not wishing to be resent when the assassin threw the assassinated man into the river. Now you omprehend. The man who was carrying the corpse was Jean Valjean; the one who ad the key is speaking to you at this moment; and the piece of the coat . . ”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.185#Thénardier completed his phrase by drawing from his pocket, and holding, n a level with his eyes, nipped between his two thumbs and his two forefingers, strip of torn black cloth, all covered with dark spots.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.186#Marius had sprung to his feet, pale, hardly able to draw his breath, with is eyes riveted on the fragment of black cloth, and, without uttering a word, ithout taking his eyes from that fragment, he retreated to the wall and fumbled ith his right hand along the wall for a key which was in the lock of a cupboard ear the chimney.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.187#He found the key, opened the cupboard, plunged his arm into it without ooking, and without his frightened gaze quitting the rag which Thénardier still eld outspread.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.188#But Thénardier continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.189#“Monsieur le Baron, I have the strongest of reasons for believing that he assassinated young man was an opulent stranger lured into a trap by Jean aljean, and the bearer of an enormous sum of money.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.190#“The young man was myself, and here is the coat!” cried Marius, and he lung upon the floor an old black coat all covered with blood.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.191#Then, snatching the fragment from the hands of Thénardier, he crouched own over the coat, and laid the torn morsel against the tattered skirt. The ent fitted exactly, and the strip completed the coat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.192#Thénardier was petrified.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.193#This is what he thought: “I’m struck all of a heap.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.194#Marius rose to his feet trembling, despairing, radiant.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.195#He fumbled in his pocket and stalked furiously to Thénardier, presenting o him and almost thrusting in his face his fist filled with bank-notes for five undred and a thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.196#“You are an infamous wretch! you are a liar, a calumniator, a villain. ou came to accuse that man, you have only justified him; you wanted to ruin im, you have only succeeded in glorifying him. And it is you who are the thief! nd it is you who are the assassin! I saw you, Thénardier Jondrette, in that air on the Rue de l’Hôpital. I know enough about you to send you to the galleys nd even further if I choose. Here are a thousand francs, bully that you re!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.197#And he flung a thousand franc note at Thénardier.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.198#“Ah! Jondrette Thénardier, vile rascal! Let this serve you as a lesson, ou dealer in second-hand secrets, merchant of mysteries, rummager of the hadows, wretch! Take these five hundred francs and get out of here! Waterloo rotects you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.199#“Waterloo!” growled Thénardier, pocketing the five hundred francs along ith the thousand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.200#“Yes, assassin! You there saved the life of a Colonel. . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.201#“Of a General,” said Thénardier, elevating his head.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.202#“Of a Colonel!” repeated Marius in a rage. “I wouldn’t give a ha’penny or a general. And you come here to commit infamies! I tell you that you have ommitted all crimes. Go! disappear! Only be happy, that is all that I desire. h! monster! here are three thousand francs more. Take them. You will depart o-morrow, for America, with your daughter; for your wife is dead, you bominable liar. I shall watch over your departure, you ruffian, and at that oment I will count out to you twenty thousand francs. Go get yourself hung lsewhere!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.203#“Monsieur le Baron!” replied Thénardier, bowing to the very earth, eternal gratitude.” And Thénardier left the room, understanding nothing, tupefied and delighted with this sweet crushing beneath sacks of gold, and with hat thunder which had burst forth over his head in bank-bills.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.204#Struck by lightning he was, but he was also content; and he would have een greatly angered had he had a lightning rod to ward off such lightning as hat.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.205#Let us finish with this man at once.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.206#Two days after the events which we are at this moment narrating, he set ut, thanks to Marius’ care, for America under a false name, with his daughter zelma, furnished with a draft on New York for twenty thousand francs.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.207#The moral wretchedness of Thénardier, the bourgeois who had missed his ocation, was irremediable. He was in America what he had been in Europe. ontact with an evil man sometimes suffices to corrupt a good action and to ause evil things to spring from it. With Marius’ money, Thénardier set up as a lave-dealer.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.208#As soon as Thénardier had left the house, Marius rushed to the garden, here Cosette was still walking.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.209#“Cosette! Cosette!” he cried. “Come! come quick! Let us go. Basque, a arriage! Cosette, come. Ah! My God! It was he who saved my life! Let us not ose a minute! Put on your shawl.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.210#Cosette thought him mad and obeyed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.211#He could not breathe, he laid his hand on his heart to restrain its hrobbing. He paced back and forth with huge strides, he embraced Cosette:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.212#“Ah! Cosette! I am an unhappy wretch!” said he.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.213#Marius was bewildered. He began to catch a glimpse in Jean Valjean of ome indescribably lofty and melancholy figure. An unheard-of virtue, supreme nd sweet, humble in its immensity, appeared to him. The convict was ransfigured into Christ.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.214#Marius was dazzled by this prodigy. He did not know precisely what he eheld, but it was grand.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.215#In an instant, a hackney-carriage stood in front of the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.216#Marius helped Cosette in and darted in himself.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.217#“Driver,” said he, “Rue de l’Homme Armé, Number 7.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.218#The carriage drove off.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.219#“Ah! what happiness!” ejaculated Cosette. “Rue de l’Homme Armé, I did not are to speak to you of that. We are going to see M. Jean.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.220#“Thy father! Cosette, thy father more than ever. Cosette, I guess it. You old me that you had never received the letter that I sent you by Gavroche. It ust have fallen into his hands. Cosette, he went to the barricade to save me. s it is a necessity with him to be an angel, he saved others also; he saved avert. He rescued me from that gulf to give me to you. He carried me on his ack through that frightful sewer. Ah! I am a monster of ingratitude. Cosette, fter having been your providence, he became mine. Just imagine, there was a errible quagmire enough to drown one a hundred times over, to drown one in ire. Cosette! he made me traverse it. I was unconscious; I saw nothing, I heard othing, I could know nothing of my own adventure. We are going to bring him ack, to take him with us, whether he is willing or not, he shall never leave us gain. If only he is at home! Provided only that we can find him, I will pass he rest of my life in venerating him. Yes, that is how it should be, do you ee, Cosette? Gavroche must have delivered my letter to him. All is explained. ou understand.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.221#Cosette did not understand a word.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.222#“You are right,” she said to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.4.223#Meanwhile the carriage rolled on.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.head#CHAPTER V—A NIGHT BEHIND WHICH THERE IS DAY
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.1#Jean Valjean turned round at the knock which he heard on his door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.2#“Come in,” he said feebly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.3#The door opened.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.4#Cosette and Marius made their appearance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.5#Cosette rushed into the room.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.6#Marius remained on the threshold, leaning against the jamb of the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.7#“Cosette!” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.8#And he sat erect in his chair, his arms outstretched and trembling, aggard, livid, gloomy, an immense joy in his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.9#Cosette, stifling with emotion, fell upon Jean Valjean’s breast.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.10#“Father!” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.11#Jean Valjean, overcome, stammered:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.12#“Cosette! she! you! Madame! it is thou! Ah! my God!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.13#And, pressed close in Cosette’s arms, he exclaimed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.14#“It is thou! thou art here! Thou dost pardon me then!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.15#Marius, lowering his eyelids, in order to keep his tears from flowing, ook a step forward and murmured between lips convulsively contracted to repress is sobs:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.16#“My father!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.17#“And you also, you pardon me!” Jean Valjean said to him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.18#Marius could find no words, and Jean Valjean added:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.19#“Thanks.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.20#Cosette tore off her shawl and tossed her hat on the bed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.21#“It embarrasses me,” said she.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.22#And, seating herself on the old man’s knees, she put aside his white locks ith an adorable movement, and kissed his brow.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.23#Jean Valjean, bewildered, let her have her own way.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.24#Cosette, who only understood in a very confused manner, redoubled her aresses, as though she desired to pay Marius’ debt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.25#Jean Valjean stammered:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.26#“How stupid people are! I thought that I should never see her again. magine, Monsieur Pontmercy, at the very moment when you entered, I was saying o myself: ‘All is over. Here is her little gown, I am a miserable man, I shall ever see Cosette again,’ and I was saying that at the very moment when you were ounting the stairs. Was not I an idiot? Just see how idiotic one can be! One eckons without the good God. The good God says:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.27#“‘You fancy that you are about to be abandoned, stupid! No. No, things ill not go so. Come, there is a good man yonder who is in need of an angel.’ nd the angel comes, and one sees one’s Cosette again! and one sees one’s little osette once more! Ah! I was very unhappy.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.28#For a moment he could not speak, then he went on:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.29#“I really needed to see Cosette a little bit now and then. A heart needs a one to gnaw. But I was perfectly conscious that I was in the way. I gave myself easons: ‘They do not want you, keep in your own course, one has not the right o cling eternally.’ Ah! God be praised, I see her once more! Dost thou know, osette, thy husband is very handsome? Ah! what a pretty embroidered collar thou ast on, luckily. I am fond of that pattern. It was thy husband who chose it, as it not? And then, thou shouldst have some cashmere shawls. Let me call her hou, Monsieur Pontmercy. It will not be for long.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.30#And Cosette began again:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.31#“How wicked of you to have left us like that! Where did you go? Why have ou stayed away so long? Formerly your journeys only lasted three or four days. sent Nicolette, the answer always was: ‘He is absent.’ How long have you been ack? Why did you not let us know? Do you know that you are very much changed? h! what a naughty father! he has been ill, and we have not known it! Stay, arius, feel how cold his hand is!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.32#“So you are here! Monsieur Pontmercy, you pardon me!” repeated Jean aljean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.33#At that word which Jean Valjean had just uttered once more, all that was welling Marius’ heart found vent.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.34#He burst forth:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.35#“Cosette, do you hear? he has come to that! he asks my forgiveness! And do ou know what he has done for me, Cosette? He has saved my life. He has done ore—he has given you to me. And after having saved me, and after having given ou to me, Cosette, what has he done with himself? He has sacrificed himself. ehold the man. And he says to me the ingrate, to me the forgetful, to me the itiless, to me the guilty one: Thanks! Cosette, my whole life passed at the eet of this man would be too little. That barricade, that sewer, that furnace, hat cesspool,—all that he traversed for me, for thee, Cosette! He carried me way through all the deaths which he put aside before me, and accepted for imself. Every courage, every virtue, every heroism, every sanctity he ossesses! Cosette, that man is an angel!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.36#“Hush! hush!” said Jean Valjean in a low voice. “Why tell all that?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.37#“But you!” cried Marius with a wrath in which there was veneration, “why id you not tell it to me? It is your own fault, too. You save people’s lives, nd you conceal it from them! You do more, under the pretext of unmasking ourself, you calumniate yourself. It is frightful.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.38#“I told the truth,” replied Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.39#“No,” retorted Marius, “the truth is the whole truth; and that you did not ell. You were Monsieur Madeleine, why not have said so? You saved Javert, why ot have said so? I owed my life to you, why not have said so?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.40#“Because I thought as you do. I thought that you were in the right. It was ecessary that I should go away. If you had known about that affair, of the ewer, you would have made me remain near you. I was therefore forced to hold my eace. If I had spoken, it would have caused embarrassment in every way.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.41#“It would have embarrassed what? embarrassed whom?” retorted Marius. “Do ou think that you are going to stay here? We shall carry you off. Ah! good eavens! when I reflect that it was by an accident that I have learned all this. ou form a part of ourselves. You are her father, and mine. You shall not pass nother day in this dreadful house. Do not imagine that you will be here o-morrow.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.42#“To-morrow,” said Jean Valjean, “I shall not be here, but I shall not be ith you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.43#“What do you mean?” replied Marius. “Ah! come now, we are not going to ermit any more journeys. You shall never leave us again. You belong to us. We hall not loose our hold of you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.44#“This time it is for good,” added Cosette. “We have a carriage at the oor. I shall run away with you. If necessary, I shall employ force.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.45#And she laughingly made a movement to lift the old man in her arms.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.46#“Your chamber still stands ready in our house,” she went on. “If you only new how pretty the garden is now! The azaleas are doing very well there. The alks are sanded with river sand; there are tiny violet shells. You shall eat my trawberries. I water them myself. And no more ‘madame,’ no more ‘Monsieur ean,’ we are living under a Republic, everybody says _thou_, don’t they, arius? The programme is changed. If you only knew, father, I have had a sorrow, here was a robin redbreast which had made her nest in a hole in the wall, and a orrible cat ate her. My poor, pretty, little robin red-breast which used to put er head out of her window and look at me! I cried over it. I should have liked o kill the cat. But now nobody cries any more. Everybody laughs, everybody is appy. You are going to come with us. How delighted grandfather will be! You hall have your plot in the garden, you shall cultivate it, and we shall see hether your strawberries are as fine as mine. And, then, I shall do everything hat you wish, and then, you will obey me prettily.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.47#Jean Valjean listened to her without hearing her. He heard the music of er voice rather than the sense of her words; one of those large tears which are he sombre pearls of the soul welled up slowly in his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.48#He murmured:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.49#“The proof that God is good is that she is here.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.50#“Father!” said Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.51#Jean Valjean continued:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.52#“It is quite true that it would be charming for us to live together. Their rees are full of birds. I would walk with Cosette. It is sweet to be among iving people who bid each other ‘good-day,’ who call to each other in the arden. People see each other from early morning. We should each cultivate our wn little corner. She would make me eat her strawberries. I would make her ather my roses. That would be charming. Only . . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.53#He paused and said gently:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.54#“It is a pity.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.55#The tear did not fall, it retreated, and Jean Valjean replaced it with a mile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.56#Cosette took both the old man’s hands in hers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.57#“My God!” said she, “your hands are still colder than before. Are you ill? o you suffer?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.58#“I? No,” replied Jean Valjean. “I am very well. Only . . .”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.59#He paused.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.60#“Only what?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.61#“I am going to die presently.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.62#Cosette and Marius shuddered.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.63#“To die!” exclaimed Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.64#“Yes, but that is nothing,” said Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.65#He took breath, smiled and resumed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.66#“Cosette, thou wert talking to me, go on, so thy little robin red-breast s dead? Speak, so that I may hear thy voice.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.67#Marius gazed at the old man in amazement.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.68#Cosette uttered a heartrending cry.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.69#“Father! my father! you will live. You are going to live. I insist upon our living, do you hear?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.70#Jean Valjean raised his head towards her with adoration.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.71#“Oh! yes, forbid me to die. Who knows? Perhaps I shall obey. I was on the erge of dying when you came. That stopped me, it seemed to me that I was born gain.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.72#“You are full of strength and life,” cried Marius. “Do you imagine that a erson can die like this? You have had sorrow, you shall have no more. It is I ho ask your forgiveness, and on my knees! You are going to live, and to live ith us, and to live a long time. We take possession of you once more. There are wo of us here who will henceforth have no other thought than your appiness.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.73#“You see,” resumed Cosette, all bathed in tears, “that Marius says that ou shall not die.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.74#Jean Valjean continued to smile.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.75#“Even if you were to take possession of me, Monsieur Pontmercy, would that ake me other than I am? No, God has thought like you and myself, and he does ot change his mind; it is useful for me to go. Death is a good arrangement. God nows better than we what we need. May you be happy, may Monsieur Pontmercy have osette, may youth wed the morning, may there be around you, my children, lilacs nd nightingales; may your life be a beautiful, sunny lawn, may all the nchantments of heaven fill your souls, and now let me, who am good for nothing, ie; it is certain that all this is right. Come, be reasonable, nothing is ossible now, I am fully conscious that all is over. And then, last night, I rank that whole jug of water. How good thy husband is, Cosette! Thou art much etter off with him than with me.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.76#A noise became audible at the door.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.77#It was the doctor entering.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.78#“Good-day, and farewell, doctor,” said Jean Valjean. “Here are my poor hildren.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.79#Marius stepped up to the doctor. He addressed to him only this single ord: “Monsieur? . . .” But his manner of pronouncing it contained a complete uestion.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.80#The doctor replied to the question by an expressive glance.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.81#“Because things are not agreeable,” said Jean Valjean, “that is no reason or being unjust towards God.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.82#A silence ensued.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.83#All breasts were oppressed.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.84#Jean Valjean turned to Cosette. He began to gaze at her as though he ished to retain her features for eternity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.85#In the depths of the shadow into which he had already descended, ecstasy as still possible to him when gazing at Cosette. The reflection of that sweet ace lighted up his pale visage.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.86#The doctor felt of his pulse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.87#“Ah! it was you that he wanted!” he murmured, looking at Cosette and arius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.88#And bending down to Marius’ ear, he added in a very low voice:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.89#“Too late.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.90#Jean Valjean surveyed the doctor and Marius serenely, almost without easing to gaze at Cosette.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.91#These barely articulate words were heard to issue from his mouth:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.92#“It is nothing to die; it is dreadful not to live.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.93#All at once he rose to his feet. These accesses of strength are sometimes he sign of the death agony. He walked with a firm step to the wall, thrusting side Marius and the doctor who tried to help him, detached from the wall a ittle copper crucifix which was suspended there, and returned to his seat with ll the freedom of movement of perfect health, and said in a loud voice, as he aid the crucifix on the table:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.94#“Behold the great martyr.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.95#Then his chest sank in, his head wavered, as though the intoxication of he tomb were seizing hold upon him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.96#His hands, which rested on his knees, began to press their nails into the tuff of his trousers.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.97#Cosette supported his shoulders, and sobbed, and tried to speak to him, ut could not.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.98#Among the words mingled with that mournful saliva which accompanies tears, hey distinguished words like the following:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.99#“Father, do not leave us. Is it possible that we have found you only to ose you again?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.100#It might be said that agony writhes. It goes, comes, advances towards the epulchre, and returns towards life. There is groping in the action of ying.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.101#Jean Valjean rallied after this semi-swoon, shook his brow as though to ake the shadows fall away from it and became almost perfectly lucid once ore.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.102#He took a fold of Cosette’s sleeve and kissed it.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.103#“He is coming back! doctor, he is coming back,” cried Marius.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.104#“You are good, both of you,” said Jean Valjean. “I am going to tell you hat has caused me pain. What has pained me, Monsieur Pontmercy, is that you ave not been willing to touch that money. That money really belongs to your ife. I will explain to you, my children, and for that reason, also, I am glad o see you. Black jet comes from England, white jet comes from Norway. All this s in this paper, which you will read. For bracelets, I invented a way of ubstituting for slides of soldered sheet iron, slides of iron laid together. It s prettier, better and less costly. You will understand how much money can be ade in that way. So Cosette’s fortune is really hers. I give you these details, n order that your mind may be set at rest.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.105#The portress had come upstairs and was gazing in at the half-open door. he doctor dismissed her.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.106#But he could not prevent this zealous woman from exclaiming to the dying an before she disappeared: “Would you like a priest?”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.107#“I have had one,” replied Jean Valjean.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.108#And with his finger he seemed to indicate a point above his head where ne would have said that he saw some one.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.109#It is probable, in fact, that the Bishop was present at this death gony.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.110#Cosette gently slipped a pillow under his loins.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.111#Jean Valjean resumed:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.112#“Have no fear, Monsieur Pontmercy, I adjure you. The six hundred thousand rancs really belong to Cosette. My life will have been wasted if you do not njoy them! We managed to do very well with those glass goods. We rivalled what s called Berlin jewellery. However, we could not equal the black glass of ngland. A gross, which contains twelve hundred very well cut grains, only costs hree francs.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.113#When a being who is dear to us is on the point of death, we gaze upon him ith a look which clings convulsively to him and which would fain hold him ack.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.114#Cosette gave her hand to Marius, and both, mute with anguish, not knowing hat to say to the dying man, stood trembling and despairing before him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.115#Jean Valjean sank moment by moment. He was failing; he was drawing near o the gloomy horizon.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.116#His breath had become intermittent; a little rattling interrupted it. He ound some difficulty in moving his forearm, his feet had lost all movement, and n proportion as the wretchedness of limb and feebleness of body increased, all he majesty of his soul was displayed and spread over his brow. The light of the nknown world was already visible in his eyes.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.117#His face paled and smiled. Life was no longer there, it was something lse.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.118#His breath sank, his glance grew grander. He was a corpse on which the ings could be felt.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.119#He made a sign to Cosette to draw near, then to Marius; the last minute f the last hour had, evidently, arrived.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.120#He began to speak to them in a voice so feeble that it seemed to come rom a distance, and one would have said that a wall now rose between them and im.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.121#“Draw near, draw near, both of you. I love you dearly. Oh! how good it is o die like this! And thou lovest me also, my Cosette. I knew well that thou till felt friendly towards thy poor old man. How kind it was of thee to place hat pillow under my loins! Thou wilt weep for me a little, wilt thou not? Not oo much. I do not wish thee to have any real griefs. You must enjoy yourselves great deal, my children. I forgot to tell you that the profit was greater till on the buckles without tongues than on all the rest. A gross of a dozen ozens cost ten francs and sold for sixty. It really was a good business. So here is no occasion for surprise at the six hundred thousand francs, Monsieur ontmercy. It is honest money. You may be rich with a tranquil mind. Thou must ave a carriage, a box at the theatres now and then, and handsome ball dresses, y Cosette, and then, thou must give good dinners to thy friends, and be very appy. I was writing to Cosette a while ago. She will find my letter. I bequeath o her the two candlesticks which stand on the chimney-piece. They are of ilver, but to me they are gold, they are diamonds; they change candles which re placed in them into wax-tapers. I do not know whether the person who gave hem to me is pleased with me yonder on high. I have done what I could. My hildren, you will not forget that I am a poor man, you will have me buried in he first plot of earth that you find, under a stone to mark the spot. This is y wish. No name on the stone. If Cosette cares to come for a little while now nd then, it will give me pleasure. And you too, Monsieur Pontmercy. I must dmit that I have not always loved you. I ask your pardon for that. Now she and ou form but one for me. I feel very grateful to you. I am sure that you make osette happy. If you only knew, Monsieur Pontmercy, her pretty rosy cheeks were y delight; when I saw her in the least pale, I was sad. In the chest of rawers, there is a bank-bill for five hundred francs. I have not touched it. It s for the poor. Cosette, dost thou see thy little gown yonder on the bed? dost hou recognize it? That was ten years ago, however. How time flies! We have been ery happy. All is over. Do not weep, my children, I am not going very far, I hall see you from there, you will only have to look at night, and you will see e smile. Cosette, dost thou remember Montfermeil? Thou wert in the forest, thou ert greatly terrified; dost thou remember how I took hold of the handle of the ater-bucket? That was the first time that I touched thy poor, little hand. It as so cold! Ah! your hands were red then, mademoiselle, they are very white ow. And the big doll! dost thou remember? Thou didst call her Catherine. Thou egrettedest not having taken her to the convent! How thou didst make me laugh ometimes, my sweet angel! When it had been raining, thou didst float bits of traw on the gutters, and watch them pass away. One day I gave thee a willow attledore and a shuttlecock with yellow, blue and green feathers. Thou hast orgotten it. Thou wert roguish so young! Thou didst play. Thou didst put herries in thy ears. Those are things of the past. The forests through which ne has passed with one’s child, the trees under which one has strolled, the onvents where one has concealed oneself, the games, the hearty laughs of hildhood, are shadows. I imagined that all that belonged to me. In that lay my tupidity. Those Thénardiers were wicked. Thou must forgive them. Cosette, the oment has come to tell thee the name of thy mother. She was called Fantine. emember that name—Fantine. Kneel whenever thou utterest it. She suffered much. he loved thee dearly. She had as much unhappiness as thou hast had happiness. hat is the way God apportions things. He is there on high, he sees us all, and e knows what he does in the midst of his great stars. I am on the verge of eparture, my children. Love each other well and always. There is nothing else ut that in the world: love for each other. You will think sometimes of the poor ld man who died here. Oh my Cosette, it is not my fault, indeed, that I have ot seen thee all this time, it cut me to the heart; I went as far as the corner f the street, I must have produced a queer effect on the people who saw me ass, I was like a madman, I once went out without my hat. I no longer see learly, my children, I had still other things to say, but never mind. Think a ittle of me. Come still nearer. I die happy. Give me your dear and well-beloved eads, so that I may lay my hands upon them.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.122#Cosette and Marius fell on their knees, in despair, suffocating with ears, each beneath one of Jean Valjean’s hands. Those august hands no longer oved.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.123#He had fallen backwards, the light of the candles illuminated him.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.124#His white face looked up to heaven, he allowed Cosette and Marius to over his hands with kisses.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.125#He was dead.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.5.126#The night was starless and extremely dark. No doubt, in the gloom, some mmense angel stood erect with wings outspread, awaiting that soul.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.head#CHAPTER VI—THE GRASS COVERS AND THE RAIN EFFACES
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.1#In the cemetery of Père-Lachaise, in the vicinity of the common grave, far rom the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres, far from all the tombs of ancy which display in the presence of eternity all the hideous fashions of eath, in a deserted corner, beside an old wall, beneath a great yew tree over hich climbs the wild convolvulus, amid dandelions and mosses, there lies a tone. That stone is no more exempt than others from the leprosy of time, of ampness, of the lichens and from the defilement of the birds. The water turns t green, the air blackens it. It is not near any path, and people are not fond f walking in that direction, because the grass is high and their feet are mmediately wet. When there is a little sunshine, the lizards come thither. All round there is a quivering of weeds. In the spring, linnets warble in the rees.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.2#This stone is perfectly plain. In cutting it the only thought was the equirements of the tomb, and no other care was taken than to make the stone ong enough and narrow enough to cover a man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.3#No name is to be read there.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.4#Only, many years ago, a hand wrote upon it in pencil these four lines, hich have become gradually illegible beneath the rain and the dust, and which re, to-day, probably effaced:
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.5#Il dort. Quoique le sort fût pour lui bien étrange, Il vivait. Il mourut uand il n’eut plus son ange. La chose simplement d’elle-même arriva, Comme la uit se fait lorsque le jour s’en va.70
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.6#LETTER TO M. DAELLI
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.7#Publisher of the Italian translation of Les Misérables in Milan.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.8#HAUTEVILLE-HOUSE, October 18, 1862.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.9#You are right, sir, when you tell me that _Les Misérables_ is written for ll nations. I do not know whether it will be read by all, but I wrote it for ll. It is addressed to England as well as to Spain, to Italy as well as to rance, to Germany as well as to Ireland, to Republics which have slaves as well s to Empires which have serfs. Social problems overstep frontiers. The sores of he human race, those great sores which cover the globe, do not halt at the red r blue lines traced upon the map. In every place where man is ignorant and espairing, in every place where woman is sold for bread, wherever the child uffers for lack of the book which should instruct him and of the hearth which hould warm him, the book of _Les Misérables_ knocks at the door and says: “Open o me, I come for you.”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.10#At the hour of civilization through which we are now passing, and which is till so sombre, the _miserable’s_ name is Man; he is agonizing in all climes, nd he is groaning in all languages.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.11#Your Italy is no more exempt from the evil than is our France. Your dmirable Italy has all miseries on the face of it. Does not banditism, that aging form of pauperism, inhabit your mountains? Few nations are more deeply aten by that ulcer of convents which I have endeavored to fathom. In spite of our possessing Rome, Milan, Naples, Palermo, Turin, Florence, Sienna, Pisa, antua, Bologna, Ferrara, Genoa, Venice, a heroic history, sublime ruins, agnificent ruins, and superb cities, you are, like ourselves, poor. You are overed with marvels and vermin. Assuredly, the sun of Italy is splendid, but, las, azure in the sky does not prevent rags on man.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.12#Like us, you have prejudices, superstitions, tyrannies, fanaticisms, blind aws lending assistance to ignorant customs. You taste nothing of the present or of the future without a flavor of the past being mingled with it. You have a arbarian, the monk, and a savage, the lazzarone. The social question is the ame for you as for us. There are a few less deaths from hunger with you, and a ew more from fever; your social hygiene is not much better than ours; shadows, hich are Protestant in England, are Catholic in Italy; but, under different ames, the _vescovo_ is identical with the _bishop_, and it always means night, nd of pretty nearly the same quality. To explain the Bible badly amounts to the ame thing as to understand the Gospel badly.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.13#Is it necessary to emphasize this? Must this melancholy parallelism be yet ore completely verified? Have you not indigent persons? Glance below. Have you ot parasites? Glance up. Does not that hideous balance, whose two scales, auperism and parasitism, so mournfully preserve their mutual equilibrium, scillate before you as it does before us? Where is your army of schoolmasters, he only army which civilization acknowledges?
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.14#Where are your free and compulsory schools? Does every one know how to ead in the land of Dante and of Michael Angelo? Have you made public schools of our barracks? Have you not, like ourselves, an opulent war-budget and a paltry udget of education? Have not you also that passive obedience which is so easily onverted into soldierly obedience? military establishment which pushes the egulations to the extreme of firing upon Garibaldi; that is to say, upon the iving honor of Italy? Let us subject your social order to examination, let us ake it where it stands and as it stands, let us view its flagrant offences, how me the woman and the child. It is by the amount of protection with which hese two feeble creatures are surrounded that the degree of civilization is to e measured. Is prostitution less heartrending in Naples than in Paris? What is he amount of truth that springs from your laws, and what amount of justice prings from your tribunals? Do you chance to be so fortunate as to be ignorant f the meaning of those gloomy words: public prosecution, legal infamy, prison, he scaffold, the executioner, the death penalty? Italians, with you as with us, eccaria is dead and Farinace is alive. And then, let us scrutinize your state easons. Have you a government which comprehends the identity of morality and olitics? You have reached the point where you grant amnesty to heroes! omething very similar has been done in France. Stay, let us pass miseries in eview, let each one contribute his pile, you are as rich as we. Have you not, ike ourselves, two condemnations, religious condemnation pronounced by the riest, and social condemnation decreed by the judge? Oh, great nation of Italy, hou resemblest the great nation of France! Alas! our brothers, you are, like urselves, _Miserables_.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.15#From the depths of the gloom wherein you dwell, you do not see much more istinctly than we the radiant and distant portals of Eden. Only, the priests re mistaken. These holy portals are before and not behind us.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.16#I resume. This book, _Les Misérables_, is no less your mirror than ours. ertain men, certain castes, rise in revolt against this book,—I understand hat. Mirrors, those revealers of the truth, are hated; that does not prevent hem from being of use.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.17#As for myself, I have written for all, with a profound love for my own ountry, but without being engrossed by France more than by any other nation. In roportion as I advance in life, I grow more simple, and I become more and more atriotic for humanity.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.18#This is, moreover, the tendency of our age, and the law of radiance of the rench Revolution; books must cease to be exclusively French, Italian, German, panish, or English, and become European, I say more, human, if they are to orrespond to the enlargement of civilization.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.19#Hence a new logic of art, and of certain requirements of composition which odify everything, even the conditions, formerly narrow, of taste and language, hich must grow broader like all the rest.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.20#In France, certain critics have reproached me, to my great delight, with aving transgressed the bounds of what they call “French taste”; I should be lad if this eulogium were merited.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.21#In short, I am doing what I can, I suffer with the same universal uffering, and I try to assuage it, I possess only the puny forces of a man, and cry to all: “Help me!”
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.22#This, sir, is what your letter prompts me to say; I say it for you and for our country. If I have insisted so strongly, it is because of one phrase in our letter. You write:—
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.23#“There are Italians, and they are numerous, who say: ‘This book, _Les isérables_, is a French book. It does not concern us. Let the French read it as history, we read it as a romance.’”—Alas! I repeat, whether we be Italians or renchmen, misery concerns us all. Ever since history has been written, ever ince philosophy has meditated, misery has been the garment of the human race; he moment has at length arrived for tearing off that rag, and for replacing, pon the naked limbs of the Man-People, the sinister fragment of the past with he grand purple robe of the dawn.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.24#If this letter seems to you of service in enlightening some minds and in issipating some prejudices, you are at liberty to publish it, sir. Accept, I ray you, a renewed assurance of my very distinguished sentiments.
urn:cts:fuLit:vhugo.lesmis.hapgood:5.9.6.25#VICTOR HUGO.
