LES MISÉRABLES


VOLUME I—FANTINE


PREFACE

So long as there shall exist, by virtue of law and custom, decrees ofdamnation pronounced by society, artificially creating hells amid thecivilization of earth, and adding the element of human fate to divinedestiny; so long as the three great problems of the century—thedegradation of man through pauperism, the corruption of woman throughhunger, the crippling of children through lack of light—are unsolved;so long as social asphyxia is possible in any part of the world;—inother words, and with a still wider significance, so long as ignoranceand poverty exist on earth, books of the nature of Les Misérablescannot fail to be of use.
HAUTEVILLE HOUSE, 1862.

FANTINE


BOOK FIRST—A JUST MAN


CHAPTER I—M. MYRIEL

In 1815, M. Charles-François-Bienvenu Myriel was Bishop of D—— He wasan old man of about seventy-five years of age; he had occupied the seeof D—— since 1806.
Although this detail has no connection whatever with the real substanceof what we are about to relate, it will not be superfluous, if merelyfor the sake of exactness in all points, to mention here the variousrumors and remarks which had been in circulation about him from thevery moment when he arrived in the diocese. True or false, that whichis said of men often occupies as important a place in their lives, andabove all in their destinies, as that which they do. M. Myriel was theson of a councillor of the Parliament of Aix; hence he belonged to thenobility of the bar. It was said that his father, destining him to bethe heir of his own post, had married him at a very early age, eighteenor twenty, in accordance with a custom which is rather widely prevalentin parliamentary families. In spite of this marriage, however, it wassaid that Charles Myriel created a great deal of talk. He was wellformed, though rather short in stature, elegant, graceful, intelligent;the whole of the first portion of his life had been devoted to theworld and to gallantry.
The Revolution came; events succeeded each other with precipitation;the parliamentary families, decimated, pursued, hunted down, weredispersed. M. Charles Myriel emigrated to Italy at the very beginningof the Revolution. There his wife died of a malady of the chest, fromwhich she had long suffered. He had no children. What took place nextin the fate of M. Myriel? The ruin of the French society of the oldendays, the fall of his own family, the tragic spectacles of ’93, whichwere, perhaps, even more alarming to the emigrants who viewed them froma distance, with the magnifying powers of terror,—did these cause theideas of renunciation and solitude to germinate in him? Was he, in themidst of these distractions, these affections which absorbed his life,suddenly smitten with one of those mysterious and terrible blows whichsometimes overwhelm, by striking to his heart, a man whom publiccatastrophes would not shake, by striking at his existence and hisfortune? No one could have told: all that was known was, that when hereturned from Italy he was a priest.
In 1804, M. Myriel was the Curé of B—— [Brignolles]. He was alreadyadvanced in years, and lived in a very retired manner.
About the epoch of the coronation, some petty affair connected with hiscuracy—just what, is not precisely known—took him to Paris. Among otherpowerful persons to whom he went to solicit aid for his parishionerswas M. le Cardinal Fesch. One day, when the Emperor had come to visithis uncle, the worthy Curé, who was waiting in the anteroom, foundhimself present when His Majesty passed. Napoleon, on finding himselfobserved with a certain curiosity by this old man, turned round andsaid abruptly:—
“Who is this good man who is staring at me?”

“Sire,” said M. Myriel, “you are looking at a good man, and I at agreat man. Each of us can profit by it.”

That very evening, the Emperor asked the Cardinal the name of the Curé,and some time afterwards M. Myriel was utterly astonished to learn thathe had been appointed Bishop of D——
What truth was there, after all, in the stories which were invented asto the early portion of M. Myriel’s life? No one knew. Very fewfamilies had been acquainted with the Myriel family before theRevolution.
M. Myriel had to undergo the fate of every newcomer in a little town,where there are many mouths which talk, and very few heads which think.He was obliged to undergo it although he was a bishop, and because hewas a bishop. But after all, the rumors with which his name wasconnected were rumors only,—noise, sayings, words; less thanwords—_palabres_, as the energetic language of the South expresses it.
However that may be, after nine years of episcopal power and ofresidence in D——, all the stories and subjects of conversation whichengross petty towns and petty people at the outset had fallen intoprofound oblivion. No one would have dared to mention them; no onewould have dared to recall them.
M. Myriel had arrived at D—— accompanied by an elderly spinster,Mademoiselle Baptistine, who was his sister, and ten years his junior.
Their only domestic was a female servant of the same age asMademoiselle Baptistine, and named Madame Magloire, who, after havingbeen _the servant of M. le Curé_, now assumed the double title of maidto Mademoiselle and housekeeper to Monseigneur.
Mademoiselle Baptistine was a long, pale, thin, gentle creature; sherealized the ideal expressed by the word “respectable”; for it seemsthat a woman must needs be a mother in order to be venerable. She hadnever been pretty; her whole life, which had been nothing but asuccession of holy deeds, had finally conferred upon her a sort ofpallor and transparency; and as she advanced in years she had acquiredwhat may be called the beauty of goodness. What had been leanness inher youth had become transparency in her maturity; and this diaphaneityallowed the angel to be seen. She was a soul rather than a virgin. Herperson seemed made of a shadow; there was hardly sufficient body toprovide for sex; a little matter enclosing a light; large eyes foreverdrooping;—a mere pretext for a soul’s remaining on the earth.
Madame Magloire was a little, fat, white old woman, corpulent andbustling; always out of breath,—in the first place, because of heractivity, and in the next, because of her asthma.
On his arrival, M. Myriel was installed in the episcopal palace withthe honors required by the Imperial decrees, which class a bishopimmediately after a major-general. The mayor and the president paid thefirst call on him, and he, in turn, paid the first call on the generaland the prefect.
The installation over, the town waited to see its bishop at work.


CHAPTER II—M. MYRIEL BECOMES M. WELCOME

The episcopal palace of D—— adjoins the hospital.
The episcopal palace was a huge and beautiful house, built of stone atthe beginning of the last century by M. Henri Puget, Doctor of Theologyof the Faculty of Paris, Abbé of Simore, who had been Bishop of D—— in1712. This palace was a genuine seignorial residence. Everything aboutit had a grand air,—the apartments of the Bishop, the drawing-rooms,the chambers, the principal courtyard, which was very large, with walksencircling it under arcades in the old Florentine fashion, and gardensplanted with magnificent trees. In the dining-room, a long and superbgallery which was situated on the ground floor and opened on thegardens, M. Henri Puget had entertained in state, on July 29, 1714, MyLords Charles Brûlart de Genlis, archbishop; Prince d’Embrun; Antoinede Mesgrigny, the capuchin, Bishop of Grasse; Philippe de Vendôme,Grand Prior of France, Abbé of Saint Honoré de Lérins; François deBerton de Crillon, bishop, Baron de Vence; César de Sabran deForcalquier, bishop, Seignor of Glandève; and Jean Soanen, Priest ofthe Oratory, preacher in ordinary to the king, bishop, Seignor ofSenez. The portraits of these seven reverend personages decorated thisapartment; and this memorable date, the 29th of July, 1714, was thereengraved in letters of gold on a table of white marble.
The hospital was a low and narrow building of a single story, with asmall garden.
Three days after his arrival, the Bishop visited the hospital. Thevisit ended, he had the director requested to be so good as to come tohis house.
“Monsieur the director of the hospital,” said he to him, “how many sickpeople have you at the present moment?”

“Twenty-six, Monseigneur.”

“That was the number which I counted,” said the Bishop.
“The beds,” pursued the director, “are very much crowded against eachother.”

“That is what I observed.”

“The halls are nothing but rooms, and it is with difficulty that theair can be changed in them.”

“So it seems to me.”

“And then, when there is a ray of sun, the garden is very small for theconvalescents.”

“That was what I said to myself.”

“In case of epidemics,—we have had the typhus fever this year; we hadthe sweating sickness two years ago, and a hundred patients attimes,—we know not what to do.”

“That is the thought which occurred to me.”

“What would you have, Monseigneur?” said the director. “One must resignone’s self.”

This conversation took place in the gallery dining-room on the groundfloor.
The Bishop remained silent for a moment; then he turned abruptly to thedirector of the hospital.
“Monsieur,” said he, “how many beds do you think this hall alone wouldhold?”

“Monseigneur’s dining-room?” exclaimed the stupefied director.
The Bishop cast a glance round the apartment, and seemed to be takingmeasures and calculations with his eyes.
“It would hold full twenty beds,” said he, as though speaking tohimself. Then, raising his voice:—
“Hold, Monsieur the director of the hospital, I will tell yousomething. There is evidently a mistake here. There are thirty-six ofyou, in five or six small rooms. There are three of us here, and wehave room for sixty. There is some mistake, I tell you; you have myhouse, and I have yours. Give me back my house; you are at home here.”

On the following day the thirty-six patients were installed in theBishop’s palace, and the Bishop was settled in the hospital.
M. Myriel had no property, his family having been ruined by theRevolution. His sister was in receipt of a yearly income of fivehundred francs, which sufficed for her personal wants at the vicarage.M. Myriel received from the State, in his quality of bishop, a salaryof fifteen thousand francs. On the very day when he took up his abodein the hospital, M. Myriel settled on the disposition of this sum oncefor all, in the following manner. We transcribe here a note made by hisown hand:—
NOTE ON THE REGULATION OF MY HOUSEHOLD EXPENSES.
For the little seminary . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,500 livresSociety of the  mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      100   ” For the Lazarists of Montdidier . . . . . . . . . .      100   ” Seminary for foreign missions in Paris  . . . . . .      200   ” Congregation of the Holy Spirit . . . . . . . . . .      150   ” Religious establishments of the Holy Land . . . . .      100   ” Charitable maternity societies  . . . . . . . . . .      300   ” Extra, for that of Arles  . . . . . . . . . . . . .       50   ” Work for the amelioration of prisons  . . . . . . .      400   ” Work for the relief and delivery of prisoners . . .      500   ” To liberate fathers of families incarcerated for debt  1,000   ” Addition to the salary of the poor teachers of thediocese  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2,000   ” Public granary of the Hautes-Alpes  . . . . . . . .      100   ” Congregation of the ladies of D——, of Manosque, and ofSisteron, for the gratuitous instruction of poorgirls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,500   ” For the poor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6,000   ” My personal expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,000   ” ———Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15,000   ”

M. Myriel made no change in this arrangement during the entire periodthat he occupied the see of D—— As has been seen, he called it_regulating his household expenses_.
This arrangement was accepted with absolute submission by MademoiselleBaptistine. This holy woman regarded Monseigneur of D—— as at one andthe same time her brother and her bishop, her friend according to theflesh and her superior according to the Church. She simply loved andvenerated him. When he spoke, she bowed; when he acted, she yielded heradherence. Their only servant, Madame Magloire, grumbled a little. Itwill be observed that Monsieur the Bishop had reserved for himself onlyone thousand livres, which, added to the pension of MademoiselleBaptistine, made fifteen hundred francs a year. On these fifteenhundred francs these two old women and the old man subsisted.
And when a village curate came to D——, the Bishop still found means toentertain him, thanks to the severe economy of Madame Magloire, and tothe intelligent administration of Mademoiselle Baptistine.
One day, after he had been in D—— about three months, the Bishop said:—
“And still I am quite cramped with it all!”

“I should think so!” exclaimed Madame Magloire. “Monseigneur has noteven claimed the allowance which the department owes him for theexpense of his carriage in town, and for his journeys about thediocese. It was customary for bishops in former days.”

“Hold!” cried the Bishop, “you are quite right, Madame Magloire.”

And he made his demand.
Some time afterwards the General Council took this demand underconsideration, and voted him an annual sum of three thousand francs,under this heading: _Allowance to M. the Bishop for expenses ofcarriage, expenses of posting, and expenses of pastoral visits._
This provoked a great outcry among the local burgesses; and a senatorof the Empire, a former member of the Council of the Five Hundred whichfavored the 18 Brumaire, and who was provided with a magnificentsenatorial office in the vicinity of the town of D——, wrote to M. Bigotde Préameneu, the minister of public worship, a very angry andconfidential note on the subject, from which we extract these authenticlines:—
“Expenses of carriage? What can be done with it in a town of less thanfour thousand inhabitants? Expenses of journeys? What is the use ofthese trips, in the first place? Next, how can the posting beaccomplished in these mountainous parts? There are no roads. No onetravels otherwise than on horseback. Even the bridge between Duranceand Château-Arnoux can barely support ox-teams. These priests are allthus, greedy and avaricious. This man played the good priest when hefirst came. Now he does like the rest; he must have a carriage and aposting-chaise, he must have luxuries, like the bishops of the oldendays. Oh, all this priesthood! Things will not go well, M. le Comte,until the Emperor has freed us from these black-capped rascals. Downwith the Pope! [Matters were getting embroiled with Rome.] For my part,I am for Cæsar alone.” Etc., etc.
On the other hand, this affair afforded great delight to MadameMagloire. “Good,” said she to Mademoiselle Baptistine; “Monseigneurbegan with other people, but he has had to wind up with himself, afterall. He has regulated all his charities. Now here are three thousandfrancs for us! At last!”

That same evening the Bishop wrote out and handed to his sister amemorandum conceived in the following terms:—
EXPENSES OF CARRIAGE AND CIRCUIT.
For furnishing meat soup to the patients in the hospital. 1,500 livresFor the maternity charitable society of Aix . . . . . . .   250   ” For the maternity charitable society of Draguignan  . . .   250   ” For foundlings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500   ” For orphans   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500   ” ——-Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,000   ”

Such was M. Myriel’s budget.
As for the chance episcopal perquisites, the fees for marriage bans,dispensations, private baptisms, sermons, benedictions, of churches orchapels, marriages, etc., the Bishop levied them on the wealthy withall the more asperity, since he bestowed them on the needy.
After a time, offerings of money flowed in. Those who had and those wholacked knocked at M. Myriel’s door,—the latter in search of the almswhich the former came to deposit. In less than a year the Bishop hadbecome the treasurer of all benevolence and the cashier of all those indistress. Considerable sums of money passed through his hands, butnothing could induce him to make any change whatever in his mode oflife, or add anything superfluous to his bare necessities.
Far from it. As there is always more wretchedness below than there isbrotherhood above, all was given away, so to speak, before it wasreceived. It was like water on dry soil; no matter how much money hereceived, he never had any. Then he stripped himself.
The usage being that bishops shall announce their baptismal names atthe head of their charges and their pastoral letters, the poor peopleof the country-side had selected, with a sort of affectionate instinct,among the names and prenomens of their bishop, that which had a meaningfor them; and they never called him anything except MonseigneurBienvenu [Welcome]. We will follow their example, and will also callhim thus when we have occasion to name him. Moreover, this appellationpleased him.
“I like that name,” said he. “Bienvenu makes up for the Monseigneur.”

We do not claim that the portrait herewith presented is probable; weconfine ourselves to stating that it resembles the original.



CHAPTER III—A HARD BISHOPRIC FOR A GOOD BISHOP

The Bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had convertedhis carriage into alms. The diocese of D—— is a fatiguing one. Thereare very few plains and a great many mountains; hardly any roads, as wehave just seen; thirty-two curacies, forty-one vicarships, and twohundred and eighty-five auxiliary chapels. To visit all these is quitea task.
The Bishop managed to do it. He went on foot when it was in theneighborhood, in a tilted spring-cart when it was on the plain, and ona donkey in the mountains. The two old women accompanied him. When thetrip was too hard for them, he went alone.
One day he arrived at Senez, which is an ancient episcopal city. He wasmounted on an ass. His purse, which was very dry at that moment, didnot permit him any other equipage. The mayor of the town came toreceive him at the gate of the town, and watched him dismount from hisass, with scandalized eyes. Some of the citizens were laughing aroundhim. “Monsieur the Mayor,” said the Bishop, “and Messieurs Citizens, Iperceive that I shock you. You think it very arrogant in a poor priestto ride an animal which was used by Jesus Christ. I have done so fromnecessity, I assure you, and not from vanity.”

In the course of these trips he was kind and indulgent, and talkedrather than preached. He never went far in search of his arguments andhis examples. He quoted to the inhabitants of one district the exampleof a neighboring district. In the cantons where they were harsh to thepoor, he said: “Look at the people of Briançon! They have conferred onthe poor, on widows and orphans, the right to have their meadows mownthree days in advance of every one else. They rebuild their houses forthem gratuitously when they are ruined. Therefore it is a country whichis blessed by God. For a whole century, there has not been a singlemurderer among them.”

In villages which were greedy for profit and harvest, he said: “Look atthe people of Embrun! If, at the harvest season, the father of a familyhas his son away on service in the army, and his daughters at servicein the town, and if he is ill and incapacitated, the curé recommendshim to the prayers of the congregation; and on Sunday, after the mass,all the inhabitants of the village—men, women, and children—go to thepoor man’s field and do his harvesting for him, and carry his straw andhis grain to his granary.” To families divided by questions of moneyand inheritance he said: “Look at the mountaineers of Devolny, acountry so wild that the nightingale is not heard there once in fiftyyears. Well, when the father of a family dies, the boys go off to seektheir fortunes, leaving the property to the girls, so that they mayfind husbands.” To the cantons which had a taste for lawsuits, andwhere the farmers ruined themselves in stamped paper, he said: “Look atthose good peasants in the valley of Queyras! There are three thousandsouls of them. Mon Dieu! it is like a little republic. Neither judgenor bailiff is known there. The mayor does everything. He allots theimposts, taxes each person conscientiously, judges quarrels fornothing, divides inheritances without charge, pronounces sentencesgratuitously; and he is obeyed, because he is a just man among simplemen.” To villages where he found no schoolmaster, he quoted once morethe people of Queyras: “Do you know how they manage?” he said. “Since alittle country of a dozen or fifteen hearths cannot always support ateacher, they have schoolmasters who are paid by the whole valley, whomake the round of the villages, spending a week in this one, ten daysin that, and instruct them. These teachers go to the fairs. I have seenthem there. They are to be recognized by the quill pens which they wearin the cord of their hat. Those who teach reading only have one pen;those who teach reading and reckoning have two pens; those who teachreading, reckoning, and Latin have three pens. But what a disgrace tobe ignorant! Do like the people of Queyras!”

Thus he discoursed gravely and paternally; in default of examples, heinvented parables, going directly to the point, with few phrases andmany images, which characteristic formed the real eloquence of JesusChrist. And being convinced himself, he was persuasive.



CHAPTER IV—WORKS CORRESPONDING TO WORDS

His conversation was gay and affable. He put himself on a level withthe two old women who had passed their lives beside him. When helaughed, it was the laugh of a schoolboy. Madame Magloire liked to callhim Your Grace [_Votre Grandeur_]. One day he rose from his armchair,and went to his library in search of a book. This book was on one ofthe upper shelves. As the bishop was rather short of stature, he couldnot reach it. “Madame Magloire,” said he, “fetch me a chair. Mygreatness [_grandeur_] does not reach as far as that shelf.”

One of his distant relatives, Madame la Comtesse de Lô, rarely allowedan opportunity to escape of enumerating, in his presence, what shedesignated as “the expectations” of her three sons. She had numerousrelatives, who were very old and near to death, and of whom her sonswere the natural heirs. The youngest of the three was to receive from agrandaunt a good hundred thousand livres of income; the second was theheir by entail to the title of the Duke, his uncle; the eldest was tosucceed to the peerage of his grandfather. The Bishop was accustomed tolisten in silence to these innocent and pardonable maternal boasts. Onone occasion, however, he appeared to be more thoughtful than usual,while Madame de Lô was relating once again the details of all theseinheritances and all these “expectations.” She interrupted herselfimpatiently: “Mon Dieu, cousin! What are you thinking about?” “I amthinking,” replied the Bishop, “of a singular remark, which is to befound, I believe, in St. Augustine,—‘Place your hopes in the man fromwhom you do not inherit.’”

At another time, on receiving a notification of the decease of agentleman of the country-side, wherein not only the dignities of thedead man, but also the feudal and noble qualifications of all hisrelatives, spread over an entire page: “What a stout back Death has!”he exclaimed. “What a strange burden of titles is cheerfully imposed onhim, and how much wit must men have, in order thus to press the tombinto the service of vanity!”

He was gifted, on occasion, with a gentle raillery, which almost alwaysconcealed a serious meaning. In the course of one Lent, a youthfulvicar came to D——, and preached in the cathedral. He was tolerablyeloquent. The subject of his sermon was charity. He urged the rich togive to the poor, in order to avoid hell, which he depicted in the mostfrightful manner of which he was capable, and to win paradise, which herepresented as charming and desirable. Among the audience there was awealthy retired merchant, who was somewhat of a usurer, named M.Géborand, who had amassed two millions in the manufacture of coarsecloth, serges, and woollen galloons. Never in his whole life had M.Géborand bestowed alms on any poor wretch. After the delivery of thatsermon, it was observed that he gave a sou every Sunday to the poor oldbeggar-women at the door of the cathedral. There were six of them toshare it. One day the Bishop caught sight of him in the act ofbestowing this charity, and said to his sister, with a smile, “There isM. Géborand purchasing paradise for a sou.”

When it was a question of charity, he was not to be rebuffed even by arefusal, and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks whichinduced reflection. Once he was begging for the poor in a drawing-roomof the town; there was present the Marquis de Champtercier, a wealthyand avaricious old man, who contrived to be, at one and the same time,an ultra-royalist and an ultra-Voltairian. This variety of man hasactually existed. When the Bishop came to him, he touched his arm,_“You must give me something, M. le Marquis.”_ The Marquis turned roundand answered dryly, _“I have poor people of my own, Monseigneur.” “Givethem to me,”_ replied the Bishop.
One day he preached the following sermon in the cathedral:—
“My very dear brethren, my good friends, there are thirteen hundred andtwenty thousand peasants’ dwellings in France which have but threeopenings; eighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels which have buttwo openings, the door and one window; and three hundred and forty-sixthousand cabins besides which have but one opening, the door. And thisarises from a thing which is called the tax on doors and windows. Justput poor families, old women and little children, in those buildings,and behold the fevers and maladies which result! Alas! God gives air tomen; the law sells it to them. I do not blame the law, but I bless God.In the department of the Isère, in the Var, in the two departments ofthe Alpes, the Hautes, and the Basses, the peasants have not evenwheelbarrows; they transport their manure on the backs of men; theyhave no candles, and they burn resinous sticks, and bits of rope dippedin pitch. That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of thehilly country of Dauphiné. They make bread for six months at one time;they bake it with dried cow-dung. In the winter they break this breadup with an axe, and they soak it for twenty-four hours, in order torender it eatable. My brethren, have pity! behold the suffering on allsides of you!”

Born a Provençal, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect ofthe south. He said, _“En bé! moussu, sés sagé?”_ as in lower Languedoc;_“Onté anaras passa?”_ as in the Basses-Alpes; _“Puerte un bouen moutuembe un bouen fromage grase,”_ as in upper Dauphiné. This pleased thepeople extremely, and contributed not a little to win him access to allspirits. He was perfectly at home in the thatched cottage and in themountains. He understood how to say the grandest things in the mostvulgar of idioms. As he spoke all tongues, he entered into all hearts.
Moreover, he was the same towards people of the world and towards thelower classes. He condemned nothing in haste and without takingcircumstances into account. He said, “Examine the road over which thefault has passed.”

Being, as he described himself with a smile, an _ex-sinner_, he hadnone of the asperities of austerity, and he professed, with a good dealof distinctness, and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous, adoctrine which may be summed up as follows:—
“Man has upon him his flesh, which is at once his burden and histemptation. He drags it with him and yields to it. He must watch it,check it, repress it, and obey it only at the last extremity. There maybe some fault even in this obedience; but the fault thus committed isvenial; it is a fall, but a fall on the knees which may terminate inprayer.
“To be a saint is the exception; to be an upright man is the rule. Err,fall, sin if you will, but be upright.
“The least possible sin is the law of man. No sin at all is the dreamof the angel. All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. Sin is agravitation.”

When he saw everyone exclaiming very loudly, and growing angry veryquickly, “Oh! oh!” he said, with a smile; “to all appearance, this is agreat crime which all the world commits. These are hypocrisies whichhave taken fright, and are in haste to make protest and to putthemselves under shelter.”

He was indulgent towards women and poor people, on whom the burden ofhuman society rest. He said, “The faults of women, of children, of thefeeble, the indigent, and the ignorant, are the fault of the husbands,the fathers, the masters, the strong, the rich, and the wise.”

He said, moreover, “Teach those who are ignorant as many things aspossible; society is culpable, in that it does not afford instructiongratis; it is responsible for the night which it produces. This soul isfull of shadow; sin is therein committed. The guilty one is not theperson who has committed the sin, but the person who has created theshadow.”

It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own ofjudging things: I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel.
One day he heard a criminal case, which was in preparation and on thepoint of trial, discussed in a drawing-room. A wretched man, being atthe end of his resources, had coined counterfeit money, out of love fora woman, and for the child which he had had by her. Counterfeiting wasstill punishable with death at that epoch. The woman had been arrestedin the act of passing the first false piece made by the man. She washeld, but there were no proofs except against her. She alone couldaccuse her lover, and destroy him by her confession. She denied; theyinsisted. She persisted in her denial. Thereupon an idea occurred tothe attorney for the crown. He invented an infidelity on the part ofthe lover, and succeeded, by means of fragments of letters cunninglypresented, in persuading the unfortunate woman that she had a rival,and that the man was deceiving her. Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy,she denounced her lover, confessed all, proved all.
The man was ruined. He was shortly to be tried at Aix with hisaccomplice. They were relating the matter, and each one was expressingenthusiasm over the cleverness of the magistrate. By bringing jealousyinto play, he had caused the truth to burst forth in wrath, he hadeduced the justice of revenge. The Bishop listened to all this insilence. When they had finished, he inquired,—
“Where are this man and woman to be tried?”

“At the Court of Assizes.”

He went on, “And where will the advocate of the crown be tried?”

A tragic event occurred at D—— A man was condemned to death for murder.He was a wretched fellow, not exactly educated, not exactly ignorant,who had been a mountebank at fairs, and a writer for the public. Thetown took a great interest in the trial. On the eve of the day fixedfor the execution of the condemned man, the chaplain of the prison fellill. A priest was needed to attend the criminal in his last moments.They sent for the curé. It seems that he refused to come, saying, “Thatis no affair of mine. I have nothing to do with that unpleasant task,and with that mountebank: I, too, am ill; and besides, it is not myplace.” This reply was reported to the Bishop, who said, _“Monsieur leCuré is right: it is not his place; it is mine.”_
He went instantly to the prison, descended to the cell of the“mountebank,” called him by name, took him by the hand, and spoke tohim. He passed the entire day with him, forgetful of food and sleep,praying to God for the soul of the condemned man, and praying thecondemned man for his own. He told him the best truths, which are alsothe most simple. He was father, brother, friend; he was bishop only tobless. He taught him everything, encouraged and consoled him. The manwas on the point of dying in despair. Death was an abyss to him. As hestood trembling on its mournful brink, he recoiled with horror. He wasnot sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent. Hiscondemnation, which had been a profound shock, had, in a manner, brokenthrough, here and there, that wall which separates us from the mysteryof things, and which we call life. He gazed incessantly beyond thisworld through these fatal breaches, and beheld only darkness. TheBishop made him see light.
On the following day, when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch, theBishop was still there. He followed him, and exhibited himself to theeyes of the crowd in his purple camail and with his episcopal crossupon his neck, side by side with the criminal bound with cords.
He mounted the tumbril with him, he mounted the scaffold with him. Thesufferer, who had been so gloomy and cast down on the preceding day,was radiant. He felt that his soul was reconciled, and he hoped in God.The Bishop embraced him, and at the moment when the knife was about tofall, he said to him: “God raises from the dead him whom man slays; hewhom his brothers have rejected finds his Father once more. Pray,believe, enter into life: the Father is there.” When he descended fromthe scaffold, there was something in his look which made the peopledraw aside to let him pass. They did not know which was most worthy ofadmiration, his pallor or his serenity. On his return to the humbledwelling, which he designated, with a smile, as _his palace_, he saidto his sister, _“I have just officiated pontifically.”_
Since the most sublime things are often those which are the leastunderstood, there were people in the town who said, when commenting onthis conduct of the Bishop, _“It is affectation.”_
This, however, was a remark which was confined to the drawing-rooms.The populace, which perceives no jest in holy deeds, was touched, andadmired him.
As for the Bishop, it was a shock to him to have beheld the guillotine,and it was a long time before he recovered from it.
In fact, when the scaffold is there, all erected and prepared, it hassomething about it which produces hallucination. One may feel a certainindifference to the death penalty, one may refrain from pronouncingupon it, from saying yes or no, so long as one has not seen aguillotine with one’s own eyes: but if one encounters one of them, theshock is violent; one is forced to decide, and to take part for oragainst. Some admire it, like de Maistre; others execrate it, likeBeccaria. The guillotine is the concretion of the law; it is called_vindicate_; it is not neutral, and it does not permit you to remainneutral. He who sees it shivers with the most mysterious of shivers.All social problems erect their interrogation point around thischopping-knife. The scaffold is a vision. The scaffold is not a pieceof carpentry; the scaffold is not a machine; the scaffold is not aninert bit of mechanism constructed of wood, iron and cords.
It seems as though it were a being, possessed of I know not what sombreinitiative; one would say that this piece of carpenter’s work saw, thatthis machine heard, that this mechanism understood, that this wood,this iron, and these cords were possessed of will. In the frightfulmeditation into which its presence casts the soul the scaffold appearsin terrible guise, and as though taking part in what is going on. Thescaffold is the accomplice of the executioner; it devours, it eatsflesh, it drinks blood; the scaffold is a sort of monster fabricated bythe judge and the carpenter, a spectre which seems to live with ahorrible vitality composed of all the death which it has inflicted.
Therefore, the impression was terrible and profound; on the dayfollowing the execution, and on many succeeding days, the Bishopappeared to be crushed. The almost violent serenity of the funerealmoment had disappeared; the phantom of social justice tormented him.He, who generally returned from all his deeds with a radiantsatisfaction, seemed to be reproaching himself. At times he talked tohimself, and stammered lugubrious monologues in a low voice. This isone which his sister overheard one evening and preserved: “I did notthink that it was so monstrous. It is wrong to become absorbed in thedivine law to such a degree as not to perceive human law. Death belongsto God alone. By what right do men touch that unknown thing?”

In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished.Nevertheless, it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoidedpassing the place of execution.
M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick anddying. He did not ignore the fact that therein lay his greatest dutyand his greatest labor. Widowed and orphaned families had no need tosummon him; he came of his own accord. He understood how to sit downand hold his peace for long hours beside the man who had lost the wifeof his love, of the mother who had lost her child. As he knew themoment for silence he knew also the moment for speech. Oh, admirableconsoler! He sought not to efface sorrow by forgetfulness, but tomagnify and dignify it by hope. He said:—
“Have a care of the manner in which you turn towards the dead. Thinknot of that which perishes. Gaze steadily. You will perceive the livinglight of your well-beloved dead in the depths of heaven.” He knew thatfaith is wholesome. He sought to counsel and calm the despairing man,by pointing out to him the resigned man, and to transform the griefwhich gazes upon a grave by showing him the grief which fixes its gazeupon a star.



CHAPTER V—MONSEIGNEUR BIENVENU MADE HIS CASSOCKS LAST TOO LONG

The private life of M. Myriel was filled with the same thoughts as hispublic life. The voluntary poverty in which the Bishop of D—— lived,would have been a solemn and charming sight for any one who could haveviewed it close at hand.
Like all old men, and like the majority of thinkers, he slept little.This brief slumber was profound. In the morning he meditated for anhour, then he said his mass, either at the cathedral or in his ownhouse. His mass said, he broke his fast on rye bread dipped in the milkof his own cows. Then he set to work.
A Bishop is a very busy man: he must every day receive the secretary ofthe bishopric, who is generally a canon, and nearly every day hisvicars-general. He has congregations to reprove, privileges to grant, awhole ecclesiastical library to examine,—prayer-books, diocesancatechisms, books of hours, etc.,—charges to write, sermons toauthorize, curés and mayors to reconcile, a clerical correspondence, anadministrative correspondence; on one side the State, on the other theHoly See; and a thousand matters of business.
What time was left to him, after these thousand details of business,and his offices and his breviary, he bestowed first on the necessitous,the sick, and the afflicted; the time which was left to him from theafflicted, the sick, and the necessitous, he devoted to work. Sometimeshe dug in his garden; again, he read or wrote. He had but one word forboth these kinds of toil; he called them _gardening_. “The mind is agarden,” said he.
Towards midday, when the weather was fine, he went forth and took astroll in the country or in town, often entering lowly dwellings. Hewas seen walking alone, buried in his own thoughts, his eyes cast down,supporting himself on his long cane, clad in his wadded purple garmentof silk, which was very warm, wearing purple stockings inside hiscoarse shoes, and surmounted by a flat hat which allowed three goldentassels of large bullion to droop from its three points.
It was a perfect festival wherever he appeared. One would have saidthat his presence had something warming and luminous about it. Thechildren and the old people came out to the doorsteps for the Bishop asfor the sun. He bestowed his blessing, and they blessed him. Theypointed out his house to any one who was in need of anything.

  Enlarge
The Comfortor  1b1-5-comfortor

Here and there he halted, accosted the little boys and girls, andsmiled upon the mothers. He visited the poor so long as he had anymoney; when he no longer had any, he visited the rich.
As he made his cassocks last a long while, and did not wish to have itnoticed, he never went out in the town without his wadded purple cloak.This inconvenienced him somewhat in summer.
On his return, he dined. The dinner resembled his breakfast.
At half-past eight in the evening he supped with his sister, MadameMagloire standing behind them and serving them at table. Nothing couldbe more frugal than this repast. If, however, the Bishop had one of hiscurés to supper, Madame Magloire took advantage of the opportunity toserve Monseigneur with some excellent fish from the lake, or with somefine game from the mountains. Every curé furnished the pretext for agood meal: the Bishop did not interfere. With that exception, hisordinary diet consisted only of vegetables boiled in water, and oilsoup. Thus it was said in the town, _when the Bishop does not indulgein the cheer of a curé, he indulges in the cheer of a trappist_.
After supper he conversed for half an hour with Mademoiselle Baptistineand Madame Magloire; then he retired to his own room and set towriting, sometimes on loose sheets, and again on the margin of somefolio. He was a man of letters and rather learned. He left behind himfive or six very curious manuscripts; among others, a dissertation onthis verse in Genesis, _In the beginning, the spirit of God floatedupon the waters_. With this verse he compares three texts: the Arabicverse which says, _The winds of God blew;_ Flavius Josephus who says,_A wind from above was precipitated upon the earth;_ and finally, theChaldaic paraphrase of Onkelos, which renders it, _A wind coming fromGod blew upon the face of the waters_. In another dissertation, heexamines the theological works of Hugo, Bishop of Ptolemaïs,great-grand-uncle to the writer of this book, and establishes the fact,that to this bishop must be attributed the divers little workspublished during the last century, under the pseudonym of Barleycourt.
Sometimes, in the midst of his reading, no matter what the book mightbe which he had in his hand, he would suddenly fall into a profoundmeditation, whence he only emerged to write a few lines on the pages ofthe volume itself. These lines have often no connection whatever withthe book which contains them. We now have under our eyes a note writtenby him on the margin of a quarto entitled _Correspondence of LordGermain with Generals Clinton, Cornwallis, and the Admirals on theAmerican station. Versailles, Poinçot, book-seller; and Paris, Pissot,bookseller, Quai des Augustins._
Here is the note:—
“Oh, you who are!
“Ecclesiastes calls you the All-powerful; the Maccabees call you theCreator; the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty; Baruch callsyou Immensity; the Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth; John calls youLight; the Books of Kings call you Lord; Exodus calls you Providence;Leviticus, Sanctity; Esdras, Justice; the creation calls you God; mancalls you Father; but Solomon calls you Compassion, and that is themost beautiful of all your names.”

Toward nine o’clock in the evening the two women retired and betookthemselves to their chambers on the first floor, leaving him aloneuntil morning on the ground floor.
It is necessary that we should, in this place, give an exact idea ofthe dwelling of the Bishop of D——



CHAPTER VI—WHO GUARDED HIS HOUSE FOR HIM

The house in which he lived consisted, as we have said, of a groundfloor, and one story above; three rooms on the ground floor, threechambers on the first, and an attic above. Behind the house was agarden, a quarter of an acre in extent. The two women occupied thefirst floor; the Bishop was lodged below. The first room, opening onthe street, served him as dining-room, the second was his bedroom, andthe third his oratory. There was no exit possible from this oratory,except by passing through the bedroom, nor from the bedroom, withoutpassing through the dining-room. At the end of the suite, in theoratory, there was a detached alcove with a bed, for use in cases ofhospitality. The Bishop offered this bed to country curates whombusiness or the requirements of their parishes brought to D——
The pharmacy of the hospital, a small building which had been added tothe house, and abutted on the garden, had been transformed into akitchen and cellar. In addition to this, there was in the garden astable, which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital, and inwhich the Bishop kept two cows. No matter what the quantity of milkthey gave, he invariably sent half of it every morning to the sickpeople in the hospital.
_“I am paying my tithes,”_ he said.
His bedroom was tolerably large, and rather difficult to warm in badweather. As wood is extremely dear at D——, he hit upon the idea ofhaving a compartment of boards constructed in the cow-shed. Here hepassed his evenings during seasons of severe cold: he called it his_winter salon_.
In this winter salon, as in the dining-room, there was no otherfurniture than a square table in white wood, and four straw-seatedchairs. In addition to this the dining-room was ornamented with anantique sideboard, painted pink, in water colors. Out of a similarsideboard, properly draped with white napery and imitation lace, theBishop had constructed the altar which decorated his oratory.
His wealthy penitents and the sainted women of D—— had more than onceassessed themselves to raise the money for a new altar forMonseigneur’s oratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and hadgiven it to the poor. “The most beautiful of altars,” he said, “is thesoul of an unhappy creature consoled and thanking God.”

In his oratory there were two straw prie-Dieu, and there was anarmchair, also in straw, in his bedroom. When, by chance, he receivedseven or eight persons at one time, the prefect, or the general, or thestaff of the regiment in garrison, or several pupils from the littleseminary, the chairs had to be fetched from the winter salon in thestable, the prie-Dieu from the oratory, and the armchair from thebedroom: in this way as many as eleven chairs could be collected forthe visitors. A room was dismantled for each new guest.
It sometimes happened that there were twelve in the party; the Bishopthen relieved the embarrassment of the situation by standing in frontof the chimney if it was winter, or by strolling in the garden if itwas summer.
There was still another chair in the detached alcove, but the straw washalf gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that it was of serviceonly when propped against the wall. Mademoiselle Baptistine had also inher own room a very large easy-chair of wood, which had formerly beengilded, and which was covered with flowered pekin; but they had beenobliged to hoist this bergère up to the first story through the window,as the staircase was too narrow; it could not, therefore, be reckonedamong the possibilities in the way of furniture.
Mademoiselle Baptistine’s ambition had been to be able to purchase aset of drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht velvet, stamped with arose pattern, and with mahogany in swan’s neck style, with a sofa. Butthis would have cost five hundred francs at least, and in view of thefact that she had only been able to lay by forty-two francs and tensous for this purpose in the course of five years, she had ended byrenouncing the idea. However, who is there who has attained his ideal?
Nothing is more easy to present to the imagination than the Bishop’sbedchamber. A glazed door opened on the garden; opposite this was thebed,—a hospital bed of iron, with a canopy of green serge; in theshadow of the bed, behind a curtain, were the utensils of the toilet,which still betrayed the elegant habits of the man of the world: therewere two doors, one near the chimney, opening into the oratory; theother near the bookcase, opening into the dining-room. The bookcase wasa large cupboard with glass doors filled with books; the chimney was ofwood painted to represent marble, and habitually without fire. In thechimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron, ornamented above with twogarlanded vases, and flutings which had formerly been silvered withsilver leaf, which was a sort of episcopal luxury; above thechimney-piece hung a crucifix of copper, with the silver worn off,fixed on a background of threadbare velvet in a wooden frame from whichthe gilding had fallen; near the glass door a large table with aninkstand, loaded with a confusion of papers and with huge volumes;before the table an armchair of straw; in front of the bed a prie-Dieu,borrowed from the oratory.
Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to the wall on each side ofthe bed. Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth atthe side of these figures indicated that the portraits represented, onethe Abbé of Chaliot, bishop of Saint Claude; the other, the AbbéTourteau, vicar-general of Agde, abbé of Grand-Champ, order of Cîteaux,diocese of Chartres. When the Bishop succeeded to this apartment, afterthe hospital patients, he had found these portraits there, and had leftthem. They were priests, and probably donors—two reasons for respectingthem. All that he knew about these two persons was, that they had beenappointed by the king, the one to his bishopric, the other to hisbenefice, on the same day, the 27th of April, 1785. Madame Magloirehaving taken the pictures down to dust, the Bishop had discovered theseparticulars written in whitish ink on a little square of paper,yellowed by time, and attached to the back of the portrait of the Abbéof Grand-Champ with four wafers.
At his window he had an antique curtain of a coarse woollen stuff,which finally became so old, that, in order to avoid the expense of anew one, Madame Magloire was forced to take a large seam in the verymiddle of it. This seam took the form of a cross. The Bishop oftencalled attention to it: “How delightful that is!” he said.
All the rooms in the house, without exception, those on the groundfloor as well as those on the first floor, were white-washed, which isa fashion in barracks and hospitals.
However, in their latter years, Madame Magloire discovered beneath thepaper which had been washed over, paintings, ornamenting the apartmentof Mademoiselle Baptistine, as we shall see further on. Before becominga hospital, this house had been the ancient parliament house of theBourgeois. Hence this decoration. The chambers were paved in redbricks, which were washed every week, with straw mats in front of allthe beds. Altogether, this dwelling, which was attended to by the twowomen, was exquisitely clean from top to bottom. This was the soleluxury which the Bishop permitted. He said, _“That takes nothing fromthe poor.”_
It must be confessed, however, that he still retained from his formerpossessions six silver knives and forks and a soup-ladle, which MadameMagloire contemplated every day with delight, as they glistenedsplendidly upon the coarse linen cloth. And since we are now paintingthe Bishop of D—— as he was in reality, we must add that he had saidmore than once, “I find it difficult to renounce eating from silverdishes.”

To this silverware must be added two large candlesticks of massivesilver, which he had inherited from a great-aunt. These candlesticksheld two wax candles, and usually figured on the Bishop’schimney-piece. When he had any one to dinner, Madame Magloire lightedthe two candles and set the candlesticks on the table.
In the Bishop’s own chamber, at the head of his bed, there was a smallcupboard, in which Madame Magloire locked up the six silver knives andforks and the big spoon every night. But it is necessary to add, thatthe key was never removed.
The garden, which had been rather spoiled by the ugly buildings whichwe have mentioned, was composed of four alleys in cross-form, radiatingfrom a tank. Another walk made the circuit of the garden, and skirtedthe white wall which enclosed it. These alleys left behind them foursquare plots rimmed with box. In three of these, Madame Magloirecultivated vegetables; in the fourth, the Bishop had planted someflowers; here and there stood a few fruit-trees. Madame Magloire hadonce remarked, with a sort of gentle malice: “Monseigneur, you who turneverything to account, have, nevertheless, one useless plot. It wouldbe better to grow salads there than bouquets.” “Madame Magloire,”retorted the Bishop, “you are mistaken. The beautiful is as useful asthe useful.” He added after a pause, “More so, perhaps.”

This plot, consisting of three or four beds, occupied the Bishop almostas much as did his books. He liked to pass an hour or two there,trimming, hoeing, and making holes here and there in the earth, intowhich he dropped seeds. He was not as hostile to insects as a gardenercould have wished to see him. Moreover, he made no pretensions tobotany; he ignored groups and consistency; he made not the slightesteffort to decide between Tournefort and the natural method; he tookpart neither with the buds against the cotyledons, nor with Jussieuagainst Linnæus. He did not study plants; he loved flowers. Herespected learned men greatly; he respected the ignorant still more;and, without ever failing in these two respects, he watered hisflower-beds every summer evening with a tin watering-pot painted green.
The house had not a single door which could be locked. The door of thedining-room, which, as we have said, opened directly on the cathedralsquare, had formerly been ornamented with locks and bolts like the doorof a prison. The Bishop had had all this ironwork removed, and thisdoor was never fastened, either by night or by day, with anythingexcept the latch. All that the first passer-by had to do at any hour,was to give it a push. At first, the two women had been very much triedby this door, which was never fastened, but Monsieur de D—— had said tothem, “Have bolts put on your rooms, if that will please you.” They hadended by sharing his confidence, or by at least acting as though theyshared it. Madame Magloire alone had frights from time to time. As forthe Bishop, his thought can be found explained, or at least indicated,in the three lines which he wrote on the margin of a Bible, “This isthe shade of difference: the door of the physician should never beshut, the door of the priest should always be open.”

On another book, entitled _Philosophy of the Medical Science_, he hadwritten this other note: “Am not I a physician like them? I also havemy patients, and then, too, I have some whom I call my unfortunates.”

Again he wrote: “Do not inquire the name of him who asks a shelter ofyou. The very man who is embarrassed by his name is the one who needsshelter.”

It chanced that a worthy curé, I know not whether it was the curé ofCouloubroux or the curé of Pompierry, took it into his head to ask himone day, probably at the instigation of Madame Magloire, whetherMonsieur was sure that he was not committing an indiscretion, to acertain extent, in leaving his door unfastened day and night, at themercy of any one who should choose to enter, and whether, in short, hedid not fear lest some misfortune might occur in a house so littleguarded. The Bishop touched his shoulder, with gentle gravity, and saidto him, _“Nisi Dominus custodierit domum, in vanum vigilant quicustodiunt eam,” Unless the Lord guard the house, in vain do they watchwho guard it._
Then he spoke of something else.
He was fond of saying, “There is a bravery of the priest as well as thebravery of a colonel of dragoons,—only,” he added, “ours must betranquil.”




CHAPTER VII—CRAVATTE

It is here that a fact falls naturally into place, which we must notomit, because it is one of the sort which show us best what sort of aman the Bishop of D—— was.
After the destruction of the band of Gaspard Bès, who had infested thegorges of Ollioules, one of his lieutenants, Cravatte, took refuge inthe mountains. He concealed himself for some time with his bandits, theremnant of Gaspard Bès’s troop, in the county of Nice; then he made hisway to Piédmont, and suddenly reappeared in France, in the vicinity ofBarcelonette. He was first seen at Jauziers, then at Tuiles. He hidhimself in the caverns of the Joug-de-l’Aigle, and thence he descendedtowards the hamlets and villages through the ravines of Ubaye andUbayette.
He even pushed as far as Embrun, entered the cathedral one night, anddespoiled the sacristy. His highway robberies laid waste thecountry-side. The gendarmes were set on his track, but in vain. Healways escaped; sometimes he resisted by main force. He was a boldwretch. In the midst of all this terror the Bishop arrived. He wasmaking his circuit to Chastelar. The mayor came to meet him, and urgedhim to retrace his steps. Cravatte was in possession of the mountainsas far as Arche, and beyond; there was danger even with an escort; itmerely exposed three or four unfortunate gendarmes to no purpose.
“Therefore,” said the Bishop, “I intend to go without escort.”

“You do not really mean that, Monseigneur!” exclaimed the mayor.
“I do mean it so thoroughly that I absolutely refuse any gendarmes, andshall set out in an hour.”

“Set out?”

“Set out.”

“Alone?”

“Alone.”

“Monseigneur, you will not do that!”

“There exists yonder in the mountains,” said the Bishop, “a tinycommunity no bigger than that, which I have not seen for three years.They are my good friends, those gentle and honest shepherds. They ownone goat out of every thirty that they tend. They make very prettywoollen cords of various colors, and they play the mountain airs onlittle flutes with six holes. They need to be told of the good God nowand then. What would they say to a bishop who was afraid? What wouldthey say if I did not go?”

“But the brigands, Monseigneur?”

“Hold,” said the Bishop, “I must think of that. You are right. I maymeet them. They, too, need to be told of the good God.”

“But, Monseigneur, there is a band of them! A flock of wolves!”

“Monsieur le maire, it may be that it is of this very flock of wolvesthat Jesus has constituted me the shepherd. Who knows the ways ofProvidence?”

“They will rob you, Monseigneur.”

“I have nothing.”

“They will kill you.”

“An old goodman of a priest, who passes along mumbling his prayers?Bah! To what purpose?”

“Oh, mon Dieu! what if you should meet them!”

“I should beg alms of them for my poor.”

“Do not go, Monseigneur. In the name of Heaven! You are risking yourlife!”

“Monsieur le maire,” said the Bishop, “is that really all? I am not inthe world to guard my own life, but to guard souls.”

They had to allow him to do as he pleased. He set out, accompanied onlyby a child who offered to serve as a guide. His obstinacy was bruitedabout the country-side, and caused great consternation.
He would take neither his sister nor Madame Magloire. He traversed themountain on mule-back, encountered no one, and arrived safe and soundat the residence of his “good friends,” the shepherds. He remainedthere for a fortnight, preaching, administering the sacrament,teaching, exhorting. When the time of his departure approached, heresolved to chant a _Te Deum_ pontifically. He mentioned it to thecuré. But what was to be done? There were no episcopal ornaments. Theycould only place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy, with afew ancient chasubles of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace.
“Bah!” said the Bishop. “Let us announce our _Te Deum_ from the pulpit,nevertheless, Monsieur le Curé. Things will arrange themselves.”

They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood. All themagnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficedto clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly.
While they were thus embarrassed, a large chest was brought anddeposited in the presbytery for the Bishop, by two unknown horsemen,who departed on the instant. The chest was opened; it contained a copeof cloth of gold, a mitre ornamented with diamonds, an archbishop’scross, a magnificent crosier,—all the pontifical vestments which hadbeen stolen a month previously from the treasury of Notre Damed’Embrun. In the chest was a paper, on which these words were written,_“From Cravatte to Monseigneur Bienvenu.”_
“Did not I say that things would come right of themselves?” said theBishop. Then he added, with a smile, “To him who contents himself withthe surplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an archbishop.”

“Monseigneur,” murmured the curé, throwing back his head with a smile.“God—or the Devil.”

The Bishop looked steadily at the curé, and repeated with authority,“God!”

When he returned to Chastelar, the people came out to stare at him asat a curiosity, all along the road. At the priest’s house in Chastelarhe rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire, who werewaiting for him, and he said to his sister: “Well! was I in the right?The poor priest went to his poor mountaineers with empty hands, and hereturns from them with his hands full. I set out bearing only my faithin God; I have brought back the treasure of a cathedral.”

That evening, before he went to bed, he said again: “Let us never fearrobbers nor murderers. Those are dangers from without, petty dangers.Let us fear ourselves. Prejudices are the real robbers; vices are thereal murderers. The great dangers lie within ourselves. What matters itwhat threatens our head or our purse! Let us think only of that whichthreatens our soul.”

Then, turning to his sister: “Sister, never a precaution on the part ofthe priest, against his fellow-man. That which his fellow does, Godpermits. Let us confine ourselves to prayer, when we think that adanger is approaching us. Let us pray, not for ourselves, but that ourbrother may not fall into sin on our account.”

However, such incidents were rare in his life. We relate those of whichwe know; but generally he passed his life in doing the same things atthe same moment. One month of his year resembled one hour of his day.
As to what became of “the treasure” of the cathedral of Embrun, weshould be embarrassed by any inquiry in that direction. It consisted ofvery handsome things, very tempting things, and things which were verywell adapted to be stolen for the benefit of the unfortunate. Stolenthey had already been elsewhere. Half of the adventure was completed;it only remained to impart a new direction to the theft, and to causeit to take a short trip in the direction of the poor. However, we makeno assertions on this point. Only, a rather obscure note was foundamong the Bishop’s papers, which may bear some relation to this matter,and which is couched in these terms, _“The question is, to decidewhether this should be turned over to the cathedral or to thehospital.”_



CHAPTER VIII—PHILOSOPHY AFTER DRINKING

The senator above mentioned was a clever man, who had made his own way,heedless of those things which present obstacles, and which are calledconscience, sworn faith, justice, duty: he had marched straight to hisgoal, without once flinching in the line of his advancement and hisinterest. He was an old attorney, softened by success; not a bad man byany means, who rendered all the small services in his power to hissons, his sons-in-law, his relations, and even to his friends, havingwisely seized upon, in life, good sides, good opportunities, goodwindfalls. Everything else seemed to him very stupid. He wasintelligent, and just sufficiently educated to think himself a discipleof Epicurus; while he was, in reality, only a product ofPigault-Lebrun. He laughed willingly and pleasantly over infinite andeternal things, and at the “crotchets of that good old fellow theBishop.” He even sometimes laughed at him with an amiable authority inthe presence of M. Myriel himself, who listened to him.
On some semi-official occasion or other, I do not recollect what,Count*** [this senator] and M. Myriel were to dine with the prefect. Atdessert, the senator, who was slightly exhilarated, though stillperfectly dignified, exclaimed:—
“Egad, Bishop, let’s have a discussion. It is hard for a senator and abishop to look at each other without winking. We are two augurs. I amgoing to make a confession to you. I have a philosophy of my own.”

“And you are right,” replied the Bishop. “As one makes one’sphilosophy, so one lies on it. You are on the bed of purple, senator.”

The senator was encouraged, and went on:—
“Let us be good fellows.”

“Good devils even,” said the Bishop.
“I declare to you,” continued the senator, “that the Marquis d’Argens,Pyrrhon, Hobbes, and M. Naigeon are no rascals. I have all thephilosophers in my library gilded on the edges.”

“Like yourself, Count,” interposed the Bishop.
The senator resumed:—
“I hate Diderot; he is an ideologist, a declaimer, and a revolutionist,a believer in God at bottom, and more bigoted than Voltaire. Voltairemade sport of Needham, and he was wrong, for Needham’s eels prove thatGod is useless. A drop of vinegar in a spoonful of flour paste suppliesthe _fiat lux_. Suppose the drop to be larger and the spoonful bigger;you have the world. Man is the eel. Then what is the good of theEternal Father? The Jehovah hypothesis tires me, Bishop. It is good fornothing but to produce shallow people, whose reasoning is hollow. Downwith that great All, which torments me! Hurrah for Zero which leaves mein peace! Between you and me, and in order to empty my sack, and makeconfession to my pastor, as it behooves me to do, I will admit to youthat I have good sense. I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus, whopreaches renunciation and sacrifice to the last extremity. ‘Tis thecounsel of an avaricious man to beggars. Renunciation; why? Sacrifice;to what end? I do not see one wolf immolating himself for the happinessof another wolf. Let us stick to nature, then. We are at the top; letus have a superior philosophy. What is the advantage of being at thetop, if one sees no further than the end of other people’s noses? Letus live merrily. Life is all. That man has another future elsewhere, onhigh, below, anywhere, I don’t believe; not one single word of it. Ah!sacrifice and renunciation are recommended to me; I must take heed toeverything I do; I must cudgel my brains over good and evil, over thejust and the unjust, over the _fas_ and the _nefas_. Why? Because Ishall have to render an account of my actions. When? After death. Whata fine dream! After my death it will be a very clever person who cancatch me. Have a handful of dust seized by a shadow-hand, if you can.Let us tell the truth, we who are initiated, and who have raised theveil of Isis: there is no such thing as either good or evil; there isvegetation. Let us seek the real. Let us get to the bottom of it. Letus go into it thoroughly. What the deuce! let us go to the bottom ofit! We must scent out the truth; dig in the earth for it, and seize it.Then it gives you exquisite joys. Then you grow strong, and you laugh.I am square on the bottom, I am. Immortality, Bishop, is a chance, awaiting for dead men’s shoes. Ah! what a charming promise! trust to it,if you like! What a fine lot Adam has! We are souls, and we shall beangels, with blue wings on our shoulder-blades. Do come to myassistance: is it not Tertullian who says that the blessed shall travelfrom star to star? Very well. We shall be the grasshoppers of thestars. And then, besides, we shall see God. Ta, ta, ta! What twaddleall these paradises are! God is a nonsensical monster. I would not saythat in the _Moniteur_, egad! but I may whisper it among friends._Inter pocula_. To sacrifice the world to paradise is to let slip theprey for the shadow. Be the dupe of the infinite! I’m not such a fool.I am a nought. I call myself Monsieur le Comte Nought, senator. Did Iexist before my birth? No. Shall I exist after death? No. What am I? Alittle dust collected in an organism. What am I to do on this earth?The choice rests with me: suffer or enjoy. Whither will suffering leadme? To nothingness; but I shall have suffered. Whither will enjoymentlead me? To nothingness; but I shall have enjoyed myself. My choice ismade. One must eat or be eaten. I shall eat. It is better to be thetooth than the grass. Such is my wisdom. After which, go whither I pushthee, the grave-digger is there; the Pantheon for some of us: all fallsinto the great hole. End. _Finis_. Total liquidation. This is thevanishing-point. Death is death, believe me. I laugh at the idea ofthere being any one who has anything to tell me on that subject. Fablesof nurses; bugaboo for children; Jehovah for men. No; our to-morrow isthe night. Beyond the tomb there is nothing but equal nothingness. Youhave been Sardanapalus, you have been Vincent de Paul—it makes nodifference. That is the truth. Then live your life, above all things.Make use of your _I_ while you have it. In truth, Bishop, I tell youthat I have a philosophy of my own, and I have my philosophers. I don’tlet myself be taken in with that nonsense. Of course, there must besomething for those who are down,—for the barefooted beggars,knife-grinders, and miserable wretches. Legends, chimæras, the soul,immortality, paradise, the stars, are provided for them to swallow.They gobble it down. They spread it on their dry bread. He who hasnothing else has the good God. That is the least he can have. I opposeno objection to that; but I reserve Monsieur Naigeon for myself. Thegood God is good for the populace.”

The Bishop clapped his hands.
“That’s talking!” he exclaimed. “What an excellent and reallymarvellous thing is this materialism! Not every one who wants it canhave it. Ah! when one does have it, one is no longer a dupe, one doesnot stupidly allow one’s self to be exiled like Cato, nor stoned likeStephen, nor burned alive like Jeanne d’Arc. Those who have succeededin procuring this admirable materialism have the joy of feelingthemselves irresponsible, and of thinking that they can devoureverything without uneasiness,—places, sinecures, dignities, power,whether well or ill acquired, lucrative recantations, usefultreacheries, savory capitulations of conscience,—and that they shallenter the tomb with their digestion accomplished. How agreeable thatis! I do not say that with reference to you, senator. Nevertheless, itis impossible for me to refrain from congratulating you. You greatlords have, so you say, a philosophy of your own, and for yourselves,which is exquisite, refined, accessible to the rich alone, good for allsauces, and which seasons the voluptuousness of life admirably. Thisphilosophy has been extracted from the depths, and unearthed by specialseekers. But you are good-natured princes, and you do not think it abad thing that belief in the good God should constitute the philosophyof the people, very much as the goose stuffed with chestnuts is thetruffled turkey of the poor.”




CHAPTER IX—THE BROTHER AS DEPICTED BY THE SISTER

In order to furnish an idea of the private establishment of the Bishopof D——, and of the manner in which those two sainted women subordinatedtheir actions, their thoughts, their feminine instincts even, which areeasily alarmed, to the habits and purposes of the Bishop, without hiseven taking the trouble of speaking in order to explain them, we cannotdo better than transcribe in this place a letter from MademoiselleBaptistine to Madame the Vicomtess de Boischevron, the friend of herchildhood. This letter is in our possession.
D——, Dec. 16, 18—. MY GOOD MADAM: Not a day passes without our speakingof you. It is our established custom; but there is another reasonbesides. Just imagine, while washing and dusting the ceilings andwalls, Madam Magloire has made some discoveries; now our two chambershung with antique paper whitewashed over, would not discredit a châteauin the style of yours. Madam Magloire has pulled off all the paper.There were things beneath. My drawing-room, which contains nofurniture, and which we use for spreading out the linen after washing,is fifteen feet in height, eighteen square, with a ceiling which wasformerly painted and gilded, and with beams, as in yours. This wascovered with a cloth while this was the hospital. And the woodwork wasof the era of our grandmothers. But my room is the one you ought tosee. Madam Magloire has discovered, under at least ten thicknesses ofpaper pasted on top, some paintings, which without being good are verytolerable. The subject is Telemachus being knighted by Minerva in somegardens, the name of which escapes me. In short, where the Roman ladiesrepaired on one single night. What shall I say to you? I have Romans,and Roman ladies [here occurs an illegible word], and the whole train.Madam Magloire has cleaned it all off; this summer she is going to havesome small injuries repaired, and the whole revarnished, and my chamberwill be a regular museum. She has also found in a corner of the attictwo wooden pier-tables of ancient fashion. They asked us two crowns ofsix francs each to regild them, but it is much better to give the moneyto the poor; and they are very ugly besides, and I should much prefer around table of mahogany.
I am always very happy. My brother is so good. He gives all he has tothe poor and sick. We are very much cramped. The country is trying inthe winter, and we really must do something for those who are in need.We are almost comfortably lighted and warmed. You see that these aregreat treats.
My brother has ways of his own. When he talks, he says that a bishopought to be so. Just imagine! the door of our house is never fastened.Whoever chooses to enter finds himself at once in my brother’s room. Hefears nothing, even at night. That is his sort of bravery, he says.
He does not wish me or Madame Magloire feel any fear for him. Heexposes himself to all sorts of dangers, and he does not like to haveus even seem to notice it. One must know how to understand him.
He goes out in the rain, he walks in the water, he travels in winter.He fears neither suspicious roads nor dangerous encounters, nor night.
Last year he went quite alone into a country of robbers. He would nottake us. He was absent for a fortnight. On his return nothing hadhappened to him; he was thought to be dead, but was perfectly well, andsaid, “This is the way I have been robbed!” And then he opened a trunkfull of jewels, all the jewels of the cathedral of Embrun, which thethieves had given him.
When he returned on that occasion, I could not refrain from scoldinghim a little, taking care, however, not to speak except when thecarriage was making a noise, so that no one might hear me.
At first I used to say to myself, “There are no dangers which will stophim; he is terrible.” Now I have ended by getting used to it. I make asign to Madam Magloire that she is not to oppose him. He risks himselfas he sees fit. I carry off Madam Magloire, I enter my chamber, I prayfor him and fall asleep. I am at ease, because I know that if anythingwere to happen to him, it would be the end of me. I should go to thegood God with my brother and my bishop. It has cost Madam Magloire moretrouble than it did me to accustom herself to what she terms hisimprudences. But now the habit has been acquired. We pray together, wetremble together, and we fall asleep. If the devil were to enter thishouse, he would be allowed to do so. After all, what is there for us tofear in this house? There is always some one with us who is strongerthan we. The devil may pass through it, but the good God dwells here.
This suffices me. My brother has no longer any need of saying a word tome. I understand him without his speaking, and we abandon ourselves tothe care of Providence. That is the way one has to do with a man whopossesses grandeur of soul.
I have interrogated my brother with regard to the information which youdesire on the subject of the Faux family. You are aware that he knowseverything, and that he has memories, because he is still a very goodroyalist. They really are a very ancient Norman family of thegeneralship of Caen. Five hundred years ago there was a Raoul de Faux,a Jean de Faux, and a Thomas de Faux, who were gentlemen, and one ofwhom was a seigneur de Rochefort. The last was Guy-Étienne-Alexandre,and was commander of a regiment, and something in the light horse ofBretagne. His daughter, Marie-Louise, married Adrien-Charles deGramont, son of the Duke Louis de Gramont, peer of France, colonel ofthe French guards, and lieutenant-general of the army. It is writtenFaux, Fauq, and Faoucq.
Good Madame, recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative,Monsieur the Cardinal. As for your dear Sylvanie, she has done well innot wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me.She is well, works as you would wish, and loves me.
That is all that I desire. The souvenir which she sent through youreached me safely, and it makes me very happy. My health is not so verybad, and yet I grow thinner every day. Farewell; my paper is at an end,and this forces me to leave you. A thousand good wishes.
BAPTISTINE.
P.S. Your grand nephew is charming. Do you know that he will soon befive years old? Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback whohad on knee-caps, and he said, “What has he got on his knees?” He is acharming child! His little brother is dragging an old broom about theroom, like a carriage, and saying, “Hu!”

As will be perceived from this letter, these two women understood howto mould themselves to the Bishop’s ways with that special femininegenius which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself.The Bishop of D——, in spite of the gentle and candid air which neverdeserted him, sometimes did things that were grand, bold, andmagnificent, without seeming to have even a suspicion of the fact. Theytrembled, but they let him alone. Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed aremonstrance in advance, but never at the time, nor afterwards. Theynever interfered with him by so much as a word or sign, in any actiononce entered upon. At certain moments, without his having occasion tomention it, when he was not even conscious of it himself in allprobability, so perfect was his simplicity, they vaguely felt that hewas acting as a bishop; then they were nothing more than two shadows inthe house. They served him passively; and if obedience consisted indisappearing, they disappeared. They understood, with an admirabledelicacy of instinct, that certain cares may be put under constraint.Thus, even when believing him to be in peril, they understood, I willnot say his thought, but his nature, to such a degree that they nolonger watched over him. They confided him to God.
Moreover, Baptistine said, as we have just read, that her brother’s endwould prove her own. Madame Magloire did not say this, but she knew it.



CHAPTER X—THE BISHOP IN THE PRESENCE OF AN UNKNOWN LIGHT

At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in thepreceding pages, he did a thing which, if the whole town was to bebelieved, was even more hazardous than his trip across the mountainsinfested with bandits.
In the country near D—— a man lived quite alone. This man, we willstate at once, was a former member of the Convention. His name was G——
Member of the Convention, G—— was mentioned with a sort of horror inthe little world of D—— A member of the Convention—can you imagine sucha thing? That existed from the time when people called each other_thou_, and when they said “citizen.” This man was almost a monster. Hehad not voted for the death of the king, but almost. He was aquasi-regicide. He had been a terrible man. How did it happen that sucha man had not been brought before a provost’s court, on the return ofthe legitimate princes? They need not have cut off his head, if youplease; clemency must be exercised, agreed; but a good banishment forlife. An example, in short, etc. Besides, he was an atheist, like allthe rest of those people. Gossip of the geese about the vulture.
Was G—— a vulture after all? Yes; if he were to be judged by theelement of ferocity in this solitude of his. As he had not voted forthe death of the king, he had not been included in the decrees ofexile, and had been able to remain in France.
He dwelt at a distance of three-quarters of an hour from the city, farfrom any hamlet, far from any road, in some hidden turn of a very wildvalley, no one knew exactly where. He had there, it was said, a sort offield, a hole, a lair. There were no neighbors, not even passers-by.Since he had dwelt in that valley, the path which led thither haddisappeared under a growth of grass. The locality was spoken of asthough it had been the dwelling of a hangman.
Nevertheless, the Bishop meditated on the subject, and from time totime he gazed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees markedthe valley of the former member of the Convention, and he said, “Thereis a soul yonder which is lonely.”

And he added, deep in his own mind, “I owe him a visit.”

But, let us avow it, this idea, which seemed natural at the firstblush, appeared to him after a moment’s reflection, as strange,impossible, and almost repulsive. For, at bottom, he shared the generalimpression, and the old member of the Convention inspired him, withouthis being clearly conscious of the fact himself, with that sentimentwhich borders on hate, and which is so well expressed by the wordestrangement.
Still, should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to recoil? No.But what a sheep!
The good Bishop was perplexed. Sometimes he set out in that direction;then he returned.
Finally, the rumor one day spread through the town that a sort of youngshepherd, who served the member of the Convention in his hovel, hadcome in quest of a doctor; that the old wretch was dying, thatparalysis was gaining on him, and that he would not live overnight.—“Thank God!” some added.
The Bishop took his staff, put on his cloak, on account of his toothreadbare cassock, as we have mentioned, and because of the eveningbreeze which was sure to rise soon, and set out.
The sun was setting, and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishoparrived at the excommunicated spot. With a certain beating of theheart, he recognized the fact that he was near the lair. He strode overa ditch, leaped a hedge, made his way through a fence of dead boughs,entered a neglected paddock, took a few steps with a good deal ofboldness, and suddenly, at the extremity of the waste land, and behindlofty brambles, he caught sight of the cavern.
It was a very low hut, poor, small, and clean, with a vine nailedagainst the outside.
Near the door, in an old wheel-chair, the armchair of the peasants,there was a white-haired man, smiling at the sun.
Near the seated man stood a young boy, the shepherd lad. He wasoffering the old man a jar of milk.
While the Bishop was watching him, the old man spoke: “Thank you,” hesaid, “I need nothing.” And his smile quitted the sun to rest upon thechild.
The Bishop stepped forward. At the sound which he made in walking, theold man turned his head, and his face expressed the sum total of thesurprise which a man can still feel after a long life.
“This is the first time since I have been here,” said he, “that any onehas entered here. Who are you, sir?”

The Bishop answered:—
“My name is Bienvenu Myriel.”

“Bienvenu Myriel? I have heard that name. Are you the man whom thepeople call Monseigneur Welcome?”

“I am.”

The old man resumed with a half-smile
“In that case, you are my bishop?”

“Something of that sort.”

“Enter, sir.”

The member of the Convention extended his hand to the Bishop, but theBishop did not take it. The Bishop confined himself to the remark:—
“I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed. You certainly do notseem to me to be ill.”

“Monsieur,” replied the old man, “I am going to recover.”

He paused, and then said:—
“I shall die three hours hence.”

Then he continued:—
“I am something of a doctor; I know in what fashion the last hour drawson. Yesterday, only my feet were cold; to-day, the chill has ascendedto my knees; now I feel it mounting to my waist; when it reaches theheart, I shall stop. The sun is beautiful, is it not? I had myselfwheeled out here to take a last look at things. You can talk to me; itdoes not fatigue me. You have done well to come and look at a man whois on the point of death. It is well that there should be witnesses atthat moment. One has one’s caprices; I should have liked to last untilthe dawn, but I know that I shall hardly live three hours. It will benight then. What does it matter, after all? Dying is a simple affair.One has no need of the light for that. So be it. I shall die bystarlight.”

The old man turned to the shepherd lad:—
“Go to thy bed; thou wert awake all last night; thou art tired.”

The child entered the hut.
The old man followed him with his eyes, and added, as though speakingto himself:—
“I shall die while he sleeps. The two slumbers may be good neighbors.”

The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been. He didnot think he discerned God in this manner of dying; let us say thewhole, for these petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicatedlike the rest: he, who on occasion, was so fond of laughing at “HisGrace,” was rather shocked at not being addressed as Monseigneur, andhe was almost tempted to retort “citizen.” He was assailed by a fancyfor peevish familiarity, common enough to doctors and priests, butwhich was not habitual with him. This man, after all, this member ofthe Convention, this representative of the people, had been one of thepowerful ones of the earth; for the first time in his life, probably,the Bishop felt in a mood to be severe.
Meanwhile, the member of the Convention had been surveying him with amodest cordiality, in which one could have distinguished, possibly,that humility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returningto dust.
The Bishop, on his side, although he generally restrained hiscuriosity, which, in his opinion, bordered on a fault, could notrefrain from examining the member of the Convention with an attentionwhich, as it did not have its course in sympathy, would have served hisconscience as a matter of reproach, in connection with any other man. Amember of the Convention produced on him somewhat the effect of beingoutside the pale of the law, even of the law of charity. G——, calm, hisbody almost upright, his voice vibrating, was one of thoseoctogenarians who form the subject of astonishment to the physiologist.The Revolution had many of these men, proportioned to the epoch. Inthis old man one was conscious of a man put to the proof. Though sonear to his end, he preserved all the gestures of health. In his clearglance, in his firm tone, in the robust movement of his shoulders,there was something calculated to disconcert death. Azrael, theMohammedan angel of the sepulchre, would have turned back, and thoughtthat he had mistaken the door. G—— seemed to be dying because he willedit so. There was freedom in his agony. His legs alone were motionless.It was there that the shadows held him fast. His feet were cold anddead, but his head survived with all the power of life, and seemed fullof light. G——, at this solemn moment, resembled the king in that taleof the Orient who was flesh above and marble below.
There was a stone there. The Bishop sat down. The exordium was abrupt.
“I congratulate you,” said he, in the tone which one uses for areprimand. “You did not vote for the death of the king, after all.”

The old member of the Convention did not appear to notice the bittermeaning underlying the words “after all.” He replied. The smile hadquite disappeared from his face.
“Do not congratulate me too much, sir. I did vote for the death of thetyrant.”

It was the tone of austerity answering the tone of severity.
“What do you mean to say?” resumed the Bishop.
“I mean to say that man has a tyrant,—ignorance. I voted for the deathof that tyrant. That tyrant engendered royalty, which is authorityfalsely understood, while science is authority rightly understood. Manshould be governed only by science.”

“And conscience,” added the Bishop.
“It is the same thing. Conscience is the quantity of innate sciencewhich we have within us.”

Monseigneur Bienvenu listened in some astonishment to this language,which was very new to him.
The member of the Convention resumed:—
“So far as Louis XVI. was concerned, I said ‘no.’ I did not think thatI had the right to kill a man; but I felt it my duty to exterminateevil. I voted the end of the tyrant, that is to say, the end ofprostitution for woman, the end of slavery for man, the end of nightfor the child. In voting for the Republic, I voted for that. I votedfor fraternity, concord, the dawn. I have aided in the overthrow ofprejudices and errors. The crumbling away of prejudices and errorscauses light. We have caused the fall of the old world, and the oldworld, that vase of miseries, has become, through its upsetting uponthe human race, an urn of joy.”

“Mixed joy,” said the Bishop.
“You may say troubled joy, and to-day, after that fatal return of thepast, which is called 1814, joy which has disappeared! Alas! The workwas incomplete, I admit: we demolished the ancient regime in deeds; wewere not able to suppress it entirely in ideas. To destroy abuses isnot sufficient; customs must be modified. The mill is there no longer;the wind is still there.”

“You have demolished. It may be of use to demolish, but I distrust ademolition complicated with wrath.”

“Right has its wrath, Bishop; and the wrath of right is an element ofprogress. In any case, and in spite of whatever may be said, the FrenchRevolution is the most important step of the human race since theadvent of Christ. Incomplete, it may be, but sublime. It set free allthe unknown social quantities; it softened spirits, it calmed,appeased, enlightened; it caused the waves of civilization to flow overthe earth. It was a good thing. The French Revolution is theconsecration of humanity.”

The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring:—
“Yes? ’93!”

The member of the Convention straightened himself up in his chair withan almost lugubrious solemnity, and exclaimed, so far as a dying man iscapable of exclamation:—
“Ah, there you go; ’93! I was expecting that word. A cloud had beenforming for the space of fifteen hundred years; at the end of fifteenhundred years it burst. You are putting the thunderbolt on its trial.”

The Bishop felt, without, perhaps, confessing it, that something withinhim had suffered extinction. Nevertheless, he put a good face on thematter. He replied:—
“The judge speaks in the name of justice; the priest speaks in the nameof pity, which is nothing but a more lofty justice. A thunderboltshould commit no error.” And he added, regarding the member of theConvention steadily the while, “Louis XVII.?”

The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop’sarm.
“Louis XVII.! let us see. For whom do you mourn? is it for the innocentchild? very good; in that case I mourn with you. Is it for the royalchild? I demand time for reflection. To me, the brother of Cartouche,an innocent child who was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Grève,until death ensued, for the sole crime of having been the brother ofCartouche, is no less painful than the grandson of Louis XV., aninnocent child, martyred in the tower of the Temple, for the sole crimeof having been grandson of Louis XV.”

“Monsieur,” said the Bishop, “I like not this conjunction of names.”

“Cartouche? Louis XV.? To which of the two do you object?”

A momentary silence ensued. The Bishop almost regretted having come,and yet he felt vaguely and strangely shaken.
The conventionary resumed:—
“Ah, Monsieur Priest, you love not the crudities of the true. Christloved them. He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple. His scourge,full of lightnings, was a harsh speaker of truths. When he cried,_‘Sinite parvulos,’_ he made no distinction between the littlechildren. It would not have embarrassed him to bring together theDauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod. Innocence, Monsieur, isits own crown. Innocence has no need to be a highness. It is as augustin rags as in fleurs de lys.”

“That is true,” said the Bishop in a low voice.
“I persist,” continued the conventionary G—— “You have mentioned LouisXVII. to me. Let us come to an understanding. Shall we weep for all theinnocent, all martyrs, all children, the lowly as well as the exalted?I agree to that. But in that case, as I have told you, we must go backfurther than ’93, and our tears must begin before Louis XVII. I willweep with you over the children of kings, provided that you will weepwith me over the children of the people.”

“I weep for all,” said the Bishop.
“Equally!” exclaimed conventionary G——; “and if the balance mustincline, let it be on the side of the people. They have been sufferinglonger.”

Another silence ensued. The conventionary was the first to break it. Heraised himself on one elbow, took a bit of his cheek between his thumband his forefinger, as one does mechanically when one interrogates andjudges, and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forcesof the death agony. It was almost an explosion.
“Yes, sir, the people have been suffering a long while. And hold! thatis not all, either; why have you just questioned me and talked to meabout Louis XVII.? I know you not. Ever since I have been in theseparts I have dwelt in this enclosure alone, never setting foot outside,and seeing no one but that child who helps me. Your name has reached mein a confused manner, it is true, and very badly pronounced, I mustadmit; but that signifies nothing: clever men have so many ways ofimposing on that honest goodman, the people. By the way, I did not hearthe sound of your carriage; you have left it yonder, behind the coppiceat the fork of the roads, no doubt. I do not know you, I tell you. Youhave told me that you are the Bishop; but that affords me noinformation as to your moral personality. In short, I repeat myquestion. Who are you? You are a bishop; that is to say, a prince ofthe church, one of those gilded men with heraldic bearings andrevenues, who have vast prebends,—the bishopric of D—— fifteen thousandfrancs settled income, ten thousand in perquisites; total, twenty-fivethousand francs,—who have kitchens, who have liveries, who make goodcheer, who eat moor-hens on Friday, who strut about, a lackey before, alackey behind, in a gala coach, and who have palaces, and who roll intheir carriages in the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot! You area prelate,—revenues, palace, horses, servants, good table, all thesensualities of life; you have this like the rest, and like the rest,you enjoy it; it is well; but this says either too much or too little;this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value ofthe man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me.To whom do I speak? Who are you?”

The Bishop hung his head and replied, _“Vermis sum_—I am a worm.”

“A worm of the earth in a carriage?” growled the conventionary.
It was the conventionary’s turn to be arrogant, and the Bishop’s to behumble.
The Bishop resumed mildly:—
“So be it, sir. But explain to me how my carriage, which is a few pacesoff behind the trees yonder, how my good table and the moor-hens whichI eat on Friday, how my twenty-five thousand francs income, how mypalace and my lackeys prove that clemency is not a duty, and that ’93was not inexorable.”

The conventionary passed his hand across his brow, as though to sweepaway a cloud.
“Before replying to you,” he said, “I beseech you to pardon me. I havejust committed a wrong, sir. You are at my house, you are my guest, Iowe you courtesy. You discuss my ideas, and it becomes me to confinemyself to combating your arguments. Your riches and your pleasures areadvantages which I hold over you in the debate; but good taste dictatesthat I shall not make use of them. I promise you to make no use of themin the future.”

“I thank you,” said the Bishop.
G—— resumed.
“Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me. Wherewere we? What were you saying to me? That ’93 was inexorable?”

“Inexorable; yes,” said the Bishop. “What think you of Marat clappinghis hands at the guillotine?”

“What think you of Bossuet chanting the _Te Deum_ over thedragonnades?”

The retort was a harsh one, but it attained its mark with thedirectness of a point of steel. The Bishop quivered under it; no replyoccurred to him; but he was offended by this mode of alluding toBossuet. The best of minds will have their fetiches, and they sometimesfeel vaguely wounded by the want of respect of logic.
The conventionary began to pant; the asthma of the agony which ismingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice; still, there was aperfect lucidity of soul in his eyes. He went on:—
“Let me say a few words more in this and that direction; I am willing.Apart from the Revolution, which, taken as a whole, is an immense humanaffirmation, ’93 is, alas! a rejoinder. You think it inexorable, sir;but what of the whole monarchy, sir? Carrier is a bandit; but what namedo you give to Montrevel? Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal; but what isyour opinion as to Lamoignon-Bâville? Maillard is terrible; butSaulx-Tavannes, if you please? Duchêne senior is ferocious; but whatepithet will you allow me for the elder Letellier? Jourdan-Coupe-Tetêis a monster; but not so great a one as M. the Marquis de Louvois. Sir,sir, I am sorry for Marie Antoinette, archduchess and queen; but I amalso sorry for that poor Huguenot woman, who, in 1685, under Louis theGreat, sir, while with a nursing infant, was bound, naked to the waist,to a stake, and the child kept at a distance; her breast swelled withmilk and her heart with anguish; the little one, hungry and pale,beheld that breast and cried and agonized; the executioner said to thewoman, a mother and a nurse, ‘Abjure!’ giving her her choice betweenthe death of her infant and the death of her conscience. What say youto that torture of Tantalus as applied to a mother? Bear this well inmind sir: the French Revolution had its reasons for existence; itswrath will be absolved by the future; its result is the world madebetter. From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for thehuman race. I abridge, I stop, I have too much the advantage; moreover,I am dying.”

And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop, the conventionary concluded histhoughts in these tranquil words:—
“Yes, the brutalities of progress are called revolutions. When they areover, this fact is recognized,—that the human race has been treatedharshly, but that it has progressed.”

The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered allthe inmost intrenchments of the Bishop. One remained, however, and fromthis intrenchment, the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu’sresistance, came forth this reply, wherein appeared nearly all theharshness of the beginning:—
“Progress should believe in God. Good cannot have an impious servitor.He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race.”

The former representative of the people made no reply. He was seizedwith a fit of trembling. He looked towards heaven, and in his glance atear gathered slowly. When the eyelid was full, the tear trickled downhis livid cheek, and he said, almost in a stammer, quite low, and tohimself, while his eyes were plunged in the depths:—
“O thou! O ideal! Thou alone existest!”

The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock.
After a pause, the old man raised a finger heavenward and said:—
“The infinite is. He is there. If the infinite had no person, personwould be without limit; it would not be infinite; in other words, itwould not exist. There is, then, an _I_. That _I_ of the infinite isGod.”

The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice, and withthe shiver of ecstasy, as though he beheld some one. When he hadspoken, his eyes closed. The effort had exhausted him. It was evidentthat he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had beenleft to him. That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is indeath. The supreme moment was approaching.
The Bishop understood this; time pressed; it was as a priest that hehad come: from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extremeemotion; he gazed at those closed eyes, he took that wrinkled, aged andice-cold hand in his, and bent over the dying man.
“This hour is the hour of God. Do you not think that it would beregrettable if we had met in vain?”

The conventionary opened his eyes again. A gravity mingled with gloomwas imprinted on his countenance.
“Bishop,” said he, with a slowness which probably arose more from hisdignity of soul than from the failing of his strength, “I have passedmy life in meditation, study, and contemplation. I was sixty years ofage when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself withits affairs. I obeyed. Abuses existed, I combated them; tyranniesexisted, I destroyed them; rights and principles existed, I proclaimedand confessed them. Our territory was invaded, I defended it; Francewas menaced, I offered my breast. I was not rich; I am poor. I havebeen one of the masters of the state; the vaults of the treasury wereencumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore upthe walls, which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight ofgold and silver; I dined in Dead Tree Street, at twenty-two sous. Ihave succored the oppressed, I have comforted the suffering. I tore thecloth from the altar, it is true; but it was to bind up the wounds ofmy country. I have always upheld the march forward of the human race,forward towards the light, and I have sometimes resisted progresswithout pity. I have, when the occasion offered, protected my ownadversaries, men of your profession. And there is at Peteghem, inFlanders, at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summerpalace, a convent of Urbanists, the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu,which I saved in 1793. I have done my duty according to my powers, andall the good that I was able. After which, I was hunted down, pursued,persecuted, blackened, jeered at, scorned, cursed, proscribed. For manyyears past, I with my white hair have been conscious that many peoplethink they have the right to despise me; to the poor ignorant masses Ipresent the visage of one damned. And I accept this isolation ofhatred, without hating any one myself. Now I am eighty-six years old; Iam on the point of death. What is it that you have come to ask of me?”

_“Your blessing,”_ said the Bishop.
And he knelt down.
When the Bishop raised his head again, the face of the conventionaryhad become august. He had just expired.
The Bishop returned home, deeply absorbed in thoughts which cannot beknown to us. He passed the whole night in prayer. On the followingmorning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him aboutmember of the Convention G——; he contented himself with pointingheavenward.
From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feelingtowards all children and sufferers.
Any allusion to “that old wretch of a G——” caused him to fall into asingular preoccupation. No one could say that the passage of that soulbefore his, and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his, didnot count for something in his approach to perfection.
This “pastoral visit” naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur ofcomment in all the little local coteries.
“Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for abishop? There was evidently no conversion to be expected. All thoserevolutionists are backsliders. Then why go there? What was there to beseen there? He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carriedoff by the devil.”

One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herselfspiritual, addressed this sally to him, “Monseigneur, people areinquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap!”—“Oh! oh!that’s a coarse color,” replied the Bishop. “It is lucky that those whodespise it in a cap revere it in a hat.”




CHAPTER XI—A RESTRICTION

We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves, were we toconclude from this that Monseigneur Welcome was “a philosophicalbishop,” or a “patriotic curé.” His meeting, which may almost bedesignated as his union, with conventionary G——, left behind it in hismind a sort of astonishment, which rendered him still more gentle. Thatis all.
Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician, this is,perhaps, the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was inthe events of that epoch, supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu everdreamed of having an attitude.
Let us, then, go back a few years.
Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate, theEmperor had made him a baron of the Empire, in company with many otherbishops. The arrest of the Pope took place, as every one knows, on thenight of the 5th to the 6th of July, 1809; on this occasion, M. Myrielwas summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France andItaly convened at Paris. This synod was held at Notre-Dame, andassembled for the first time on the 15th of June, 1811, under thepresidency of Cardinal Fesch. M. Myriel was one of the ninety-fivebishops who attended it. But he was present only at one sitting and atthree or four private conferences. Bishop of a mountain diocese, livingso very close to nature, in rusticity and deprivation, it appeared thathe imported among these eminent personages, ideas which altered thetemperature of the assembly. He very soon returned to D—— He wasinterrogated as to this speedy return, and he replied: _“I embarrassedthem. The outside air penetrated to them through me. I produced on themthe effect of an open door.”_
On another occasion he said, _“What would you have? Those gentlemen areprinces. I am only a poor peasant bishop.”_
The fact is that he displeased them. Among other strange things, it issaid that he chanced to remark one evening, when he found himself atthe house of one of his most notable colleagues: “What beautifulclocks! What beautiful carpets! What beautiful liveries! They must be agreat trouble. I would not have all those superfluities, cryingincessantly in my ears: ‘There are people who are hungry! There arepeople who are cold! There are poor people! There are poor people!’”

Let us remark, by the way, that the hatred of luxury is not anintelligent hatred. This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts.Nevertheless, in churchmen, luxury is wrong, except in connection withrepresentations and ceremonies. It seems to reveal habits which havevery little that is charitable about them. An opulent priest is acontradiction. The priest must keep close to the poor. Now, can onecome in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress, allthese misfortunes, and this poverty, without having about one’s ownperson a little of that misery, like the dust of labor? Is it possibleto imagine a man near a brazier who is not warm? Can one imagine aworkman who is working near a furnace, and who has neither a singedhair, nor blackened nails, nor a drop of sweat, nor a speck of ashes onhis face? The first proof of charity in the priest, in the bishopespecially, is poverty.
This is, no doubt, what the Bishop of D—— thought.
It must not be supposed, however, that he shared what we call the“ideas of the century” on certain delicate points. He took very littlepart in the theological quarrels of the moment, and maintained silenceon questions in which Church and State were implicated; but if he hadbeen strongly pressed, it seems that he would have been found to be anultramontane rather than a gallican. Since we are making a portrait,and since we do not wish to conceal anything, we are forced to add thathe was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline. Beginning with 1813, hegave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations. Herefused to see him, as he passed through on his return from the islandof Elba, and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperorin his diocese during the Hundred Days.
Besides his sister, Mademoiselle Baptistine, he had two brothers, one ageneral, the other a prefect. He wrote to both with tolerablefrequency. He was harsh for a time towards the former, because, holdinga command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes, thegeneral had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and hadpursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one isdesirous of allowing to escape. His correspondence with the otherbrother, the ex-prefect, a fine, worthy man who lived in retirement atParis, Rue Cassette, remained more affectionate.
Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit, his hourof bitterness, his cloud. The shadow of the passions of the momenttraversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things.Certainly, such a man would have done well not to entertain anypolitical opinions. Let there be no mistake as to our meaning: we arenot confounding what is called “political opinions” with the grandaspiration for progress, with the sublime faith, patriotic, democratic,humane, which in our day should be the very foundation of everygenerous intellect. Without going deeply into questions which are onlyindirectly connected with the subject of this book, we will simply saythis: It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been aRoyalist, and if his glance had never been, for a single instant,turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctlydiscernible, above the fictions and the hatreds of this world, abovethe stormy vicissitudes of human things, the beaming of those threepure radiances, truth, justice, and charity.
While admitting that it was not for a political office that God createdMonseigneur Welcome, we should have understood and admired his protestin the name of right and liberty, his proud opposition, his just butperilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon. But that whichpleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case ofpeople who are falling. We only love the fray so long as there isdanger, and in any case, the combatants of the first hour have alonethe right to be the exterminators of the last. He who has not been astubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face ofruin. The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner ofthe fall. As for us, when Providence intervenes and strikes, we let itwork. 1812 commenced to disarm us. In 1813 the cowardly breach ofsilence of that taciturn legislative body, emboldened by catastrophe,possessed only traits which aroused indignation. And it was a crime toapplaud, in 1814, in the presence of those marshals who betrayed; inthe presence of that senate which passed from one dunghill to another,insulting after having deified; in the presence of that idolatry whichwas loosing its footing and spitting on its idol,—it was a duty to turnaside the head. In 1815, when the supreme disasters filled the air,when France was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach, whenWaterloo could be dimly discerned opening before Napoleon, the mournfulacclamation of the army and the people to the condemned of destiny hadnothing laughable in it, and, after making all allowance for thedespot, a heart like that of the Bishop of D——, ought not perhaps tohave failed to recognize the august and touching features presented bythe embrace of a great nation and a great man on the brink of theabyss.
With this exception, he was in all things just, true, equitable,intelligent, humble and dignified, beneficent and kindly, which is onlyanother sort of benevolence. He was a priest, a sage, and a man. Itmust be admitted, that even in the political views with which we havejust reproached him, and which we are disposed to judge almost withseverity, he was tolerant and easy, more so, perhaps, than we who arespeaking here. The porter of the town-hall had been placed there by theEmperor. He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old guard, amember of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz, as much of a Bonapartistas the eagle. This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderateremarks, which the law then stigmatized as _seditious speeches_. Afterthe imperial profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor, he neverdressed himself in his regimentals, as he said, so that he should notbe obliged to wear his cross. He had himself devoutly removed theimperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon had given him; this madea hole, and he would not put anything in its place. _“I will die,”_ hesaid, _“rather than wear the three frogs upon my heart!”_ He liked toscoff aloud at Louis XVIII. “The gouty old creature in Englishgaiters!” he said; _“let him take himself off to Prussia with thatqueue of his.”_ He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the twothings which he most detested, Prussia and England. He did it so oftenthat he lost his place. There he was, turned out of the house, with hiswife and children, and without bread. The Bishop sent for him, reprovedhim gently, and appointed him beadle in the cathedral.
In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had, by dint of holydeeds and gentle manners, filled the town of D——with a sort of tenderand filial reverence. Even his conduct towards Napoleon had beenaccepted and tacitly pardoned, as it were, by the people, the good andweakly flock who adored their emperor, but loved their bishop.



CHAPTER XII—THE SOLITUDE OF MONSEIGNEUR WELCOME

A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of littleabbés, just as a general is by a covey of young officers. This is whatthat charming Saint François de Sales calls somewhere “les prêtresblancs-becs,” callow priests. Every career has its aspirants, who forma train for those who have attained eminence in it. There is no powerwhich has not its dependents. There is no fortune which has not itscourt. The seekers of the future eddy around the splendid present.Every metropolis has its staff of officials. Every bishop who possessesthe least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from theseminary, which goes the round, and maintains good order in theepiscopal palace, and mounts guard over monseigneur’s smile. To pleasea bishop is equivalent to getting one’s foot in the stirrup for asub-diaconate. It is necessary to walk one’s path discreetly; theapostleship does not disdain the canonship.
Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere, there are big mitres in theChurch. These are the bishops who stand well at Court, who are rich,well endowed, skilful, accepted by the world, who know how to pray, nodoubt, but who know also how to beg, who feel little scruple at makinga whole diocese dance attendance in their person, who are connectinglinks between the sacristy and diplomacy, who are abbés rather thanpriests, prelates rather than bishops. Happy those who approach them!Being persons of influence, they create a shower about them, upon theassiduous and the favored, and upon all the young men who understandthe art of pleasing, of large parishes, prebends, archidiaconates,chaplaincies, and cathedral posts, while awaiting episcopal honors. Asthey advance themselves, they cause their satellites to progress also;it is a whole solar system on the march. Their radiance casts a gleamof purple over their suite. Their prosperity is crumbled up behind thescenes, into nice little promotions. The larger the diocese of thepatron, the fatter the curacy for the favorite. And then, there isRome. A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop, anarchbishop who knows how to become a cardinal, carries you with him asconclavist; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction, you receive thepallium, and behold! you are an auditor, then a papal chamberlain, thenmonsignor, and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step, and betweenthe Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot. Everyskull-cap may dream of the tiara. The priest is nowadays the only manwho can become a king in a regular manner; and what a king! the supremeking. Then what a nursery of aspirations is a seminary! How manyblushing choristers, how many youthful abbés bear on their headsPerrette’s pot of milk! Who knows how easy it is for ambition to callitself vocation? in good faith, perchance, and deceiving itself,devotee that it is.
Monseigneur Bienvenu, poor, humble, retiring, was not accounted amongthe big mitres. This was plain from the complete absence of youngpriests about him. We have seen that he “did not take” in Paris. Not asingle future dreamed of engrafting itself on this solitary old man.Not a single sprouting ambition committed the folly of putting forthits foliage in his shadow. His canons and grand-vicars were good oldmen, rather vulgar like himself, walled up like him in this diocese,without exit to a cardinalship, and who resembled their bishop, withthis difference, that they were finished and he was completed. Theimpossibility of growing great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so wellunderstood, that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left theseminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aixor of Auch, and went off in a great hurry. For, in short, we repeat it,men wish to be pushed. A saint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegationis a dangerous neighbor; he might communicate to you, by contagion, anincurable poverty, an anchylosis of the joints, which are useful inadvancement, and in short, more renunciation than you desire; and thisinfectious virtue is avoided. Hence the isolation of MonseigneurBienvenu. We live in the midst of a gloomy society. Success; that isthe lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption.
Be it said in passing, that success is a very hideous thing. Its falseresemblance to merit deceives men. For the masses, success has almostthe same profile as supremacy. Success, that Menæchmus of talent, hasone dupe,—history. Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it. In our day,a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its service,wears the livery of success, and performs the service of itsantechamber. Succeed: theory. Prosperity argues capacity. Win in thelottery, and behold! you are a clever man. He who triumphs isvenerated. Be born with a silver spoon in your mouth! everything liesin that. Be lucky, and you will have all the rest; be happy, and peoplewill think you great. Outside of five or six immense exceptions, whichcompose the splendor of a century, contemporary admiration is nothingbut short-sightedness. Gilding is gold. It does no harm to be the firstarrival by pure chance, so long as you do arrive. The common herd is anold Narcissus who adores himself, and who applauds the vulgar herd.That enormous ability by virtue of which one is Moses, Æschylus, Dante,Michael Angelo, or Napoleon, the multitude awards on the spot, and byacclamation, to whomsoever attains his object, in whatsoever it mayconsist. Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy: let a falseCorneille compose _Tiridate;_ let a eunuch come to possess a harem; leta military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch;let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of theSambre-and-Meuse, and construct for himself, out of this cardboard,sold as leather, four hundred thousand francs of income; let apork-packer espouse usury, and cause it to bring forth seven or eightmillions, of which he is the father and of which it is the mother; leta preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl; let the stewardof a fine family be so rich on retiring from service that he is mademinister of finances,—and men call that Genius, just as they call theface of Mousqueton _Beauty_, and the mien of Claude _Majesty_. With theconstellations of space they confound the stars of the abyss which aremade in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks.



CHAPTER XIII—WHAT HE BELIEVED

We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D—— on the score oforthodoxy. In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no moodbut respect. The conscience of the just man should be accepted on hisword. Moreover, certain natures being given, we admit the possibledevelopment of all beauties of human virtue in a belief that differsfrom our own.
What did he think of this dogma, or of that mystery? These secrets ofthe inner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb, wheresouls enter naked. The point on which we are certain is, that thedifficulties of faith never resolved themselves into hypocrisy in hiscase. No decay is possible to the diamond. He believed to the extent ofhis powers. _“Credo in Patrem,”_ he often exclaimed. Moreover, he drewfrom good works that amount of satisfaction which suffices to theconscience, and which whispers to a man, “Thou art with God!”

The point which we consider it our duty to note is, that outside of andbeyond his faith, as it were, the Bishop possessed an excess of love.It was in that quarter, _quia multum amavit_,—because he lovedmuch—that he was regarded as vulnerable by “serious men,” “gravepersons” and “reasonable people”; favorite locutions of our sad worldwhere egotism takes its word of command from pedantry. What was thisexcess of love? It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men, as wehave already pointed out, and which, on occasion, extended even tothings. He lived without disdain. He was indulgent towards God’screation. Every man, even the best, has within him a thoughtlessharshness which he reserves for animals. The Bishop of D—— had none ofthat harshness, which is peculiar to many priests, nevertheless. He didnot go as far as the Brahmin, but he seemed to have weighed this sayingof Ecclesiastes: “Who knoweth whither the soul of the animal goeth?”Hideousness of aspect, deformity of instinct, troubled him not, and didnot arouse his indignation. He was touched, almost softened by them. Itseemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond the bounds oflife which is apparent, the cause, the explanation, or the excuse forthem. He seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties.He examined without wrath, and with the eye of a linguist who isdeciphering a palimpsest, that portion of chaos which still exists innature. This reverie sometimes caused him to utter odd sayings. Onemorning he was in his garden, and thought himself alone, but his sisterwas walking behind him, unseen by him: suddenly he paused and gazed atsomething on the ground; it was a large, black, hairy, frightfulspider. His sister heard him say:—
“Poor beast! It is not its fault!”

Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness?Puerile they may be; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar toSaint Francis d’Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius. One day he sprained hisankle in his effort to avoid stepping on an ant. Thus lived this justman. Sometimes he fell asleep in his garden, and then there was nothingmore venerable possible.
Monseigneur Bienvenu had formerly been, if the stories anent his youth,and even in regard to his manhood, were to be believed, a passionate,and, possibly, a violent man. His universal suavity was less aninstinct of nature than the result of a grand conviction which hadfiltered into his heart through the medium of life, and had trickledthere slowly, thought by thought; for, in a character, as in a rock,there may exist apertures made by drops of water. These hollows areuneffaceable; these formations are indestructible.
In 1815, as we think we have already said, he reached his seventy-fifthbirthday, but he did not appear to be more than sixty. He was not tall;he was rather plump; and, in order to combat this tendency, he was fondof taking long strolls on foot; his step was firm, and his form was butslightly bent, a detail from which we do not pretend to draw anyconclusion. Gregory XVI., at the age of eighty, held himself erect andsmiling, which did not prevent him from being a bad bishop. MonseigneurWelcome had what the people term a “fine head,” but so amiable was hethat they forgot that it was fine.
When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of hischarms, and of which we have already spoken, people felt at their easewith him, and joy seemed to radiate from his whole person. His freshand ruddy complexion, his very white teeth, all of which he hadpreserved, and which were displayed by his smile, gave him that openand easy air which cause the remark to be made of a man, “He’s a goodfellow”; and of an old man, “He is a fine man.” That, it will berecalled, was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon. On the firstencounter, and to one who saw him for the first time, he was nothing,in fact, but a fine man. But if one remained near him for a few hours,and beheld him in the least degree pensive, the fine man becamegradually transfigured, and took on some imposing quality, I know notwhat; his broad and serious brow, rendered august by his white locks,became august also by virtue of meditation; majesty radiated from hisgoodness, though his goodness ceased not to be radiant; one experiencedsomething of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smilingangel slowly unfold his wings, without ceasing to smile. Respect, anunutterable respect, penetrated you by degrees and mounted to yourheart, and one felt that one had before him one of those strong,thoroughly tried, and indulgent souls where thought is so grand that itcan no longer be anything but gentle.
As we have seen, prayer, the celebration of the offices of religion,alms-giving, the consolation of the afflicted, the cultivation of a bitof land, fraternity, frugality, hospitality, renunciation, confidence,study, work, filled every day of his life. _Filled_ is exactly theword; certainly the Bishop’s day was quite full to the brim, of goodwords and good deeds. Nevertheless, it was not complete if cold orrainy weather prevented his passing an hour or two in his garden beforegoing to bed, and after the two women had retired. It seemed to be asort of rite with him, to prepare himself for slumber by meditation inthe presence of the grand spectacles of the nocturnal heavens.Sometimes, if the two old women were not asleep, they heard him pacingslowly along the walks at a very advanced hour of the night. He wasthere alone, communing with himself, peaceful, adoring, comparing theserenity of his heart with the serenity of the ether, moved amid thedarkness by the visible splendor of the constellations and theinvisible splendor of God, opening his heart to the thoughts which fallfrom the Unknown. At such moments, while he offered his heart at thehour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume, illuminated like alamp amid the starry night, as he poured himself out in ecstasy in themidst of the universal radiance of creation, he could not have toldhimself, probably, what was passing in his spirit; he felt somethingtake its flight from him, and something descend into him. Mysteriousexchange of the abysses of the soul with the abysses of the universe!
He thought of the grandeur and presence of God; of the future eternity,that strange mystery; of the eternity past, a mystery still morestrange; of all the infinities, which pierced their way into all hissenses, beneath his eyes; and, without seeking to comprehend theincomprehensible, he gazed upon it. He did not study God; he wasdazzled by him. He considered those magnificent conjunctions of atoms,which communicate aspects to matter, reveal forces by verifying them,create individualities in unity, proportions in extent, the innumerablein the infinite, and, through light, produce beauty. These conjunctionsare formed and dissolved incessantly; hence life and death.
He seated himself on a wooden bench, with his back against a decrepitvine; he gazed at the stars, past the puny and stunted silhouettes ofhis fruit-trees. This quarter of an acre, so poorly planted, soencumbered with mean buildings and sheds, was dear to him, andsatisfied his wants.
What more was needed by this old man, who divided the leisure of hislife, where there was so little leisure, between gardening in thedaytime and contemplation at night? Was not this narrow enclosure, withthe heavens for a ceiling, sufficient to enable him to adore God in hismost divine works, in turn? Does not this comprehend all, in fact? andwhat is there left to desire beyond it? A little garden in which towalk, and immensity in which to dream. At one’s feet that which can becultivated and plucked; over head that which one can study and meditateupon: some flowers on earth, and all the stars in the sky.



CHAPTER XIV—WHAT HE THOUGHT

One last word.
Since this sort of details might, particularly at the present moment,and to use an expression now in fashion, give to the Bishop of D—— acertain “pantheistical” physiognomy, and induce the belief, either tohis credit or discredit, that he entertained one of those personalphilosophies which are peculiar to our century, which sometimes springup in solitary spirits, and there take on a form and grow until theyusurp the place of religion, we insist upon it, that not one of thosepersons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have thought himselfauthorized to think anything of the sort. That which enlightened thisman was his heart. His wisdom was made of the light which comes fromthere.
No systems; many works. Abstruse speculations contain vertigo; no,there is nothing to indicate that he risked his mind in apocalypses.The apostle may be daring, but the bishop must be timid. He wouldprobably have felt a scruple at sounding too far in advance certainproblems which are, in a manner, reserved for terrible great minds.There is a sacred horror beneath the porches of the enigma; thosegloomy openings stand yawning there, but something tells you, you, apasser-by in life, that you must not enter. Woe to him who penetratesthither!
Geniuses in the impenetrable depths of abstraction and purespeculation, situated, so to speak, above all dogmas, propose theirideas to God. Their prayer audaciously offers discussion. Theiradoration interrogates. This is direct religion, which is full ofanxiety and responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs.
Human meditation has no limits. At his own risk and peril, it analyzesand digs deep into its own bedazzlement. One might almost say, that bya sort of splendid reaction, it with it dazzles nature; the mysteriousworld which surrounds us renders back what it has received; it isprobable that the contemplators are contemplated. However that may be,there are on earth men who—are they men?—perceive distinctly at theverge of the horizons of reverie the heights of the absolute, and whohave the terrible vision of the infinite mountain. Monseigneur Welcomewas one of these men; Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius. He wouldhave feared those sublimities whence some very great men even, likeSwedenborg and Pascal, have slipped into insanity. Certainly, thesepowerful reveries have their moral utility, and by these arduous pathsone approaches to ideal perfection. As for him, he took the path whichshortens,—the Gospel’s.
He did not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah’smantle; he projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell ofevents; he did not see to condense in flame the light of things; he hadnothing of the prophet and nothing of the magician about him. Thishumble soul loved, and that was all.
That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration isprobable: but one can no more pray too much than one can love too much;and if it is a heresy to pray beyond the texts, Saint Theresa and SaintJerome would be heretics.
He inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates. The universeappeared to him like an immense malady; everywhere he felt fever,everywhere he heard the sound of suffering, and, without seeking tosolve the enigma, he strove to dress the wound. The terrible spectacleof created things developed tenderness in him; he was occupied only infinding for himself, and in inspiring others with the best way tocompassionate and relieve. That which exists was for this good and rarepriest a permanent subject of sadness which sought consolation.
There are men who toil at extracting gold; he toiled at the extractionof pity. Universal misery was his mine. The sadness which reignedeverywhere was but an excuse for unfailing kindness. _Love each other;_he declared this to be complete, desired nothing further, and that wasthe whole of his doctrine. One day, that man who believed himself to bea “philosopher,” the senator who has already been alluded to, said tothe Bishop: “Just survey the spectacle of the world: all war againstall; the strongest has the most wit. Your _love each other_ isnonsense.”—_“Well,”_ replied Monseigneur Welcome, without contestingthe point, _“if it is nonsense, the soul should shut itself up in it,as the pearl in the oyster.”_ Thus he shut himself up, he lived there,he was absolutely satisfied with it, leaving on one side the prodigiousquestions which attract and terrify, the fathomless perspectives ofabstraction, the precipices of metaphysics—all those profundities whichconverge, for the apostle in God, for the atheist in nothingness;destiny, good and evil, the way of being against being, the conscienceof man, the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal, the transformationin death, the recapitulation of existences which the tomb contains, theincomprehensible grafting of successive loves on the persistent _I_,the essence, the substance, the Nile, and the Ens, the soul, nature,liberty, necessity; perpendicular problems, sinister obscurities, wherelean the gigantic archangels of the human mind; formidable abysses,which Lucretius, Manou, Saint Paul, Dante, contemplate with eyesflashing lightning, which seems by its steady gaze on the infinite tocause stars to blaze forth there.
Monseigneur Bienvenu was simply a man who took note of the exterior ofmysterious questions without scrutinizing them, and without troublinghis own mind with them, and who cherished in his own soul a graverespect for darkness.



BOOK SECOND—THE FALL



CHAPTER I—THE EVENING OF A DAY OF WALKING

Early in the month of October, 1815, about an hour before sunset, a manwho was travelling on foot entered the little town of D—— The fewinhabitants who were at their windows or on their thresholds at themoment stared at this traveller with a sort of uneasiness. It wasdifficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance. He was aman of medium stature, thickset and robust, in the prime of life. Hemight have been forty-six or forty-eight years old. A cap with adrooping leather visor partly concealed his face, burned and tanned bysun and wind, and dripping with perspiration. His shirt of coarseyellow linen, fastened at the neck by a small silver anchor, permitteda view of his hairy breast: he had a cravat twisted into a string;trousers of blue drilling, worn and threadbare, white on one knee andtorn on the other; an old gray, tattered blouse, patched on one of theelbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine; a tightly packedsoldier knapsack, well buckled and perfectly new, on his back; anenormous, knotty stick in his hand; iron-shod shoes on his stockinglessfeet; a shaved head and a long beard.
The sweat, the heat, the journey on foot, the dust, added I know notwhat sordid quality to this dilapidated whole. His hair was closelycut, yet bristling, for it had begun to grow a little, and did not seemto have been cut for some time.
No one knew him. He was evidently only a chance passer-by. Whence camehe? From the south; from the seashore, perhaps, for he made hisentrance into D—— by the same street which, seven months previously,had witnessed the passage of the Emperor Napoleon on his way fromCannes to Paris. This man must have been walking all day. He seemedvery much fatigued. Some women of the ancient market town which issituated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees of theboulevard Gassendi, and drink at the fountain which stands at the endof the promenade. He must have been very thirsty: for the children whofollowed him saw him stop again for a drink, two hundred paces furtheron, at the fountain in the market-place.
On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert, he turned to the left,and directed his steps toward the town-hall. He entered, then came outa quarter of an hour later. A gendarme was seated near the door, on thestone bench which General Drouot had mounted on the 4th of March toread to the frightened throng of the inhabitants of D—— theproclamation of the Gulf Juan. The man pulled off his cap and humblysaluted the gendarme.
The gendarme, without replying to his salute, stared attentively athim, followed him for a while with his eyes, and then entered thetown-hall.
There then existed at D—— a fine inn at the sign of the _Cross ofColbas_. This inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre, a manof consideration in the town on account of his relationship to anotherLabarre, who kept the inn of the _Three Dauphins_ in Grenoble, and hadserved in the Guides. At the time of the Emperor’s landing, many rumorshad circulated throughout the country with regard to this inn of the_Three Dauphins_. It was said that General Bertrand, disguised as acarter, had made frequent trips thither in the month of January, andthat he had distributed crosses of honor to the soldiers and handfulsof gold to the citizens. The truth is, that when the Emperor enteredGrenoble he had refused to install himself at the hotel of theprefecture; he had thanked the mayor, saying, _“I am going to the houseof a brave man of my acquaintance”;_ and he had betaken himself to the_Three Dauphins_. This glory of the Labarre of the _Three Dauphins_ wasreflected upon the Labarre of the _Cross of Colbas_, at a distance offive and twenty leagues. It was said of him in the town, _“That is thecousin of the man of Grenoble.”_
The man bent his steps towards this inn, which was the best in thecountry-side. He entered the kitchen, which opened on a level with thestreet. All the stoves were lighted; a huge fire blazed gayly in thefireplace. The host, who was also the chief cook, was going from onestew-pan to another, very busily superintending an excellent dinnerdesigned for the wagoners, whose loud talking, conversation, andlaughter were audible from an adjoining apartment. Any one who hastravelled knows that there is no one who indulges in better cheer thanwagoners. A fat marmot, flanked by white partridges and heather-cocks,was turning on a long spit before the fire; on the stove, two hugecarps from Lake Lauzet and a trout from Lake Alloz were cooking.
The host, hearing the door open and seeing a newcomer enter, said,without raising his eyes from his stoves:—
“What do you wish, sir?”

“Food and lodging,” said the man.
“Nothing easier,” replied the host. At that moment he turned his head,took in the traveller’s appearance with a single glance, and added, “Bypaying for it.”

The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse, andanswered, “I have money.”

“In that case, we are at your service,” said the host.
The man put his purse back in his pocket, removed his knapsack from hisback, put it on the ground near the door, retained his stick in hishand, and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire. D—— is inthe mountains. The evenings are cold there in October.
But as the host went back and forth, he scrutinized the traveller.
“Will dinner be ready soon?” said the man.
“Immediately,” replied the landlord.
While the newcomer was warming himself before the fire, with his backturned, the worthy host, Jacquin Labarre, drew a pencil from hispocket, then tore off the corner of an old newspaper which was lying ona small table near the window. On the white margin he wrote a line ortwo, folded it without sealing, and then intrusted this scrap of paperto a child who seemed to serve him in the capacity both of scullion andlackey. The landlord whispered a word in the scullion’s ear, and thechild set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall.
The traveller saw nothing of all this.
Once more he inquired, “Will dinner be ready soon?”

“Immediately,” responded the host.
The child returned. He brought back the paper. The host unfolded iteagerly, like a person who is expecting a reply. He seemed to read itattentively, then tossed his head, and remained thoughtful for amoment. Then he took a step in the direction of the traveller, whoappeared to be immersed in reflections which were not very serene.
“I cannot receive you, sir,” said he.
The man half rose.
“What! Are you afraid that I will not pay you? Do you want me to payyou in advance? I have money, I tell you.”

“It is not that.”

“What then?”

“You have money—”

“Yes,” said the man.
“And I,” said the host, “have no room.”

The man resumed tranquilly, “Put me in the stable.”

“I cannot.”

“Why?”

“The horses take up all the space.”

“Very well!” retorted the man; “a corner of the loft then, a truss ofstraw. We will see about that after dinner.”

“I cannot give you any dinner.”

This declaration, made in a measured but firm tone, struck the strangeras grave. He rose.
“Ah! bah! But I am dying of hunger. I have been walking since sunrise.I have travelled twelve leagues. I pay. I wish to eat.”

“I have nothing,” said the landlord.
The man burst out laughing, and turned towards the fireplace and thestoves: “Nothing! and all that?”

“All that is engaged.”

“By whom?”

“By messieurs the wagoners.”

“How many are there of them?”

“Twelve.”

“There is enough food there for twenty.”

“They have engaged the whole of it and paid for it in advance.”

The man seated himself again, and said, without raising his voice, “Iam at an inn; I am hungry, and I shall remain.”

Then the host bent down to his ear, and said in a tone which made himstart, “Go away!”

At that moment the traveller was bending forward and thrusting somebrands into the fire with the iron-shod tip of his staff; he turnedquickly round, and as he opened his mouth to reply, the host gazedsteadily at him and added, still in a low voice: “Stop! there’s enoughof that sort of talk. Do you want me to tell you your name? Your nameis Jean Valjean. Now do you want me to tell you who you are? When I sawyou come in I suspected something; I sent to the town-hall, and thiswas the reply that was sent to me. Can you read?”

So saying, he held out to the stranger, fully unfolded, the paper whichhad just travelled from the inn to the town-hall, and from thetown-hall to the inn. The man cast a glance upon it. The landlordresumed after a pause.
“I am in the habit of being polite to every one. Go away!”

The man dropped his head, picked up the knapsack which he had depositedon the ground, and took his departure.
He chose the principal street. He walked straight on at a venture,keeping close to the houses like a sad and humiliated man. He did notturn round a single time. Had he done so, he would have seen the hostof the _Cross of Colbas_ standing on his threshold, surrounded by allthe guests of his inn, and all the passers-by in the street, talkingvivaciously, and pointing him out with his finger; and, from theglances of terror and distrust cast by the group, he might have divinedthat his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town.
He saw nothing of all this. People who are crushed do not look behindthem. They know but too well the evil fate which follows them.
Thus he proceeded for some time, walking on without ceasing, traversingat random streets of which he knew nothing, forgetful of his fatigue,as is often the case when a man is sad. All at once he felt the pangsof hunger sharply. Night was drawing near. He glanced about him, to seewhether he could not discover some shelter.
The fine hostelry was closed to him; he was seeking some very humblepublic house, some hovel, however lowly.
Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets; a pine branchsuspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white skyof the twilight. He proceeded thither.
It proved to be, in fact, a public house. The public house which is inthe Rue de Chaffaut.
The wayfarer halted for a moment, and peeped through the window intothe interior of the low-studded room of the public house, illuminatedby a small lamp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth. Some menwere engaged in drinking there. The landlord was warming himself. Aniron pot, suspended from a crane, bubbled over the flame.
The entrance to this public house, which is also a sort of an inn, isby two doors. One opens on the street, the other upon a small yardfilled with manure. The traveller dare not enter by the street door. Heslipped into the yard, halted again, then raised the latch timidly andopened the door.
“Who goes there?” said the master.
“Some one who wants supper and bed.”

“Good. We furnish supper and bed here.”

He entered. All the men who were drinking turned round. The lampilluminated him on one side, the firelight on the other. They examinedhim for some time while he was taking off his knapsack.
The host said to him, “There is the fire. The supper is cooking in thepot. Come and warm yourself, comrade.”

He approached and seated himself near the hearth. He stretched out hisfeet, which were exhausted with fatigue, to the fire; a fine odor wasemitted by the pot. All that could be distinguished of his face,beneath his cap, which was well pulled down, assumed a vague appearanceof comfort, mingled with that other poignant aspect which habitualsuffering bestows.
It was, moreover, a firm, energetic, and melancholy profile. Thisphysiognomy was strangely composed; it began by seeming humble, andended by seeming severe. The eye shone beneath its lashes like a firebeneath brushwood.
One of the men seated at the table, however, was a fishmonger who,before entering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut, had been tostable his horse at Labarre’s. It chanced that he had that very morningencountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Brasd’Asse and—I have forgotten the name. I think it was Escoublon. Now,when he met him, the man, who then seemed already extremely weary, hadrequested him to take him on his crupper; to which the fishmonger hadmade no reply except by redoubling his gait. This fishmonger had been amember half an hour previously of the group which surrounded JacquinLabarre, and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of themorning to the people at the _Cross of Colbas_. From where he sat hemade an imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper. The tavern-keeper wentto him. They exchanged a few words in a low tone. The man had againbecome absorbed in his reflections.
The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace, laid his hand abruptly onthe shoulder of the man, and said to him:—
“You are going to get out of here.”

The stranger turned round and replied gently, “Ah! You know?—”

“Yes.”

“I was sent away from the other inn.”

“And you are to be turned out of this one.”

“Where would you have me go?”

“Elsewhere.”

The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed.
As he went out, some children who had followed him from the _Cross ofColbas_, and who seemed to be lying in wait for him, threw stones athim. He retraced his steps in anger, and threatened them with hisstick: the children dispersed like a flock of birds.
He passed before the prison. At the door hung an iron chain attached toa bell. He rang.
The wicket opened.
“Turnkey,” said he, removing his cap politely, “will you have thekindness to admit me, and give me a lodging for the night?”

A voice replied:—
“The prison is not an inn. Get yourself arrested, and you will beadmitted.”

The wicket closed again.
He entered a little street in which there were many gardens. Some ofthem are enclosed only by hedges, which lends a cheerful aspect to thestreet. In the midst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of asmall house of a single story, the window of which was lighted up. Hepeered through the pane as he had done at the public house. Within wasa large whitewashed room, with a bed draped in printed cotton stuff,and a cradle in one corner, a few wooden chairs, and a double-barrelledgun hanging on the wall. A table was spread in the centre of the room.A copper lamp illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen, thepewter jug shining like silver, and filled with wine, and the brown,smoking soup-tureen. At this table sat a man of about forty, with amerry and open countenance, who was dandling a little child on hisknees. Close by a very young woman was nursing another child. Thefather was laughing, the child was laughing, the mother was smiling.
The stranger paused a moment in reverie before this tender and calmingspectacle. What was taking place within him? He alone could have told.It is probable that he thought that this joyous house would behospitable, and that, in a place where he beheld so much happiness, hewould find perhaps a little pity.
He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock.
They did not hear him.
He tapped again.
He heard the woman say, “It seems to me, husband, that some one isknocking.”

“No,” replied the husband.
He tapped a third time.
The husband rose, took the lamp, and went to the door, which he opened.
He was a man of lofty stature, half peasant, half artisan. He wore ahuge leather apron, which reached to his left shoulder, and which ahammer, a red handkerchief, a powder-horn, and all sorts of objectswhich were upheld by the girdle, as in a pocket, caused to bulge out.He carried his head thrown backwards; his shirt, widely opened andturned back, displayed his bull neck, white and bare. He had thickeyelashes, enormous black whiskers, prominent eyes, the lower part ofhis face like a snout; and besides all this, that air of being on hisown ground, which is indescribable.
“Pardon me, sir,” said the wayfarer, “Could you, in consideration ofpayment, give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed yonder inthe garden, in which to sleep? Tell me; can you? For money?”

“Who are you?” demanded the master of the house.
The man replied: “I have just come from Puy-Moisson. I have walked allday long. I have travelled twelve leagues. Can you?—if I pay?”

“I would not refuse,” said the peasant, “to lodge any respectable manwho would pay me. But why do you not go to the inn?”

“There is no room.”

“Bah! Impossible. This is neither a fair nor a market day. Have youbeen to Labarre?”

“Yes.”

“Well?”

The traveller replied with embarrassment: “I do not know. He did notreceive me.”

“Have you been to What’s-his-name’s, in the Rue Chaffaut?”

The stranger’s embarrassment increased; he stammered, “He did notreceive me either.”

The peasant’s countenance assumed an expression of distrust; hesurveyed the newcomer from head to feet, and suddenly exclaimed, with asort of shudder:—
“Are you the man?—”

He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger, took three steps backwards,placed the lamp on the table, and took his gun down from the wall.
Meanwhile, at the words, _Are you the man?_ the woman had risen, hadclasped her two children in her arms, and had taken refugeprecipitately behind her husband, staring in terror at the stranger,with her bosom uncovered, and with frightened eyes, as she murmured ina low tone, _“Tso-maraude.”_1
All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it toone’s self. After having scrutinized the man for several moments, asone scrutinizes a viper, the master of the house returned to the doorand said:—
“Clear out!”

“For pity’s sake, a glass of water,” said the man.
“A shot from my gun!” said the peasant.
Then he closed the door violently, and the man heard him shoot twolarge bolts. A moment later, the window-shutter was closed, and thesound of a bar of iron which was placed against it was audible outside.
Night continued to fall. A cold wind from the Alps was blowing. By thelight of the expiring day the stranger perceived, in one of the gardenswhich bordered the street, a sort of hut, which seemed to him to bebuilt of sods. He climbed over the wooden fence resolutely, and foundhimself in the garden. He approached the hut; its door consisted of avery low and narrow aperture, and it resembled those buildings whichroad-laborers construct for themselves along the roads. He thoughtwithout doubt, that it was, in fact, the dwelling of a road-laborer; hewas suffering from cold and hunger, but this was, at least, a shelterfrom the cold. This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night.He threw himself flat on his face, and crawled into the hut. It waswarm there, and he found a tolerably good bed of straw. He lay, for amoment, stretched out on this bed, without the power to make amovement, so fatigued was he. Then, as the knapsack on his back was inhis way, and as it furnished, moreover, a pillow ready to his hand, heset about unbuckling one of the straps. At that moment, a ferociousgrowl became audible. He raised his eyes. The head of an enormous dogwas outlined in the darkness at the entrance of the hut.
It was a dog’s kennel.
He was himself vigorous and formidable; he armed himself with hisstaff, made a shield of his knapsack, and made his way out of thekennel in the best way he could, not without enlarging the rents in hisrags.
He left the garden in the same manner, but backwards, being obliged, inorder to keep the dog respectful, to have recourse to that manœuvrewith his stick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as _larose couverte_.
When he had, not without difficulty, repassed the fence, and foundhimself once more in the street, alone, without refuge, withoutshelter, without a roof over his head, chased even from that bed ofstraw and from that miserable kennel, he dropped rather than seatedhimself on a stone, and it appears that a passer-by heard him exclaim,“I am not even a dog!”

He soon rose again and resumed his march. He went out of the town,hoping to find some tree or haystack in the fields which would affordhim shelter.
He walked thus for some time, with his head still drooping. When hefelt himself far from every human habitation, he raised his eyes andgazed searchingly about him. He was in a field. Before him was one ofthose low hills covered with close-cut stubble, which, after theharvest, resemble shaved heads.
The horizon was perfectly black. This was not alone the obscurity ofnight; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed to restupon the hill itself, and which were mounting and filling the wholesky. Meanwhile, as the moon was about to rise, and as there was stillfloating in the zenith a remnant of the brightness of twilight, theseclouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort of whitish arch, whence agleam of light fell upon the earth.
The earth was thus better lighted than the sky, which produces aparticularly sinister effect, and the hill, whose contour was poor andmean, was outlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon. The wholeeffect was hideous, petty, lugubrious, and narrow.
There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree,which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer.
This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits ofintelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysteriousaspects of things; nevertheless, there was something in that sky, inthat hill, in that plain, in that tree, which was so profoundlydesolate, that after a moment of immobility and reverie he turned backabruptly. There are instants when nature seems hostile.
He retraced his steps; the gates of D—— were closed. D——, which hadsustained sieges during the wars of religion, was still surrounded in1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have beendemolished since. He passed through a breach and entered the townagain.
It might have been eight o’clock in the evening. As he was notacquainted with the streets, he recommenced his walk at random.
In this way he came to the prefecture, then to the seminary. As hepassed through the Cathedral Square, he shook his fist at the church.
At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment. It isthere that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial Guardto the army, brought from the Island of Elba and dictated by Napoleonhimself, were printed for the first time.
Worn out with fatigue, and no longer entertaining any hope, he lay downon a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this printing office.
At that moment an old woman came out of the church. She saw the manstretched out in the shadow. “What are you doing there, my friend?”said she.
He answered harshly and angrily: “As you see, my good woman, I amsleeping.” The good woman, who was well worthy the name, in fact, wasthe Marquise de R——
“On this bench?” she went on.
“I have had a mattress of wood for nineteen years,” said the man;“to-day I have a mattress of stone.”

“You have been a soldier?”

“Yes, my good woman, a soldier.”

“Why do you not go to the inn?”

“Because I have no money.”

“Alas!” said Madame de R——, “I have only four sous in my purse.”

“Give it to me all the same.”

The man took the four sous. Madame de R—— continued: “You cannot obtainlodgings in an inn for so small a sum. But have you tried? It isimpossible for you to pass the night thus. You are cold and hungry, nodoubt. Some one might have given you a lodging out of charity.”

“I have knocked at all doors.”

“Well?”

“I have been driven away everywhere.”

The “good woman” touched the man’s arm, and pointed out to him on theother side of the street a small, low house, which stood beside theBishop’s palace.
“You have knocked at all doors?”

“Yes.”

“Have you knocked at that one?”

“No.”

“Knock there.”




CHAPTER II—PRUDENCE COUNSELLED TO WISDOM.

That evening, the Bishop of D——, after his promenade through the town,remained shut up rather late in his room. He was busy over a great workon _Duties_, which was never completed, unfortunately. He was carefullycompiling everything that the Fathers and the doctors have said on thisimportant subject. His book was divided into two parts: firstly, theduties of all; secondly, the duties of each individual, according tothe class to which he belongs. The duties of all are the great duties.There are four of these. Saint Matthew points them out: duties towardsGod (_Matt._ vi.); duties towards one’s self (_Matt._ v. 29, 30);duties towards one’s neighbor (_Matt._ vii. 12); duties towards animals(_Matt._ vi. 20, 25). As for the other duties the Bishop found thempointed out and prescribed elsewhere: to sovereigns and subjects, inthe Epistle to the Romans; to magistrates, to wives, to mothers, toyoung men, by Saint Peter; to husbands, fathers, children and servants,in the Epistle to the Ephesians; to the faithful, in the Epistle to theHebrews; to virgins, in the Epistle to the Corinthians. Out of theseprecepts he was laboriously constructing a harmonious whole, which hedesired to present to souls.
At eight o’clock he was still at work, writing with a good deal ofinconvenience upon little squares of paper, with a big book open on hisknees, when Madame Magloire entered, according to her wont, to get thesilver-ware from the cupboard near his bed. A moment later, the Bishop,knowing that the table was set, and that his sister was probablywaiting for him, shut his book, rose from his table, and entered thedining-room.
The dining-room was an oblong apartment, with a fireplace, which had adoor opening on the street (as we have said), and a window opening onthe garden.
Madame Magloire was, in fact, just putting the last touches to thetable.
As she performed this service, she was conversing with MademoiselleBaptistine.
A lamp stood on the table; the table was near the fireplace. A woodfire was burning there.
One can easily picture to one’s self these two women, both of whom wereover sixty years of age. Madame Magloire small, plump, vivacious;Mademoiselle Baptistine gentle, slender, frail, somewhat taller thanher brother, dressed in a gown of puce-colored silk, of the fashion of1806, which she had purchased at that date in Paris, and which hadlasted ever since. To borrow vulgar phrases, which possess the merit ofgiving utterance in a single word to an idea which a whole page wouldhardly suffice to express, Madame Magloire had the air of a _peasant_,and Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a _lady_. Madame Magloire wore awhite quilted cap, a gold Jeannette cross on a velvet ribbon upon herneck, the only bit of feminine jewelry that there was in the house, avery white fichu puffing out from a gown of coarse black woollen stuff,with large, short sleeves, an apron of cotton cloth in red and greenchecks, knotted round the waist with a green ribbon, with a stomacherof the same attached by two pins at the upper corners, coarse shoes onher feet, and yellow stockings, like the women of Marseilles.Mademoiselle Baptistine’s gown was cut on the patterns of 1806, with ashort waist, a narrow, sheath-like skirt, puffed sleeves, with flapsand buttons. She concealed her gray hair under a frizzed wig known asthe _baby_ wig. Madame Magloire had an intelligent, vivacious, andkindly air; the two corners of her mouth unequally raised, and herupper lip, which was larger than the lower, imparted to her a rathercrabbed and imperious look. So long as Monseigneur held his peace, shetalked to him resolutely with a mixture of respect and freedom; but assoon as Monseigneur began to speak, as we have seen, she obeyedpassively like her mistress. Mademoiselle Baptistine did not evenspeak. She confined herself to obeying and pleasing him. She had neverbeen pretty, even when she was young; she had large, blue, prominenteyes, and a long arched nose; but her whole visage, her whole person,breathed forth an ineffable goodness, as we stated in the beginning.She had always been predestined to gentleness; but faith, charity,hope, those three virtues which mildly warm the soul, had graduallyelevated that gentleness to sanctity. Nature had made her a lamb,religion had made her an angel. Poor sainted virgin! Sweet memory whichhas vanished!
Mademoiselle Baptistine has so often narrated what passed at theepiscopal residence that evening, that there are many people now livingwho still recall the most minute details.
At the moment when the Bishop entered, Madame Magloire was talking withconsiderable vivacity. She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine on asubject which was familiar to her and to which the Bishop was alsoaccustomed. The question concerned the lock upon the entrance door.
It appears that while procuring some provisions for supper, MadameMagloire had heard things in divers places. People had spoken of aprowler of evil appearance; a suspicious vagabond had arrived who mustbe somewhere about the town, and those who should take it into theirheads to return home late that night might be subjected to unpleasantencounters. The police was very badly organized, moreover, becausethere was no love lost between the Prefect and the Mayor, who sought toinjure each other by making things happen. It behooved wise people toplay the part of their own police, and to guard themselves well, andcare must be taken to duly close, bar and barricade their houses, andto _fasten the doors well_.
Madame Magloire emphasized these last words; but the Bishop had justcome from his room, where it was rather cold. He seated himself infront of the fire, and warmed himself, and then fell to thinking ofother things. He did not take up the remark dropped with design byMadame Magloire. She repeated it. Then Mademoiselle Baptistine,desirous of satisfying Madame Magloire without displeasing her brother,ventured to say timidly:—
“Did you hear what Madame Magloire is saying, brother?”

“I have heard something of it in a vague way,” replied the Bishop. Thenhalf-turning in his chair, placing his hands on his knees, and raisingtowards the old servant woman his cordial face, which so easily grewjoyous, and which was illuminated from below by the firelight,—“Come,what is the matter? What is the matter? Are we in any great danger?”

Then Madame Magloire began the whole story afresh, exaggerating it alittle without being aware of the fact. It appeared that a Bohemian, abare-footed vagabond, a sort of dangerous mendicant, was at that momentin the town. He had presented himself at Jacquin Labarre’s to obtainlodgings, but the latter had not been willing to take him in. He hadbeen seen to arrive by the way of the boulevard Gassendi and roam aboutthe streets in the gloaming. A gallows-bird with a terrible face.
“Really!” said the Bishop.
This willingness to interrogate encouraged Madame Magloire; it seemedto her to indicate that the Bishop was on the point of becomingalarmed; she pursued triumphantly:—
“Yes, Monseigneur. That is how it is. There will be some sort ofcatastrophe in this town to-night. Every one says so. And withal, thepolice is so badly regulated” (a useful repetition). “The idea ofliving in a mountainous country, and not even having lights in thestreets at night! One goes out. Black as ovens, indeed! And I say,Monseigneur, and Mademoiselle there says with me—”

“I,” interrupted his sister, “say nothing. What my brother does is welldone.”

Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest:—
“We say that this house is not safe at all; that if Monseigneur willpermit, I will go and tell Paulin Musebois, the locksmith, to come andreplace the ancient locks on the doors; we have them, and it is onlythe work of a moment; for I say that nothing is more terrible than adoor which can be opened from the outside with a latch by the firstpasser-by; and I say that we need bolts, Monseigneur, if only for thisnight; moreover, Monseigneur has the habit of always saying ‘come in’;and besides, even in the middle of the night, O mon Dieu! there is noneed to ask permission.”

At that moment there came a tolerably violent knock on the door.
“Come in,” said the Bishop.



CHAPTER III—THE HEROISM OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE.

The door opened.
It opened wide with a rapid movement, as though some one had given itan energetic and resolute push.
A man entered.
We already know the man. It was the wayfarer whom we have seenwandering about in search of shelter.
He entered, advanced a step, and halted, leaving the door open behindhim. He had his knapsack on his shoulders, his cudgel in his hand, arough, audacious, weary, and violent expression in his eyes. The fireon the hearth lighted him up. He was hideous. It was a sinisterapparition.
Madame Magloire had not even the strength to utter a cry. She trembled,and stood with her mouth wide open.
Mademoiselle Baptistine turned round, beheld the man entering, and halfstarted up in terror; then, turning her head by degrees towards thefireplace again, she began to observe her brother, and her face becameonce more profoundly calm and serene.
The Bishop fixed a tranquil eye on the man.
As he opened his mouth, doubtless to ask the newcomer what he desired,the man rested both hands on his staff, directed his gaze at the oldman and the two women, and without waiting for the Bishop to speak, hesaid, in a loud voice:—
“See here. My name is Jean Valjean. I am a convict from the galleys. Ihave passed nineteen years in the galleys. I was liberated four daysago, and am on my way to Pontarlier, which is my destination. I havebeen walking for four days since I left Toulon. I have travelled adozen leagues to-day on foot. This evening, when I arrived in theseparts, I went to an inn, and they turned me out, because of my yellowpassport, which I had shown at the town-hall. I had to do it. I went toan inn. They said to me, ‘Be off,’ at both places. No one would takeme. I went to the prison; the jailer would not admit me. I went into adog’s kennel; the dog bit me and chased me off, as though he had been aman. One would have said that he knew who I was. I went into thefields, intending to sleep in the open air, beneath the stars. Therewere no stars. I thought it was going to rain, and I re-entered thetown, to seek the recess of a doorway. Yonder, in the square, I meantto sleep on a stone bench. A good woman pointed out your house to me,and said to me, ‘Knock there!’ I have knocked. What is this place? Doyou keep an inn? I have money—savings. One hundred and nine francsfifteen sous, which I earned in the galleys by my labor, in the courseof nineteen years. I will pay. What is that to me? I have money. I amvery weary; twelve leagues on foot; I am very hungry. Are you willingthat I should remain?”

“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “you will set another place.”

The man advanced three paces, and approached the lamp which was on thetable. “Stop,” he resumed, as though he had not quite understood;“that’s not it. Did you hear? I am a galley-slave; a convict. I comefrom the galleys.” He drew from his pocket a large sheet of yellowpaper, which he unfolded. “Here’s my passport. Yellow, as you see. Thisserves to expel me from every place where I go. Will you read it? Iknow how to read. I learned in the galleys. There is a school there forthose who choose to learn. Hold, this is what they put on thispassport: ‘Jean Valjean, discharged convict, native of’—that is nothingto you—‘has been nineteen years in the galleys: five years forhouse-breaking and burglary; fourteen years for having attempted toescape on four occasions. He is a very dangerous man.’ There! Every onehas cast me out. Are you willing to receive me? Is this an inn? Willyou give me something to eat and a bed? Have you a stable?”

“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “you will put white sheets on thebed in the alcove.” We have already explained the character of the twowomen’s obedience.
Madame Magloire retired to execute these orders.
The Bishop turned to the man.
“Sit down, sir, and warm yourself. We are going to sup in a fewmoments, and your bed will be prepared while you are supping.”

At this point the man suddenly comprehended. The expression of hisface, up to that time sombre and harsh, bore the imprint ofstupefaction, of doubt, of joy, and became extraordinary. He beganstammering like a crazy man:—
“Really? What! You will keep me? You do not drive me forth? A convict!You call me _sir!_ You do not address me as _thou?_ ‘Get out of here,you dog!’ is what people always say to me. I felt sure that you wouldexpel me, so I told you at once who I am. Oh, what a good woman thatwas who directed me hither! I am going to sup! A bed with a mattressand sheets, like the rest of the world! a bed! It is nineteen yearssince I have slept in a bed! You actually do not want me to go! You aregood people. Besides, I have money. I will pay well. Pardon me,monsieur the inn-keeper, but what is your name? I will pay anything youask. You are a fine man. You are an inn-keeper, are you not?”

“I am,” replied the Bishop, “a priest who lives here.”

“A priest!” said the man. “Oh, what a fine priest! Then you are notgoing to demand any money of me? You are the curé, are you not? thecuré of this big church? Well! I am a fool, truly! I had not perceivedyour skull-cap.”

As he spoke, he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner,replaced his passport in his pocket, and seated himself. MademoiselleBaptistine gazed mildly at him. He continued:
“You are humane, Monsieur le Curé; you have not scorned me. A goodpriest is a very good thing. Then you do not require me to pay?”

“No,” said the Bishop; “keep your money. How much have you? Did you nottell me one hundred and nine francs?”

“And fifteen sous,” added the man.
“One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous. And how long did it take youto earn that?”

“Nineteen years.”

“Nineteen years!”

The Bishop sighed deeply.
The man continued: “I have still the whole of my money. In four days Ihave spent only twenty-five sous, which I earned by helping unload somewagons at Grasse. Since you are an abbé, I will tell you that we had achaplain in the galleys. And one day I saw a bishop there. Monseigneuris what they call him. He was the Bishop of Majore at Marseilles. He isthe curé who rules over the other curés, you understand. Pardon me, Isay that very badly; but it is such a far-off thing to me! Youunderstand what we are! He said mass in the middle of the galleys, onan altar. He had a pointed thing, made of gold, on his head; itglittered in the bright light of midday. We were all ranged in lines onthe three sides, with cannons with lighted matches facing us. We couldnot see very well. He spoke; but he was too far off, and we did nothear. That is what a bishop is like.”

While he was speaking, the Bishop had gone and shut the door, which hadremained wide open.
Madame Magloire returned. She brought a silver fork and spoon, whichshe placed on the table.
“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “place those things as near thefire as possible.” And turning to his guest: “The night wind is harshon the Alps. You must be cold, sir.”

Each time that he uttered the word _sir_, in his voice which was sogently grave and polished, the man’s face lighted up. _Monsieur_ to aconvict is like a glass of water to one of the shipwrecked of the_Medusa_. Ignominy thirsts for consideration.
“This lamp gives a very bad light,” said the Bishop.
Madame Magloire understood him, and went to get the two silvercandlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur’s bed-chamber, andplaced them, lighted, on the table.
“Monsieur le Curé,” said the man, “you are good; you do not despise me.You receive me into your house. You light your candles for me. Yet Ihave not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortunateman.”

The Bishop, who was sitting close to him, gently touched his hand. “Youcould not help telling me who you were. This is not my house; it is thehouse of Jesus Christ. This door does not demand of him who enterswhether he has a name, but whether he has a grief. You suffer, you arehungry and thirsty; you are welcome. And do not thank me; do not saythat I receive you in my house. No one is at home here, except the manwho needs a refuge. I say to you, who are passing by, that you are muchmore at home here than I am myself. Everything here is yours. What needhave I to know your name? Besides, before you told me you had one whichI knew.”

The man opened his eyes in astonishment.
“Really? You knew what I was called?”

“Yes,” replied the Bishop, “you are called my brother.”

“Stop, Monsieur le Curé,” exclaimed the man. “I was very hungry when Ientered here; but you are so good, that I no longer know what hashappened to me.”

The Bishop looked at him, and said,—
“You have suffered much?”

“Oh, the red coat, the ball on the ankle, a plank to sleep on, heat,cold, toil, the convicts, the thrashings, the double chain for nothing,the cell for one word; even sick and in bed, still the chain! Dogs,dogs are happier! Nineteen years! I am forty-six. Now there is theyellow passport. That is what it is like.”

“Yes,” resumed the Bishop, “you have come from a very sad place.Listen. There will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face of arepentant sinner than over the white robes of a hundred just men. Ifyou emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrathagainst mankind, you are deserving of pity; if you emerge with thoughtsof good-will and of peace, you are more worthy than any one of us.”

In the meantime, Madame Magloire had served supper: soup, made withwater, oil, bread, and salt; a little bacon, a bit of mutton, figs, afresh cheese, and a large loaf of rye bread. She had, of her ownaccord, added to the Bishop’s ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauveswine.
The Bishop’s face at once assumed that expression of gayety which ispeculiar to hospitable natures. “To table!” he cried vivaciously. Aswas his custom when a stranger supped with him, he made the man sit onhis right. Mademoiselle Baptistine, perfectly peaceable and natural,took her seat at his left.
The Bishop asked a blessing; then helped the soup himself, according tohis custom. The man began to eat with avidity.
All at once the Bishop said: “It strikes me there is something missingon this table.”

Madame Magloire had, in fact, only placed the three sets of forks andspoons which were absolutely necessary. Now, it was the usage of thehouse, when the Bishop had any one to supper, to lay out the whole sixsets of silver on the table-cloth—an innocent ostentation. Thisgraceful semblance of luxury was a kind of child’s play, which was fullof charm in that gentle and severe household, which raised poverty intodignity.
Madame Magloire understood the remark, went out without saying a word,and a moment later the three sets of silver forks and spoons demandedby the Bishop were glittering upon the cloth, symmetrically arrangedbefore the three persons seated at the table.



CHAPTER IV—DETAILS CONCERNING THE CHEESE-DAIRIES OF PONTARLIER.

Now, in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table, we cannotdo better than to transcribe here a passage from one of MademoiselleBaptistine’s letters to Madame Boischevron, wherein the conversationbetween the convict and the Bishop is described with ingeniousminuteness.
“. . . This man paid no attention to any one. He ate with the voracityof a starving man. However, after supper he said:
“‘Monsieur le Curé of the good God, all this is far too good for me;but I must say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with themkeep a better table than you do.’
“Between ourselves, the remark rather shocked me. My brother replied:—
“‘They are more fatigued than I.’
“‘No,’ returned the man, ‘they have more money. You are poor; I seethat plainly. You cannot be even a curate. Are you really a curé? Ah,if the good God were but just, you certainly ought to be a curé!’
“‘The good God is more than just,’ said my brother.
“A moment later he added:—
“‘Monsieur Jean Valjean, is it to Pontarlier that you are going?’
“‘With my road marked out for me.’
“I think that is what the man said. Then he went on:—
“‘I must be on my way by daybreak to-morrow. Travelling is hard. If thenights are cold, the days are hot.’
“‘You are going to a good country,’ said my brother. ‘During theRevolution my family was ruined. I took refuge in Franche-Comté atfirst, and there I lived for some time by the toil of my hands. My willwas good. I found plenty to occupy me. One has only to choose. Thereare paper mills, tanneries, distilleries, oil factories, watchfactories on a large scale, steel mills, copper works, twenty ironfoundries at least, four of which, situated at Lods, at Châtillon, atAudincourt, and at Beure, are tolerably large.’
“I think I am not mistaken in saying that those are the names which mybrother mentioned. Then he interrupted himself and addressed me:—
“‘Have we not some relatives in those parts, my dear sister?’
“I replied,—
“‘We did have some; among others, M. de Lucenet, who was captain of thegates at Pontarlier under the old régime.’
“‘Yes,’ resumed my brother; ‘but in ’93, one had no longer anyrelatives, one had only one’s arms. I worked. They have, in the countryof Pontarlier, whither you are going, Monsieur Valjean, a trulypatriarchal and truly charming industry, my sister. It is theircheese-dairies, which they call _fruitières_.’
“Then my brother, while urging the man to eat, explained to him, withgreat minuteness, what these _fruitières_ of Pontarlier were; that theywere divided into two classes: the _big barns_ which belong to therich, and where there are forty or fifty cows which produce from sevento eight thousand cheeses each summer, and the _associated fruitières_,which belong to the poor; these are the peasants of mid-mountain, whohold their cows in common, and share the proceeds. ‘They engage theservices of a cheese-maker, whom they call the _grurin_; the _grurin_receives the milk of the associates three times a day, and marks thequantity on a double tally. It is towards the end of April that thework of the cheese-dairies begins; it is towards the middle of Junethat the cheese-makers drive their cows to the mountains.’
“The man recovered his animation as he ate. My brother made him drinkthat good Mauves wine, which he does not drink himself, because he saysthat wine is expensive. My brother imparted all these details with thateasy gayety of his with which you are acquainted, interspersing hiswords with graceful attentions to me. He recurred frequently to thatcomfortable trade of _grurin_, as though he wished the man tounderstand, without advising him directly and harshly, that this wouldafford him a refuge. One thing struck me. This man was what I have toldyou. Well, neither during supper, nor during the entire evening, did mybrother utter a single word, with the exception of a few words aboutJesus when he entered, which could remind the man of what he was, norof what my brother was. To all appearances, it was an occasion forpreaching him a little sermon, and of impressing the Bishop on theconvict, so that a mark of the passage might remain behind. This mighthave appeared to any one else who had this, unfortunate man in hishands to afford a chance to nourish his soul as well as his body, andto bestow upon him some reproach, seasoned with moralizing and advice,or a little commiseration, with an exhortation to conduct himselfbetter in the future. My brother did not even ask him from what countryhe came, nor what was his history. For in his history there is a fault,and my brother seemed to avoid everything which could remind him of it.To such a point did he carry it, that at one time, when my brother wasspeaking of the mountaineers of Pontarlier, _who exercise a gentlelabor near heaven, and who_, he added, _are happy because they areinnocent_, he stopped short, fearing lest in this remark there mighthave escaped him something which might wound the man. By dint ofreflection, I think I have comprehended what was passing in mybrother’s heart. He was thinking, no doubt, that this man, whose nameis Jean Valjean, had his misfortune only too vividly present in hismind; that the best thing was to divert him from it, and to make himbelieve, if only momentarily, that he was a person like any other, bytreating him just in his ordinary way. Is not this indeed, tounderstand charity well? Is there not, dear Madame, something trulyevangelical in this delicacy which abstains from sermon, frommoralizing, from allusions? and is not the truest pity, when a man hasa sore point, not to touch it at all? It has seemed to me that thismight have been my brother’s private thought. In any case, what I cansay is that, if he entertained all these ideas, he gave no sign ofthem; from beginning to end, even to me he was the same as he is everyevening, and he supped with this Jean Valjean with the same air and inthe same manner in which he would have supped with M. Gédéon lePrévost, or with the curate of the parish.
“Towards the end, when he had reached the figs, there came a knock atthe door. It was Mother Gerbaud, with her little one in her arms. Mybrother kissed the child on the brow, and borrowed fifteen sous which Ihad about me to give to Mother Gerbaud. The man was not paying muchheed to anything then. He was no longer talking, and he seemed verymuch fatigued. After poor old Gerbaud had taken her departure, mybrother said grace; then he turned to the man and said to him, ‘Youmust be in great need of your bed.’ Madame Magloire cleared the tablevery promptly. I understood that we must retire, in order to allow thistraveller to go to sleep, and we both went upstairs. Nevertheless, Isent Madame Magloire down a moment later, to carry to the man’s bed agoat skin from the Black Forest, which was in my room. The nights arefrigid, and that keeps one warm. It is a pity that this skin is old;all the hair is falling out. My brother bought it while he was inGermany, at Tottlingen, near the sources of the Danube, as well as thelittle ivory-handled knife which I use at table.
“Madame Magloire returned immediately. We said our prayers in thedrawing-room, where we hang up the linen, and then we each retired toour own chambers, without saying a word to each other.”




CHAPTER V—TRANQUILLITY

After bidding his sister good night, Monseigneur Bienvenu took one ofthe two silver candlesticks from the table, handed the other to hisguest, and said to him,—
“Monsieur, I will conduct you to your room.”

The man followed him.
As might have been observed from what has been said above, the housewas so arranged that in order to pass into the oratory where the alcovewas situated, or to get out of it, it was necessary to traverse theBishop’s bedroom.
At the moment when he was crossing this apartment, Madame Magloire wasputting away the silverware in the cupboard near the head of the bed.This was her last care every evening before she went to bed.
The Bishop installed his guest in the alcove. A fresh white bed hadbeen prepared there. The man set the candle down on a small table.
“Well,” said the Bishop, “may you pass a good night. To-morrow morning,before you set out, you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows.”

“Thanks, Monsieur l’ Abbé,” said the man.
Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace, when all of asudden, and without transition, he made a strange movement, which wouldhave frozen the two sainted women with horror, had they witnessed it.Even at this day it is difficult for us to explain what inspired him atthat moment. Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out amenace? Was he simply obeying a sort of instinctive impulse which wasobscure even to himself? He turned abruptly to the old man, folded hisarms, and bending upon his host a savage gaze, he exclaimed in a hoarsevoice:—
“Ah! really! You lodge me in your house, close to yourself like this?”

He broke off, and added with a laugh in which there lurked somethingmonstrous:—
“Have you really reflected well? How do you know that I have not beenan assassin?”

The Bishop replied:—
“That is the concern of the good God.”

Then gravely, and moving his lips like one who is praying or talking tohimself, he raised two fingers of his right hand and bestowed hisbenediction on the man, who did not bow, and without turning his heador looking behind him, he returned to his bedroom.
When the alcove was in use, a large serge curtain drawn from wall towall concealed the altar. The Bishop knelt before this curtain as hepassed and said a brief prayer. A moment later he was in his garden,walking, meditating, contemplating, his heart and soul wholly absorbedin those grand and mysterious things which God shows at night to theeyes which remain open.
As for the man, he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profitby the nice white sheets. Snuffing out his candle with his nostrilsafter the manner of convicts, he dropped, all dressed as he was, uponthe bed, where he immediately fell into a profound sleep.
Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to hisapartment.
A few minutes later all were asleep in the little house.



CHAPTER VI—JEAN VALJEAN

Towards the middle of the night Jean Valjean woke.
Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie. He had notlearned to read in his childhood. When he reached man’s estate, hebecame a tree-pruner at Faverolles. His mother was named JeanneMathieu; his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean, probably asobriquet, and a contraction of _voilà_ Jean, “here’s Jean.”

Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition whichconstitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures. On the whole,however, there was something decidedly sluggish and insignificant aboutJean Valjean in appearance, at least. He had lost his father and motherat a very early age. His mother had died of a milk fever, which had notbeen properly attended to. His father, a tree-pruner, like himself, hadbeen killed by a fall from a tree. All that remained to Jean Valjeanwas a sister older than himself,—a widow with seven children, boys andgirls. This sister had brought up Jean Valjean, and so long as she hada husband she lodged and fed her young brother.
The husband died. The eldest of the seven children was eight years old.The youngest, one.
Jean Valjean had just attained his twenty-fifth year. He took thefather’s place, and, in his turn, supported the sister who had broughthim up. This was done simply as a duty and even a little churlishly onthe part of Jean Valjean. Thus his youth had been spent in rude andill-paid toil. He had never known a “kind woman friend” in his nativeparts. He had not had the time to fall in love.
He returned at night weary, and ate his broth without uttering a word.His sister, mother Jeanne, often took the best part of his repast fromhis bowl while he was eating,—a bit of meat, a slice of bacon, theheart of the cabbage,—to give to one of her children. As he went oneating, with his head bent over the table and almost into his soup, hislong hair falling about his bowl and concealing his eyes, he had theair of perceiving nothing and allowing it. There was at Faverolles, notfar from the Valjean thatched cottage, on the other side of the lane, afarmer’s wife named Marie-Claude; the Valjean children, habituallyfamished, sometimes went to borrow from Marie-Claude a pint of milk, intheir mother’s name, which they drank behind a hedge or in some alleycorner, snatching the jug from each other so hastily that the littlegirls spilled it on their aprons and down their necks. If their motherhad known of this marauding, she would have punished the delinquentsseverely. Jean Valjean gruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude forthe pint of milk behind their mother’s back, and the children were notpunished.
In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day; then he hired out as ahay-maker, as laborer, as neat-herd on a farm, as a drudge. He didwhatever he could. His sister worked also but what could she do withseven little children? It was a sad group enveloped in misery, whichwas being gradually annihilated. A very hard winter came. Jean had nowork. The family had no bread. No bread literally. Seven children!
One Sunday evening, Maubert Isabeau, the baker on the Church Square atFaverolles, was preparing to go to bed, when he heard a violent blow onthe grated front of his shop. He arrived in time to see an arm passedthrough a hole made by a blow from a fist, through the grating and theglass. The arm seized a loaf of bread and carried it off. Isabeau ranout in haste; the robber fled at the full speed of his legs. Isabeauran after him and stopped him. The thief had flung away the loaf, buthis arm was still bleeding. It was Jean Valjean.
This took place in 1795. Jean Valjean was taken before the tribunals ofthe time for theft and breaking and entering an inhabited house atnight. He had a gun which he used better than any one else in theworld, he was a bit of a poacher, and this injured his case. Thereexists a legitimate prejudice against poachers. The poacher, like thesmuggler, smacks too strongly of the brigand. Nevertheless, we willremark cursorily, there is still an abyss between these races of menand the hideous assassin of the towns. The poacher lives in the forest,the smuggler lives in the mountains or on the sea. The cities makeferocious men because they make corrupt men. The mountain, the sea, theforest, make savage men; they develop the fierce side, but oftenwithout destroying the humane side.
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty. The terms of the Code wereexplicit. There occur formidable hours in our civilization; there aremoments when the penal laws decree a shipwreck. What an ominous minuteis that in which society draws back and consummates the irreparableabandonment of a sentient being! Jean Valjean was condemned to fiveyears in the galleys.
On the 22d of April, 1796, the victory of Montenotte, won by thegeneral-in-chief of the army of Italy, whom the message of theDirectory to the Five Hundred, of the 2d of Floréal, year IV., callsBuona-Parte, was announced in Paris; on that same day a great gang ofgalley-slaves was put in chains at Bicêtre. Jean Valjean formed a partof that gang. An old turnkey of the prison, who is now nearly eightyyears old, still recalls perfectly that unfortunate wretch who waschained to the end of the fourth line, in the north angle of thecourtyard. He was seated on the ground like the others. He did not seemto comprehend his position, except that it was horrible. It is probablethat he, also, was disentangling from amid the vague ideas of a poorman, ignorant of everything, something excessive. While the bolt of hisiron collar was being riveted behind his head with heavy blows from thehammer, he wept, his tears stifled him, they impeded his speech; heonly managed to say from time to time, “I was a tree-pruner atFaverolles.” Then still sobbing, he raised his right hand and loweredit gradually seven times, as though he were touching in successionseven heads of unequal heights, and from this gesture it was divinedthat the thing which he had done, whatever it was, he had done for thesake of clothing and nourishing seven little children.
He set out for Toulon. He arrived there, after a journey oftwenty-seven days, on a cart, with a chain on his neck. At Toulon hewas clothed in the red cassock. All that had constituted his life, evento his name, was effaced; he was no longer even Jean Valjean; he wasnumber 24,601. What became of his sister? What became of the sevenchildren? Who troubled himself about that? What becomes of the handfulof leaves from the young tree which is sawed off at the root?
It is always the same story. These poor living beings, these creaturesof God, henceforth without support, without guide, without refuge,wandered away at random,—who even knows?—each in his own directionperhaps, and little by little buried themselves in that cold mist whichengulfs solitary destinies; gloomy shades, into which disappear insuccession so many unlucky heads, in the sombre march of the humanrace. They quitted the country. The clock-tower of what had been theirvillage forgot them; the boundary line of what had been their fieldforgot them; after a few years’ residence in the galleys, Jean Valjeanhimself forgot them. In that heart, where there had been a wound, therewas a scar. That is all. Only once, during all the time which he spentat Toulon, did he hear his sister mentioned. This happened, I think,towards the end of the fourth year of his captivity. I know not throughwhat channels the news reached him. Some one who had known them intheir own country had seen his sister. She was in Paris. She lived in apoor street near Saint-Sulpice, in the Rue du Gindre. She had with heronly one child, a little boy, the youngest. Where were the other six?Perhaps she did not know herself. Every morning she went to a printingoffice, No. 3 Rue du Sabot, where she was a folder and stitcher. Shewas obliged to be there at six o’clock in the morning—long beforedaylight in winter. In the same building with the printing office therewas a school, and to this school she took her little boy, who was sevenyears old. But as she entered the printing office at six, and theschool only opened at seven, the child had to wait in the courtyard,for the school to open, for an hour—one hour of a winter night in theopen air! They would not allow the child to come into the printingoffice, because he was in the way, they said. When the workmen passedin the morning, they beheld this poor little being seated on thepavement, overcome with drowsiness, and often fast asleep in theshadow, crouched down and doubled up over his basket. When it rained,an old woman, the portress, took pity on him; she took him into herden, where there was a pallet, a spinning-wheel, and two wooden chairs,and the little one slumbered in a corner, pressing himself close to thecat that he might suffer less from cold. At seven o’clock the schoolopened, and he entered. That is what was told to Jean Valjean.
They talked to him about it for one day; it was a moment, a flash, asthough a window had suddenly been opened upon the destiny of thosethings whom he had loved; then all closed again. He heard nothing moreforever. Nothing from them ever reached him again; he never beheldthem; he never met them again; and in the continuation of this mournfulhistory they will not be met with any more.
Towards the end of this fourth year Jean Valjean’s turn to escapearrived. His comrades assisted him, as is the custom in that sad place.He escaped. He wandered for two days in the fields at liberty, if beingat liberty is to be hunted, to turn the head every instant, to quake atthe slightest noise, to be afraid of everything,—of a smoking roof, ofa passing man, of a barking dog, of a galloping horse, of a strikingclock, of the day because one can see, of the night because one cannotsee, of the highway, of the path, of a bush, of sleep. On the eveningof the second day he was captured. He had neither eaten nor slept forthirty-six hours. The maritime tribunal condemned him, for this crime,to a prolongation of his term for three years, which made eight years.In the sixth year his turn to escape occurred again; he availed himselfof it, but could not accomplish his flight fully. He was missing atroll-call. The cannon were fired, and at night the patrol found himhidden under the keel of a vessel in process of construction; heresisted the galley guards who seized him. Escape and rebellion. Thiscase, provided for by a special code, was punished by an addition offive years, two of them in the double chain. Thirteen years. In thetenth year his turn came round again; he again profited by it; hesucceeded no better. Three years for this fresh attempt. Sixteen years.Finally, I think it was during his thirteenth year, he made a lastattempt, and only succeeded in getting retaken at the end of four hoursof absence. Three years for those four hours. Nineteen years. InOctober, 1815, he was released; he had entered there in 1796, forhaving broken a pane of glass and taken a loaf of bread.
Room for a brief parenthesis. This is the second time, during hisstudies on the penal question and damnation by law, that the author ofthis book has come across the theft of a loaf of bread as the point ofdeparture for the disaster of a destiny. Claude Gaux had stolen a loaf;Jean Valjean had stolen a loaf. English statistics prove the fact thatfour thefts out of five in London have hunger for their immediatecause.
Jean Valjean had entered the galleys sobbing and shuddering; he emergedimpassive. He had entered in despair; he emerged gloomy.
What had taken place in that soul?



CHAPTER VII—THE INTERIOR OF DESPAIR

Let us try to say it.
It is necessary that society should look at these things, because it isitself which creates them.
He was, as we have said, an ignorant man, but he was not a fool. Thelight of nature was ignited in him. Unhappiness, which also possesses aclearness of vision of its own, augmented the small amount of daylightwhich existed in this mind. Beneath the cudgel, beneath the chain, inthe cell, in hardship, beneath the burning sun of the galleys, upon theplank bed of the convict, he withdrew into his own consciousness andmeditated.
He constituted himself the tribunal.
He began by putting himself on trial.
He recognized the fact that he was not an innocent man unjustlypunished. He admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthyact; that that loaf of bread would probably not have been refused tohim had he asked for it; that, in any case, it would have been betterto wait until he could get it through compassion or through work; thatit is not an unanswerable argument to say, “Can one wait when one ishungry?” That, in the first place, it is very rare for any one to dieof hunger, literally; and next, that, fortunately or unfortunately, manis so constituted that he can suffer long and much, both morally andphysically, without dying; that it is therefore necessary to havepatience; that that would even have been better for those poor littlechildren; that it had been an act of madness for him, a miserable,unfortunate wretch, to take society at large violently by the collar,and to imagine that one can escape from misery through theft; that thatis in any case a poor door through which to escape from misery throughwhich infamy enters; in short, that he was in the wrong.
Then he asked himself:—
Whether he had been the only one in fault in his fatal history. Whetherit was not a serious thing, that he, a laborer, out of work, that he,an industrious man, should have lacked bread. And whether, the faultonce committed and confessed, the chastisement had not been ferociousand disproportioned. Whether there had not been more abuse on the partof the law, in respect to the penalty, than there had been on the partof the culprit in respect to his fault. Whether there had not been anexcess of weights in one balance of the scale, in the one whichcontains expiation. Whether the over-weight of the penalty was notequivalent to the annihilation of the crime, and did not result inreversing the situation, of replacing the fault of the delinquent bythe fault of the repression, of converting the guilty man into thevictim, and the debtor into the creditor, and of ranging the lawdefinitely on the side of the man who had violated it.
Whether this penalty, complicated by successive aggravations forattempts at escape, had not ended in becoming a sort of outrageperpetrated by the stronger upon the feebler, a crime of societyagainst the individual, a crime which was being committed afresh everyday, a crime which had lasted nineteen years.
He asked himself whether human society could have the right to forceits members to suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lackof foresight, and in the other case for its pitiless foresight; and toseize a poor man forever between a defect and an excess, a default ofwork and an excess of punishment.
Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely thoseof its members who were the least well endowed in the division of goodsmade by chance, and consequently the most deserving of consideration.
These questions put and answered, he judged society and condemned it.
He condemned it to his hatred.
He made it responsible for the fate which he was suffering, and he saidto himself that it might be that one day he should not hesitate to callit to account. He declared to himself that there was no equilibriumbetween the harm which he had caused and the harm which was being doneto him; he finally arrived at the conclusion that his punishment wasnot, in truth, unjust, but that it most assuredly was iniquitous.
Anger may be both foolish and absurd; one can be irritated wrongfully;one is exasperated only when there is some show of right on one’s sideat bottom. Jean Valjean felt himself exasperated.
And besides, human society had done him nothing but harm; he had neverseen anything of it save that angry face which it calls Justice, andwhich it shows to those whom it strikes. Men had only touched him tobruise him. Every contact with them had been a blow. Never, since hisinfancy, since the days of his mother, of his sister, had he everencountered a friendly word and a kindly glance. From suffering tosuffering, he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is awar; and that in this war he was the conquered. He had no other weaponthan his hate. He resolved to whet it in the galleys and to bear itaway with him when he departed.
There was at Toulon a school for the convicts, kept by the Ignorantinfriars, where the most necessary branches were taught to those of theunfortunate men who had a mind for them. He was of the number who had amind. He went to school at the age of forty, and learned to read, towrite, to cipher. He felt that to fortify his intelligence was tofortify his hate. In certain cases, education and enlightenment canserve to eke out evil.
This is a sad thing to say; after having judged society, which hadcaused his unhappiness, he judged Providence, which had made society,and he condemned it also.
Thus during nineteen years of torture and slavery, this soul mountedand at the same time fell. Light entered it on one side, and darknesson the other.
Jean Valjean had not, as we have seen, an evil nature. He was stillgood when he arrived at the galleys. He there condemned society, andfelt that he was becoming wicked; he there condemned Providence, andwas conscious that he was becoming impious.
It is difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point.
Does human nature thus change utterly and from top to bottom? Can theman created good by God be rendered wicked by man? Can the soul becompletely made over by fate, and become evil, fate being evil? Can theheart become misshapen and contract incurable deformities andinfirmities under the oppression of a disproportionate unhappiness, asthe vertebral column beneath too low a vault? Is there not in everyhuman soul, was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in particular, afirst spark, a divine element, incorruptible in this world, immortal inthe other, which good can develop, fan, ignite, and make to glow withsplendor, and which evil can never wholly extinguish?
Grave and obscure questions, to the last of which every physiologistwould probably have responded no, and that without hesitation, had hebeheld at Toulon, during the hours of repose, which were for JeanValjean hours of reverie, this gloomy galley-slave, seated with foldedarms upon the bar of some capstan, with the end of his chain thrustinto his pocket to prevent its dragging, serious, silent, andthoughtful, a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath,condemned by civilization, and regarding heaven with severity.
Certainly,—and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact,—theobserving physiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery; hewould, perchance, have pitied this sick man, of the law’s making; buthe would not have even essayed any treatment; he would have turnedaside his gaze from the caverns of which he would have caught a glimpsewithin this soul, and, like Dante at the portals of hell, he would haveeffaced from this existence the word which the finger of God has,nevertheless, inscribed upon the brow of every man,—hope.
Was this state of his soul, which we have attempted to analyze, asperfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for thosewho read us? Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive, after theirformation, and had he seen distinctly during the process of theirformation, all the elements of which his moral misery was composed? Hadthis rough and unlettered man gathered a perfectly clear perception ofthe succession of ideas through which he had, by degrees, mounted anddescended to the lugubrious aspects which had, for so many years,formed the inner horizon of his spirit? Was he conscious of all thatpassed within him, and of all that was working there? That is somethingwhich we do not presume to state; it is something which we do not evenbelieve. There was too much ignorance in Jean Valjean, even after hismisfortune, to prevent much vagueness from still lingering there. Attimes he did not rightly know himself what he felt. Jean Valjean was inthe shadows; he suffered in the shadows; he hated in the shadows; onemight have said that he hated in advance of himself. He dwelthabitually in this shadow, feeling his way like a blind man and adreamer. Only, at intervals, there suddenly came to him, from withoutand from within, an access of wrath, a surcharge of suffering, a lividand rapid flash which illuminated his whole soul, and caused to appearabruptly all around him, in front, behind, amid the gleams of afrightful light, the hideous precipices and the sombre perspective ofhis destiny.
The flash passed, the night closed in again; and where was he? He nolonger knew. The peculiarity of pains of this nature, in which thatwhich is pitiless—that is to say, that which isbrutalizing—predominates, is to transform a man, little by little, by asort of stupid transfiguration, into a wild beast; sometimes into aferocious beast.
Jean Valjean’s successive and obstinate attempts at escape would alonesuffice to prove this strange working of the law upon the human soul.Jean Valjean would have renewed these attempts, utterly useless andfoolish as they were, as often as the opportunity had presented itself,without reflecting for an instant on the result, nor on the experienceswhich he had already gone through. He escaped impetuously, like thewolf who finds his cage open. Instinct said to him, “Flee!” Reasonwould have said, “Remain!” But in the presence of so violent atemptation, reason vanished; nothing remained but instinct. The beastalone acted. When he was recaptured, the fresh severities inflicted onhim only served to render him still more wild.
One detail, which we must not omit, is that he possessed a physicalstrength which was not approached by a single one of the denizens ofthe galleys. At work, at paying out a cable or winding up a capstan,Jean Valjean was worth four men. He sometimes lifted and sustainedenormous weights on his back; and when the occasion demanded it, hereplaced that implement which is called a jack-screw, and was formerlycalled _orgueil_ [pride], whence, we may remark in passing, is derivedthe name of the Rue Montorgueil, near the Halles [Fishmarket] in Paris.His comrades had nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw. Once, when theywere repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon, one of thoseadmirable caryatids of Puget, which support the balcony, becameloosened, and was on the point of falling. Jean Valjean, who waspresent, supported the caryatid with his shoulder, and gave the workmentime to arrive.
His suppleness even exceeded his strength. Certain convicts who wereforever dreaming of escape, ended by making a veritable science offorce and skill combined. It is the science of muscles. An entiresystem of mysterious statics is daily practised by prisoners, men whoare forever envious of the flies and birds. To climb a verticalsurface, and to find points of support where hardly a projection wasvisible, was play to Jean Valjean. An angle of the wall being given,with the tension of his back and legs, with his elbows and his heelsfitted into the unevenness of the stone, he raised himself as if bymagic to the third story. He sometimes mounted thus even to the roof ofthe galley prison.
He spoke but little. He laughed not at all. An excessive emotion wasrequired to wring from him, once or twice a year, that lugubrious laughof the convict, which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon. To allappearance, he seemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation ofsomething terrible.
He was absorbed, in fact.
Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushedintelligence, he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing wasresting on him. In that obscure and wan shadow within which he crawled,each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance, heperceived with terror, mingled with rage, a sort of frightfulaccumulation of things, collecting and mounting above him, beyond therange of his vision,—laws, prejudices, men, and deeds,—whose outlinesescaped him, whose mass terrified him, and which was nothing else thanthat prodigious pyramid which we call civilization. He distinguished,here and there in that swarming and formless mass, now near him, nowafar off and on inaccessible table-lands, some group, some detail,vividly illuminated; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel; there thegendarme and his sword; yonder the mitred archbishop; away at the top,like a sort of sun, the Emperor, crowned and dazzling. It seemed to himthat these distant splendors, far from dissipating his night, renderedit more funereal and more black. All this—laws, prejudices, deeds, men,things—went and came above him, over his head, in accordance with thecomplicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization,walking over him and crushing him with I know not what peacefulness inits cruelty and inexorability in its indifference. Souls which havefallen to the bottom of all possible misfortune, unhappy men lost inthe lowest of those limbos at which no one any longer looks, thereproved of the law, feel the whole weight of this human society, soformidable for him who is without, so frightful for him who is beneath,resting upon their heads.
In this situation Jean Valjean meditated; and what could be the natureof his meditation?
If the grain of millet beneath the millstone had thoughts, it would,doubtless, think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought.
All these things, realities full of spectres, phantasmagories full ofrealities, had eventually created for him a sort of interior statewhich is almost indescribable.
At times, amid his convict toil, he paused. He fell to thinking. Hisreason, at one and the same time riper and more troubled than of yore,rose in revolt. Everything which had happened to him seemed to himabsurd; everything that surrounded him seemed to him impossible. Hesaid to himself, “It is a dream.” He gazed at the galley-sergeantstanding a few paces from him; the galley-sergeant seemed a phantom tohim. All of a sudden the phantom dealt him a blow with his cudgel.
Visible nature hardly existed for him. It would almost be true to saythat there existed for Jean Valjean neither sun, nor fine summer days,nor radiant sky, nor fresh April dawns. I know not what vent-holedaylight habitually illumined his soul.
To sum up, in conclusion, that which can be summed up and translatedinto positive results in all that we have just pointed out, we willconfine ourselves to the statement that, in the course of nineteenyears, Jean Valjean, the inoffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles, theformidable convict of Toulon, had become capable, thanks to the mannerin which the galleys had moulded him, of two sorts of evil action:firstly, of evil action which was rapid, unpremeditated, dashing,entirely instinctive, in the nature of reprisals for the evil which hehad undergone; secondly, of evil action which was serious, grave,consciously argued out and premeditated, with the false ideas whichsuch a misfortune can furnish. His deliberate deeds passed throughthree successive phases, which natures of a certain stamp can alonetraverse,—reasoning, will, perseverance. He had for moving causes hishabitual wrath, bitterness of soul, a profound sense of indignitiessuffered, the reaction even against the good, the innocent, and thejust, if there are any such. The point of departure, like the point ofarrival, for all his thoughts, was hatred of human law; that hatredwhich, if it be not arrested in its development by some providentialincident, becomes, within a given time, the hatred of society, then thehatred of the human race, then the hatred of creation, and whichmanifests itself by a vague, incessant, and brutal desire to do harm tosome living being, no matter whom. It will be perceived that it was notwithout reason that Jean Valjean’s passport described him as _a verydangerous man_.
From year to year this soul had dried away slowly, but with fatalsureness. When the heart is dry, the eye is dry. On his departure fromthe galleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear.



CHAPTER VIII—BILLOWS AND SHADOWS

A man overboard!
What matters it? The vessel does not halt. The wind blows. That sombreship has a path which it is forced to pursue. It passes on.
The man disappears, then reappears; he plunges, he rises again to thesurface; he calls, he stretches out his arms; he is not heard. Thevessel, trembling under the hurricane, is wholly absorbed in its ownworkings; the passengers and sailors do not even see the drowning man;his miserable head is but a speck amid the immensity of the waves. Hegives vent to desperate cries from out of the depths. What a spectre isthat retreating sail! He gazes and gazes at it frantically. Itretreats, it grows dim, it diminishes in size. He was there but justnow, he was one of the crew, he went and came along the deck with therest, he had his part of breath and of sunlight, he was a living man.Now, what has taken place? He has slipped, he has fallen; all is at anend.
He is in the tremendous sea. Under foot he has nothing but what fleesand crumbles. The billows, torn and lashed by the wind, encompass himhideously; the tossings of the abyss bear him away; all the tongues ofwater dash over his head; a populace of waves spits upon him; confusedopenings half devour him; every time that he sinks, he catches glimpsesof precipices filled with night; frightful and unknown vegetationsseize him, knot about his feet, draw him to them; he is conscious thathe is becoming an abyss, that he forms part of the foam; the waves tosshim from one to another; he drinks in the bitterness; the cowardlyocean attacks him furiously, to drown him; the enormity plays with hisagony. It seems as though all that water were hate.
Nevertheless, he struggles.
He tries to defend himself; he tries to sustain himself; he makes aneffort; he swims. He, his petty strength all exhausted instantly,combats the inexhaustible.
Where, then, is the ship? Yonder. Barely visible in the pale shadows ofthe horizon.
The wind blows in gusts; all the foam overwhelms him. He raises hiseyes and beholds only the lividness of the clouds. He witnesses, amidhis death-pangs, the immense madness of the sea. He is tortured by thismadness; he hears noises strange to man, which seem to come from beyondthe limits of the earth, and from one knows not what frightful regionbeyond.
There are birds in the clouds, just as there are angels above humandistresses; but what can they do for him? They sing and fly and float,and he, he rattles in the death agony.
He feels himself buried in those two infinities, the ocean and the sky,at one and the same time: the one is a tomb; the other is a shroud.
Night descends; he has been swimming for hours; his strength isexhausted; that ship, that distant thing in which there were men, hasvanished; he is alone in the formidable twilight gulf; he sinks, hestiffens himself, he twists himself; he feels under him the monstrousbillows of the invisible; he shouts.
There are no more men. Where is God?
He shouts. Help! Help! He still shouts on.
Nothing on the horizon; nothing in heaven.
He implores the expanse, the waves, the seaweed, the reef; they aredeaf. He beseeches the tempest; the imperturbable tempest obeys onlythe infinite.
Around him darkness, fog, solitude, the stormy and nonsentient tumult,the undefined curling of those wild waters. In him horror and fatigue.Beneath him the depths. Not a point of support. He thinks of the gloomyadventures of the corpse in the limitless shadow. The bottomless coldparalyzes him. His hands contract convulsively; they close, and graspnothingness. Winds, clouds, whirlwinds, gusts, useless stars! What isto be done? The desperate man gives up; he is weary, he chooses thealternative of death; he resists not; he lets himself go; he abandonshis grip; and then he tosses forevermore in the lugubrious drearydepths of engulfment.
Oh, implacable march of human societies! Oh, losses of men and of soulson the way! Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip!Disastrous absence of help! Oh, moral death!
The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws flingtheir condemned. The sea is the immensity of wretchedness.
The soul, going downstream in this gulf, may become a corpse. Who shallresuscitate it?



CHAPTER IX—NEW TROUBLES

When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys, whenJean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words, _Thou art free!_ themoment seemed improbable and unprecedented; a ray of vivid light, a rayof the true light of the living, suddenly penetrated within him. But itwas not long before this ray paled. Jean Valjean had been dazzled bythe idea of liberty. He had believed in a new life. He very speedilyperceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport isprovided.
And this was encompassed with much bitterness. He had calculated thathis earnings, during his sojourn in the galleys, ought to amount to ahundred and seventy-one francs. It is but just to add that he hadforgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundaysand festival days during nineteen years, which entailed a diminution ofabout eighty francs. At all events, his hoard had been reduced byvarious local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs fifteensous, which had been counted out to him on his departure. He hadunderstood nothing of this, and had thought himself wronged. Let us saythe word—robbed.
On the day following his liberation, he saw, at Grasse, in front of anorange-flower distillery, some men engaged in unloading bales. Heoffered his services. Business was pressing; they were accepted. He setto work. He was intelligent, robust, adroit; he did his best; themaster seemed pleased. While he was at work, a gendarme passed,observed him, and demanded his papers. It was necessary to show him theyellow passport. That done, Jean Valjean resumed his labor. A littlewhile before he had questioned one of the workmen as to the amountwhich they earned each day at this occupation; he had been told _thirtysous_. When evening arrived, as he was forced to set out again on thefollowing day, he presented himself to the owner of the distillery andrequested to be paid. The owner did not utter a word, but handed himfifteen sous. He objected. He was told, _“That is enough for thee.”_ Hepersisted. The master looked him straight between the eyes, and said tohim _“Beware of the prison.”_
There, again, he considered that he had been robbed.
Society, the State, by diminishing his hoard, had robbed him wholesale.Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail.
Liberation is not deliverance. One gets free from the galleys, but notfrom the sentence.
That is what happened to him at Grasse. We have seen in what manner hewas received at D——



CHAPTER X—THE MAN AROUSED

As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning, Jean Valjean awoke.
What woke him was that his bed was too good. It was nearly twenty yearssince he had slept in a bed, and, although he had not undressed, thesensation was too novel not to disturb his slumbers.
He had slept more than four hours. His fatigue had passed away. He wasaccustomed not to devote many hours to repose.
He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him; thenhe closed them again, with the intention of going to sleep once more.
When many varied sensations have agitated the day, when various matterspreoccupy the mind, one falls asleep once, but not a second time. Sleepcomes more easily than it returns. This is what happened to JeanValjean. He could not get to sleep again, and he fell to thinking.
He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one’smind are troubled. There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain. Hismemories of the olden time and of the immediate present floated therepell-mell and mingled confusedly, losing their proper forms, becomingdisproportionately large, then suddenly disappearing, as in a muddy andperturbed pool. Many thoughts occurred to him; but there was one whichkept constantly presenting itself afresh, and which drove away allothers. We will mention this thought at once: he had observed the sixsets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle which Madame Magloire hadplaced on the table.
Those six sets of silver haunted him.—They were there.—A few pacesdistant.—Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the onein which he then was, the old servant-woman had been in the act ofplacing them in a little cupboard near the head of the bed.—He hadtaken careful note of this cupboard.—On the right, as you entered fromthe dining-room.—They were solid.—And old silver.—From the ladle onecould get at least two hundred francs.—Double what he had earned innineteen years.—It is true that he would have earned more if “the_administration_ had not _robbed him_.”

His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there wascertainly mingled some struggle. Three o’clock struck. He opened hiseyes again, drew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture, stretchedout his arm and felt of his knapsack, which he had thrown down on acorner of the alcove; then he hung his legs over the edge of the bed,and placed his feet on the floor, and thus found himself, almostwithout knowing it, seated on his bed.
He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude, which would havebeen suggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen him thusin the dark, the only person awake in that house where all weresleeping. All of a sudden he stooped down, removed his shoes and placedthem softly on the mat beside the bed; then he resumed his thoughtfulattitude, and became motionless once more.
Throughout this hideous meditation, the thoughts which we have aboveindicated moved incessantly through his brain; entered, withdrew,re-entered, and in a manner oppressed him; and then he thought, also,without knowing why, and with the mechanical persistence of reverie, ofa convict named Brevet, whom he had known in the galleys, and whosetrousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted cotton. Thecheckered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his mind.
He remained in this situation, and would have so remained indefinitely,even until daybreak, had not the clock struck one—the half or quarterhour. It seemed to him that that stroke said to him, “Come on!”

He rose to his feet, hesitated still another moment, and listened; allwas quiet in the house; then he walked straight ahead, with shortsteps, to the window, of which he caught a glimpse. The night was notvery dark; there was a full moon, across which coursed large cloudsdriven by the wind. This created, outdoors, alternate shadow and gleamsof light, eclipses, then bright openings of the clouds; and indoors asort of twilight. This twilight, sufficient to enable a person to seehis way, intermittent on account of the clouds, resembled the sort oflivid light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar, before whichthe passers-by come and go. On arriving at the window, Jean Valjeanexamined it. It had no grating; it opened in the garden and wasfastened, according to the fashion of the country, only by a small pin.He opened it; but as a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated theroom abruptly, he closed it again immediately. He scrutinized thegarden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than looks. Thegarden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall, easy to climb. Faraway, at the extremity, he perceived tops of trees, spaced at regularintervals, which indicated that the wall separated the garden from anavenue or lane planted with trees.
Having taken this survey, he executed a movement like that of a man whohas made up his mind, strode to his alcove, grasped his knapsack,opened it, fumbled in it, pulled out of it something which he placed onthe bed, put his shoes into one of his pockets, shut the whole thing upagain, threw the knapsack on his shoulders, put on his cap, drew thevisor down over his eyes, felt for his cudgel, went and placed it inthe angle of the window; then returned to the bed, and resolutelyseized the object which he had deposited there. It resembled a shortbar of iron, pointed like a pike at one end. It would have beendifficult to distinguish in that darkness for what employment that bitof iron could have been designed. Perhaps it was a lever; possibly itwas a club.
In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothingmore than a miner’s candlestick. Convicts were, at that period,sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills whichenviron Toulon, and it was not rare for them to have miners’ tools attheir command. These miners’ candlesticks are of massive iron,terminated at the lower extremity by a point, by means of which theyare stuck into the rock.
He took the candlestick in his right hand; holding his breath andtrying to deaden the sound of his tread, he directed his steps to thedoor of the adjoining room, occupied by the Bishop, as we already know.
On arriving at this door, he found it ajar. The Bishop had not closedit.



CHAPTER XI—WHAT HE DOES

Jean Valjean listened. Not a sound.
He gave the door a push.
He pushed it gently with the tip of his finger, lightly, with thefurtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering.
The door yielded to this pressure, and made an imperceptible and silentmovement, which enlarged the opening a little.
He waited a moment; then gave the door a second and a bolder push.
It continued to yield in silence. The opening was now large enough toallow him to pass. But near the door there stood a little table, whichformed an embarrassing angle with it, and barred the entrance.
Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty. It was necessary, at any cost,to enlarge the aperture still further.
He decided on his course of action, and gave the door a third push,more energetic than the two preceding. This time a badly oiled hingesuddenly emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry.
Jean Valjean shuddered. The noise of the hinge rang in his ears withsomething of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump of the Dayof Judgment.
In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imaginedthat that hinge had just become animated, and had suddenly assumed aterrible life, and that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one,and warn and to wake those who were asleep. He halted, shuddering,bewildered, and fell back from the tips of his toes upon his heels. Heheard the arteries in his temples beating like two forge hammers, andit seemed to him that his breath issued from his breast with the roarof the wind issuing from a cavern. It seemed impossible to him that thehorrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not have disturbed theentire household, like the shock of an earthquake; the door, pushed byhim, had taken the alarm, and had shouted; the old man would rise atonce; the two old women would shriek out; people would come to theirassistance; in less than a quarter of an hour the town would be in anuproar, and the gendarmerie on hand. For a moment he thought himselflost.
He remained where he was, petrified like the statue of salt, not daringto make a movement. Several minutes elapsed. The door had fallen wideopen. He ventured to peep into the next room. Nothing had stirredthere. He lent an ear. Nothing was moving in the house. The noise madeby the rusty hinge had not awakened any one.
This first danger was past; but there still reigned a frightful tumultwithin him. Nevertheless, he did not retreat. Even when he had thoughthimself lost, he had not drawn back. His only thought now was to finishas soon as possible. He took a step and entered the room.
This room was in a state of perfect calm. Here and there vague andconfused forms were distinguishable, which in the daylight were papersscattered on a table, open folios, volumes piled upon a stool, anarmchair heaped with clothing, a prie-Dieu, and which at that hour wereonly shadowy corners and whitish spots. Jean Valjean advanced withprecaution, taking care not to knock against the furniture. He couldhear, at the extremity of the room, the even and tranquil breathing ofthe sleeping Bishop.
He suddenly came to a halt. He was near the bed. He had arrived theresooner than he had thought for.
Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with ouractions with sombre and intelligent appropriateness, as though shedesired to make us reflect. For the last half-hour a large cloud hadcovered the heavens. At the moment when Jean Valjean paused in front ofthe bed, this cloud parted, as though on purpose, and a ray of light,traversing the long window, suddenly illuminated the Bishop’s paleface. He was sleeping peacefully. He lay in his bed almost completelydressed, on account of the cold of the Basses-Alps, in a garment ofbrown wool, which covered his arms to the wrists. His head was thrownback on the pillow, in the careless attitude of repose; his hand,adorned with the pastoral ring, and whence had fallen so many gooddeeds and so many holy actions, was hanging over the edge of the bed.His whole face was illumined with a vague expression of satisfaction,of hope, and of felicity. It was more than a smile, and almost aradiance. He bore upon his brow the indescribable reflection of a lightwhich was invisible. The soul of the just contemplates in sleep amysterious heaven.
A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop.
It was, at the same time, a luminous transparency, for that heaven waswithin him. That heaven was his conscience.

  Enlarge
1b2-10-the-fallTH (58K)

At the moment when the ray of moonlight superposed itself, so to speak,upon that inward radiance, the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory. Itremained, however, gentle and veiled in an ineffable half-light. Thatmoon in the sky, that slumbering nature, that garden without a quiver,that house which was so calm, the hour, the moment, the silence, addedsome solemn and unspeakable quality to the venerable repose of thisman, and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole that whitehair, those closed eyes, that face in which all was hope and all wasconfidence, that head of an old man, and that slumber of an infant.
There was something almost divine in this man, who was thus august,without being himself aware of it.
Jean Valjean was in the shadow, and stood motionless, with his ironcandlestick in his hand, frightened by this luminous old man. Never hadhe beheld anything like this. This confidence terrified him. The moralworld has no grander spectacle than this: a troubled and uneasyconscience, which has arrived on the brink of an evil action,contemplating the slumber of the just.
That slumber in that isolation, and with a neighbor like himself, hadabout it something sublime, of which he was vaguely but imperiouslyconscious.
No one could have told what was passing within him, not even himself.In order to attempt to form an idea of it, it is necessary to think ofthe most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle. Even onhis visage it would have been impossible to distinguish anything withcertainty. It was a sort of haggard astonishment. He gazed at it, andthat was all. But what was his thought? It would have been impossibleto divine it. What was evident was, that he was touched and astounded.But what was the nature of this emotion?
His eye never quitted the old man. The only thing which was clearly tobe inferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strangeindecision. One would have said that he was hesitating between the twoabysses,—the one in which one loses one’s self and that in which onesaves one’s self. He seemed prepared to crush that skull or to kissthat hand.
At the expiration of a few minutes his left arm rose slowly towards hisbrow, and he took off his cap; then his arm fell back with the samedeliberation, and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more, his cap inhis left hand, his club in his right hand, his hair bristling all overhis savage head.
The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that terrifyinggaze.
The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix over thechimney-piece, which seemed to be extending its arms to both of them,with a benediction for one and pardon for the other.
Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow; then steppedrapidly past the bed, without glancing at the Bishop, straight to thecupboard, which he saw near the head; he raised his iron candlestick asthough to force the lock; the key was there; he opened it; the firstthing which presented itself to him was the basket of silverware; heseized it, traversed the chamber with long strides, without taking anyprecautions and without troubling himself about the noise, gained thedoor, re-entered the oratory, opened the window, seized his cudgel,bestrode the window-sill of the ground floor, put the silver into hisknapsack, threw away the basket, crossed the garden, leaped over thewall like a tiger, and fled.



CHAPTER XII—THE BISHOP WORKS

The next morning at sunrise Monseigneur Bienvenu was strolling in hisgarden. Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation.
“Monseigneur, Monseigneur!” she exclaimed, “does your Grace know wherethe basket of silver is?”

“Yes,” replied the Bishop.
“Jesus the Lord be blessed!” she resumed; “I did not know what hadbecome of it.”

The Bishop had just picked up the basket in a flower-bed. He presentedit to Madame Magloire.
“Here it is.”

“Well!” said she. “Nothing in it! And the silver?”

“Ah,” returned the Bishop, “so it is the silver which troubles you? Idon’t know where it is.”

“Great, good God! It is stolen! That man who was here last night hasstolen it.”

In a twinkling, with all the vivacity of an alert old woman, MadameMagloire had rushed to the oratory, entered the alcove, and returned tothe Bishop. The Bishop had just bent down, and was sighing as heexamined a plant of cochlearia des Guillons, which the basket hadbroken as it fell across the bed. He rose up at Madame Magloire’s cry.
“Monseigneur, the man is gone! The silver has been stolen!”

As she uttered this exclamation, her eyes fell upon a corner of thegarden, where traces of the wall having been scaled were visible. Thecoping of the wall had been torn away.
“Stay! yonder is the way he went. He jumped over into Cochefilet Lane.Ah, the abomination! He has stolen our silver!”

The Bishop remained silent for a moment; then he raised his grave eyes,and said gently to Madame Magloire:—
“And, in the first place, was that silver ours?”

Madame Magloire was speechless. Another silence ensued; then the Bishopwent on:—
“Madame Magloire, I have for a long time detained that silverwrongfully. It belonged to the poor. Who was that man? A poor man,evidently.”

“Alas! Jesus!” returned Madame Magloire. “It is not for my sake, norfor Mademoiselle’s. It makes no difference to us. But it is for thesake of Monseigneur. What is Monseigneur to eat with now?”

The Bishop gazed at her with an air of amazement.
“Ah, come! Are there no such things as pewter forks and spoons?”

Madame Magloire shrugged her shoulders.
“Pewter has an odor.”

“Iron forks and spoons, then.”

Madame Magloire made an expressive grimace.
“Iron has a taste.”

“Very well,” said the Bishop; “wooden ones then.”

A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which JeanValjean had sat on the previous evening. As he ate his breakfast,Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister, who said nothing, andto Madame Magloire, who was grumbling under her breath, that one reallydoes not need either fork or spoon, even of wood, in order to dip a bitof bread in a cup of milk.
“A pretty idea, truly,” said Madame Magloire to herself, as she wentand came, “to take in a man like that! and to lodge him close to one’sself! And how fortunate that he did nothing but steal! Ah, mon Dieu! itmakes one shudder to think of it!”

As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table, there camea knock at the door.
“Come in,” said the Bishop.
The door opened. A singular and violent group made its appearance onthe threshold. Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar. Thethree men were gendarmes; the other was Jean Valjean.
A brigadier of gendarmes, who seemed to be in command of the group, wasstanding near the door. He entered and advanced to the Bishop, making amilitary salute.
“Monseigneur—” said he.
At this word, Jean Valjean, who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed,raised his head with an air of stupefaction.
“Monseigneur!” he murmured. “So he is not the curé?”

“Silence!” said the gendarme. “He is Monseigneur the Bishop.”

In the meantime, Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly as hisgreat age permitted.
“Ah! here you are!” he exclaimed, looking at Jean Valjean. “I am gladto see you. Well, but how is this? I gave you the candlesticks too,which are of silver like the rest, and for which you can certainly gettwo hundred francs. Why did you not carry them away with your forks andspoons?”

Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide, and stared at the venerable Bishopwith an expression which no human tongue can render any account of.
“Monseigneur,” said the brigadier of gendarmes, “so what this man saidis true, then? We came across him. He was walking like a man who isrunning away. We stopped him to look into the matter. He had thissilver—”

“And he told you,” interposed the Bishop with a smile, “that it hadbeen given to him by a kind old fellow of a priest with whom he hadpassed the night? I see how the matter stands. And you have brought himback here? It is a mistake.”

“In that case,” replied the brigadier, “we can let him go?”

“Certainly,” replied the Bishop.
The gendarmes released Jean Valjean, who recoiled.
“Is it true that I am to be released?” he said, in an almostinarticulate voice, and as though he were talking in his sleep.
“Yes, thou art released; dost thou not understand?” said one of thegendarmes.
“My friend,” resumed the Bishop, “before you go, here are yourcandlesticks. Take them.”

He stepped to the chimney-piece, took the two silver candlesticks, andbrought them to Jean Valjean. The two women looked on without utteringa word, without a gesture, without a look which could disconcert theBishop.
Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb. He took the two candlesticksmechanically, and with a bewildered air.
“Now,” said the Bishop, “go in peace. By the way, when you return, myfriend, it is not necessary to pass through the garden. You can alwaysenter and depart through the street door. It is never fastened withanything but a latch, either by day or by night.”

Then, turning to the gendarmes:—
“You may retire, gentlemen.”

The gendarmes retired.
Jean Valjean was like a man on the point of fainting.
The Bishop drew near to him, and said in a low voice:—
“Do not forget, never forget, that you have promised to use this moneyin becoming an honest man.”

Jean Valjean, who had no recollection of ever having promised anything,remained speechless. The Bishop had emphasized the words when heuttered them. He resumed with solemnity:—
“Jean Valjean, my brother, you no longer belong to evil, but to good.It is your soul that I buy from you; I withdraw it from black thoughtsand the spirit of perdition, and I give it to God.”




CHAPTER XIII—LITTLE GERVAIS

Jean Valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it. He setout at a very hasty pace through the fields, taking whatever roads andpaths presented themselves to him, without perceiving that he wasincessantly retracing his steps. He wandered thus the whole morning,without having eaten anything and without feeling hungry. He was theprey of a throng of novel sensations. He was conscious of a sort ofrage; he did not know against whom it was directed. He could not havetold whether he was touched or humiliated. There came over him atmoments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed thehardness acquired during the last twenty years of his life. This stateof mind fatigued him. He perceived with dismay that the sort offrightful calm which the injustice of his misfortune had conferred uponhim was giving way within him. He asked himself what would replacethis. At times he would have actually preferred to be in prison withthe gendarmes, and that things should not have happened in this way; itwould have agitated him less. Although the season was tolerably faradvanced, there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows hereand there, whose odor as he passed through them in his march recalledto him memories of his childhood. These memories were almostintolerable to him, it was so long since they had recurred to him.
Unutterable thoughts assembled within him in this manner all day long.
As the sun declined to its setting, casting long shadows athwart thesoil from every pebble, Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon alarge ruddy plain, which was absolutely deserted. There was nothing onthe horizon except the Alps. Not even the spire of a distant village.Jean Valjean might have been three leagues distant from D—— A pathwhich intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush.
In the middle of this meditation, which would have contributed not alittle to render his rags terrifying to any one who might haveencountered him, a joyous sound became audible.
He turned his head and saw a little Savoyard, about ten years of age,coming up the path and singing, his hurdy-gurdy on his hip, and hismarmot-box on his back.
One of those gay and gentle children, who go from land to landaffording a view of their knees through the holes in their trousers.
Without stopping his song, the lad halted in his march from time totime, and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in hishand—his whole fortune, probably.
Among this money there was one forty-sou piece.
The child halted beside the bush, without perceiving Jean Valjean, andtossed up his handful of sous, which, up to that time, he had caughtwith a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand.
This time the forty-sou piece escaped him, and went rolling towards thebrushwood until it reached Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean set his foot upon it.
In the meantime, the child had looked after his coin and had caughtsight of him.
He showed no astonishment, but walked straight up to the man.
The spot was absolutely solitary. As far as the eye could see there wasnot a person on the plain or on the path. The only sound was the tiny,feeble cries of a flock of birds of passage, which was traversing theheavens at an immense height. The child was standing with his back tothe sun, which cast threads of gold in his hair and empurpled with itsblood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean.
“Sir,” said the little Savoyard, with that childish confidence which iscomposed of ignorance and innocence, “my money.”

“What is your name?” said Jean Valjean.
“Little Gervais, sir.”

“Go away,” said Jean Valjean.
“Sir,” resumed the child, “give me back my money.”

Jean Valjean dropped his head, and made no reply.
The child began again, “My money, sir.”

Jean Valjean’s eyes remained fixed on the earth.
“My piece of money!” cried the child, “my white piece! my silver!”

It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him. The child graspedhim by the collar of his blouse and shook him. At the same time he madean effort to displace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on histreasure.
“I want my piece of money! my piece of forty sous!”

The child wept. Jean Valjean raised his head. He still remained seated.His eyes were troubled. He gazed at the child, in a sort of amazement,then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in aterrible voice, “Who’s there?”

“I, sir,” replied the child. “Little Gervais! I! Give me back my fortysous, if you please! Take your foot away, sir, if you please!”

Then irritated, though he was so small, and becoming almost menacing:—
“Come now, will you take your foot away? Take your foot away, or we’llsee!”

“Ah! It’s still you!” said Jean Valjean, and rising abruptly to hisfeet, his foot still resting on the silver piece, he added:—
“Will you take yourself off!”

The frightened child looked at him, then began to tremble from head tofoot, and after a few moments of stupor he set out, running at the topof his speed, without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry.
Nevertheless, lack of breath forced him to halt after a certaindistance, and Jean Valjean heard him sobbing, in the midst of his ownreverie.
At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared.
The sun had set.
The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean. He had eaten nothingall day; it is probable that he was feverish.
He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after thechild’s flight. The breath heaved his chest at long and irregularintervals. His gaze, fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him, seemedto be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancientfragment of blue earthenware which had fallen in the grass. All at oncehe shivered; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening.
He settled his cap more firmly on his brow, sought mechanically tocross and button his blouse, advanced a step and stopped to pick up hiscudgel.
At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece, which his foothad half ground into the earth, and which was shining among thepebbles. It was as though he had received a galvanic shock. “What isthis?” he muttered between his teeth. He recoiled three paces, thenhalted, without being able to detach his gaze from the spot which hisfoot had trodden but an instant before, as though the thing which layglittering there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted upon him.
At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards thesilver coin, seized it, and straightened himself up again and began togaze afar off over the plain, at the same time casting his eyes towardsall points of the horizon, as he stood there erect and shivering, likea terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge.
He saw nothing. Night was falling, the plain was cold and vague, greatbanks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight.
He said, “Ah!” and set out rapidly in the direction in which the childhad disappeared. After about thirty paces he paused, looked about himand saw nothing.
Then he shouted with all his might:—
“Little Gervais! Little Gervais!”

He paused and waited.
There was no reply.
The landscape was gloomy and deserted. He was encompassed by space.There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze waslost, and a silence which engulfed his voice.
An icy north wind was blowing, and imparted to things around him a sortof lugubrious life. The bushes shook their thin little arms withincredible fury. One would have said that they were threatening andpursuing some one.
He set out on his march again, then he began to run; and from time totime he halted and shouted into that solitude, with a voice which wasthe most formidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible tohear, “Little Gervais! Little Gervais!”

Assuredly, if the child had heard him, he would have been alarmed andwould have taken good care not to show himself. But the child was nodoubt already far away.
He encountered a priest on horseback. He stepped up to him and said:—
“Monsieur le Curé, have you seen a child pass?”

“No,” said the priest.
“One named Little Gervais?”

“I have seen no one.”

He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to thepriest.
“Monsieur le Curé, this is for your poor people. Monsieur le Curé, hewas a little lad, about ten years old, with a marmot, I think, and ahurdy-gurdy. One of those Savoyards, you know?”

“I have not seen him.”

“Little Gervais? There are no villages here? Can you tell me?”

“If he is like what you say, my friend, he is a little stranger. Suchpersons pass through these parts. We know nothing of them.”

Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence,and gave them to the priest.
“For your poor,” he said.
Then he added, wildly:—
“Monsieur l’Abbé, have me arrested. I am a thief.”

The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste, much alarmed.
Jean Valjean set out on a run, in the direction which he had firsttaken.
In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance, gazing, calling,shouting, but he met no one. Two or three times he ran across the plaintowards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human beingreclining or crouching down; it turned out to be nothing but brushwoodor rocks nearly on a level with the earth. At length, at a spot wherethree paths intersected each other, he stopped. The moon had risen. Hesent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time, “LittleGervais! Little Gervais! Little Gervais!” His shout died away in themist, without even awakening an echo. He murmured yet once more,“Little Gervais!” but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice. It washis last effort; his legs gave way abruptly under him, as though aninvisible power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of hisevil conscience; he fell exhausted, on a large stone, his fistsclenched in his hair and his face on his knees, and he cried, “I am awretch!”

Then his heart burst, and he began to cry. It was the first time thathe had wept in nineteen years.
When Jean Valjean left the Bishop’s house, he was, as we have seen,quite thrown out of everything that had been his thought hitherto. Hecould not yield to the evidence of what was going on within him. Hehardened himself against the angelic action and the gentle words of theold man. “You have promised me to become an honest man. I buy yoursoul. I take it away from the spirit of perversity; I give it to thegood God.”

This recurred to his mind unceasingly. To this celestial kindness heopposed pride, which is the fortress of evil within us. He wasindistinctly conscious that the pardon of this priest was the greatestassault and the most formidable attack which had moved him yet; thathis obduracy was finally settled if he resisted this clemency; that ifhe yielded, he should be obliged to renounce that hatred with which theactions of other men had filled his soul through so many years, andwhich pleased him; that this time it was necessary to conquer or to beconquered; and that a struggle, a colossal and final struggle, had beenbegun between his viciousness and the goodness of that man.
In the presence of these lights, he proceeded like a man who isintoxicated. As he walked thus with haggard eyes, did he have adistinct perception of what might result to him from his adventure atD——? Did he understand all those mysterious murmurs which warn orimportune the spirit at certain moments of life? Did a voice whisper inhis ear that he had just passed the solemn hour of his destiny; thatthere no longer remained a middle course for him; that if he were nothenceforth the best of men, he would be the worst; that it behooved himnow, so to speak, to mount higher than the Bishop, or fall lower thanthe convict; that if he wished to become good he must become an angel;that if he wished to remain evil, he must become a monster?
Here, again, some questions must be put, which we have already put toourselves elsewhere: did he catch some shadow of all this in histhought, in a confused way? Misfortune certainly, as we have said, doesform the education of the intelligence; nevertheless, it is doubtfulwhether Jean Valjean was in a condition to disentangle all that we havehere indicated. If these ideas occurred to him, he but caught glimpsesof, rather than saw them, and they only succeeded in throwing him intoan unutterable and almost painful state of emotion. On emerging fromthat black and deformed thing which is called the galleys, the Bishophad hurt his soul, as too vivid a light would have hurt his eyes onemerging from the dark. The future life, the possible life whichoffered itself to him henceforth, all pure and radiant, filled him withtremors and anxiety. He no longer knew where he really was. Like anowl, who should suddenly see the sun rise, the convict had been dazzledand blinded, as it were, by virtue.
That which was certain, that which he did not doubt, was that he was nolonger the same man, that everything about him was changed, that it wasno longer in his power to make it as though the Bishop had not spokento him and had not touched him.
In this state of mind he had encountered little Gervais, and had robbedhim of his forty sous. Why? He certainly could not have explained it;was this the last effect and the supreme effort, as it were, of theevil thoughts which he had brought away from the galleys,—a remnant ofimpulse, a result of what is called in statics, _acquired force?_ Itwas that, and it was also, perhaps, even less than that. Let us say itsimply, it was not he who stole; it was not the man; it was the beast,who, by habit and instinct, had simply placed his foot upon that money,while the intelligence was struggling amid so many novel and hithertounheard-of thoughts besetting it.
When intelligence reawakened and beheld that action of the brute, JeanValjean recoiled with anguish and uttered a cry of terror.

  Enlarge
Awakened  1b2-11-awakened

It was because,—strange phenomenon, and one which was possible only inthe situation in which he found himself,—in stealing the money fromthat child, he had done a thing of which he was no longer capable.
However that may be, this last evil action had a decisive effect onhim; it abruptly traversed that chaos which he bore in his mind, anddispersed it, placed on one side the thick obscurity, and on the otherthe light, and acted on his soul, in the state in which it then was, ascertain chemical reagents act upon a troubled mixture by precipitatingone element and clarifying the other.
First of all, even before examining himself and reflecting, allbewildered, like one who seeks to save himself, he tried to find thechild in order to return his money to him; then, when he recognized thefact that this was impossible, he halted in despair. At the moment whenhe exclaimed “I am a wretch!” he had just perceived what he was, and hewas already separated from himself to such a degree, that he seemed tohimself to be no longer anything more than a phantom, and as if he had,there before him, in flesh and blood, the hideous galley-convict, JeanValjean, cudgel in hand, his blouse on his hips, his knapsack filledwith stolen objects on his back, with his resolute and gloomy visage,with his thoughts filled with abominable projects.
Excess of unhappiness had, as we have remarked, made him in some sort avisionary. This, then, was in the nature of a vision. He actually sawthat Jean Valjean, that sinister face, before him. He had almostreached the point of asking himself who that man was, and he washorrified by him.
His brain was going through one of those violent and yet perfectly calmmoments in which reverie is so profound that it absorbs reality. One nolonger beholds the object which one has before one, and one sees, asthough apart from one’s self, the figures which one has in one’s ownmind.
Thus he contemplated himself, so to speak, face to face, and at thesame time, athwart this hallucination, he perceived in a mysteriousdepth a sort of light which he at first took for a torch. Onscrutinizing this light which appeared to his conscience with moreattention, he recognized the fact that it possessed a human form andthat this torch was the Bishop.
His conscience weighed in turn these two men thus placed before it,—theBishop and Jean Valjean. Nothing less than the first was required tosoften the second. By one of those singular effects, which are peculiarto this sort of ecstasies, in proportion as his reverie continued, asthe Bishop grew great and resplendent in his eyes, so did Jean Valjeangrow less and vanish. After a certain time he was no longer anythingmore than a shade. All at once he disappeared. The Bishop aloneremained; he filled the whole soul of this wretched man with amagnificent radiance.
Jean Valjean wept for a long time. He wept burning tears, he sobbedwith more weakness than a woman, with more fright than a child.
As he wept, daylight penetrated more and more clearly into his soul; anextraordinary light; a light at once ravishing and terrible. His pastlife, his first fault, his long expiation, his external brutishness,his internal hardness, his dismissal to liberty, rejoicing in manifoldplans of vengeance, what had happened to him at the Bishop’s, the lastthing that he had done, that theft of forty sous from a child, a crimeall the more cowardly, and all the more monstrous since it had comeafter the Bishop’s pardon,—all this recurred to his mind and appearedclearly to him, but with a clearness which he had never hithertowitnessed. He examined his life, and it seemed horrible to him; hissoul, and it seemed frightful to him. In the meantime a gentle lightrested over this life and this soul. It seemed to him that he beheldSatan by the light of Paradise.
How many hours did he weep thus? What did he do after he had wept?Whither did he go! No one ever knew. The only thing which seems to beauthenticated is that that same night the carrier who served Grenobleat that epoch, and who arrived at D—— about three o’clock in themorning, saw, as he traversed the street in which the Bishop’sresidence was situated, a man in the attitude of prayer, kneeling onthe pavement in the shadow, in front of the door of MonseigneurWelcome.



BOOK THIRD—IN THE YEAR 1817



CHAPTER I—THE YEAR 1817

1817 is the year which Louis XVIII., with a certain royal assurancewhich was not wanting in pride, entitled the twenty-second of hisreign. It is the year in which M. Bruguière de Sorsum was celebrated.All the hairdressers’ shops, hoping for powder and the return of theroyal bird, were besmeared with azure and decked with fleurs-de-lys. Itwas the candid time at which Count Lynch sat every Sunday aschurch-warden in the church-warden’s pew of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, inhis costume of a peer of France, with his red ribbon and his long noseand the majesty of profile peculiar to a man who has performed abrilliant action. The brilliant action performed by M. Lynch was this:being mayor of Bordeaux, on the 12th of March, 1814, he had surrenderedthe city a little too promptly to M. the Duke d’Angoulême. Hence hispeerage. In 1817 fashion swallowed up little boys of from four to sixyears of age in vast caps of morocco leather with ear-tabs resemblingEsquimaux mitres. The French army was dressed in white, after the modeof the Austrian; the regiments were called legions; instead of numbersthey bore the names of departments; Napoleon was at St. Helena; andsince England refused him green cloth, he was having his old coatsturned. In 1817 Pelligrini sang; Mademoiselle Bigottini danced; Potierreigned; Odry did not yet exist. Madame Saqui had succeeded to Forioso.There were still Prussians in France. M. Delalot was a personage.Legitimacy had just asserted itself by cutting off the hand, then thehead, of Pleignier, of Carbonneau, and of Tolleron. The Prince deTalleyrand, grand chamberlain, and the Abbé Louis, appointed ministerof finance, laughed as they looked at each other, with the laugh of thetwo augurs; both of them had celebrated, on the 14th of July, 1790, themass of federation in the Champ de Mars; Talleyrand had said it asbishop, Louis had served it in the capacity of deacon. In 1817, in theside-alleys of this same Champ de Mars, two great cylinders of woodmight have been seen lying in the rain, rotting amid the grass, paintedblue, with traces of eagles and bees, from which the gilding wasfalling. These were the columns which two years before had upheld theEmperor’s platform in the Champ de Mai. They were blackened here andthere with the scorches of the bivouac of Austrians encamped nearGros-Caillou. Two or three of these columns had disappeared in thesebivouac fires, and had warmed the large hands of the Imperial troops.The Field of May had this remarkable point: that it had been held inthe month of June and in the Field of March (Mars). In this year, 1817,two things were popular: the Voltaire-Touquet and the snuff-box _à laCharter_. The most recent Parisian sensation was the crime of Dautun,who had thrown his brother’s head into the fountain of theFlower-Market.
They had begun to feel anxious at the Naval Department, on account ofthe lack of news from that fatal frigate, _The Medusa_, which wasdestined to cover Chaumareix with infamy and Géricault with glory.Colonel Selves was going to Egypt to become Soliman-Pasha. The palaceof Thermes, in the Rue de La Harpe, served as a shop for a cooper. Onthe platform of the octagonal tower of the Hotel de Cluny, the littleshed of boards, which had served as an observatory to Messier, thenaval astronomer under Louis XVI., was still to be seen. The Duchessede Duras read to three or four friends her unpublished _Ourika_, in herboudoir furnished by X. in sky-blue satin. The N’s were scratched offthe Louvre. The bridge of Austerlitz had abdicated, and was entitledthe bridge of the King’s Garden [du Jardin du Roi], a double enigma,which disguised the bridge of Austerlitz and the Jardin des Plantes atone stroke. Louis XVIII., much preoccupied while annotating Horace withthe corner of his finger-nail, heroes who have become emperors, andmakers of wooden shoes who have become dauphins, had twoanxieties,—Napoleon and Mathurin Bruneau. The French Academy had givenfor its prize subject, _The Happiness procured through Study_. M.Bellart was officially eloquent. In his shadow could be seengerminating that future advocate-general of Broë, dedicated to thesarcasms of Paul-Louis Courier. There was a false Chateaubriand, namedMarchangy, in the interim, until there should be a false Marchangy,named d’Arlincourt. _Claire d’Albe_ and _Malek-Adel_ were masterpieces;Madame Cottin was proclaimed the chief writer of the epoch. TheInstitute had the academician, Napoleon Bonaparte, stricken from itslist of members. A royal ordinance erected Angoulême into a navalschool; for the Duc d’Angoulême, being lord high admiral, it wasevident that the city of Angoulême had all the qualities of a seaport;otherwise the monarchical principle would have received a wound. In theCouncil of Ministers the question was agitated whether vignettesrepresenting slack-rope performances, which adorned Franconi’sadvertising posters, and which attracted throngs of street urchins,should be tolerated. M. Paër, the author of _Agnese_, a good sort offellow, with a square face and a wart on his cheek, directed the littleprivate concerts of the Marquise de Sasenaye in the Rue Ville l‘Évêque.All the young girls were singing the _Hermit of Saint-Avelle_, withwords by Edmond Géraud. _The Yellow Dwarf_ was transferred into_Mirror_. The Café Lemblin stood up for the Emperor, against the CaféValois, which upheld the Bourbons. The Duc de Berri, already surveyedfrom the shadow by Louvel, had just been married to a princess ofSicily. Madame de Staël had died a year previously. The body-guardhissed Mademoiselle Mars. The grand newspapers were all very small.Their form was restricted, but their liberty was great. The_Constitutionnel_ was constitutional. _La Minerve_ called Chateaubriand_Chateaubriant_. That _t_ made the good middle-class people laughheartily at the expense of the great writer. In journals which soldthemselves, prostituted journalists, insulted the exiles of 1815. Davidhad no longer any talent, Arnault had no longer any wit, Carnot was nolonger honest, Soult had won no battles; it is true that Napoleon hadno longer any genius. No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sentto an exile by post very rarely reached him, as the police made ittheir religious duty to intercept them. This is no new fact; Descartescomplained of it in his exile. Now David, having, in a Belgianpublication, shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which hadbeen written to him, it struck the royalist journals as amusing; andthey derided the prescribed man well on this occasion. What separatedtwo men more than an abyss was to say, the _regicides_, or to say the_voters_; to say the _enemies_, or to say the _allies_; to say_Napoleon_, or to say _Buonaparte_. All sensible people were agreedthat the era of revolution had been closed forever by King LouisXVIII., surnamed “The Immortal Author of the Charter.” On the platformof the Pont-Neuf, the word _Redivivus_ was carved on the pedestal thatawaited the statue of Henry IV. M. Piet, in the Rue Thérèse, No. 4, wasmaking the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate themonarchy. The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures, “We mustwrite to Bacot.” MM. Canuel, O’Mahoney, and De Chappedelaine werepreparing the sketch, to some extent with Monsieur’s approval, of whatwas to become later on “The Conspiracy of the Bord de l‘Eau”—of thewaterside. L‘Épingle Noire was already plotting in his own quarter.Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff. M. Decazes, who was liberalto a degree, reigned. Chateaubriand stood every morning at his windowat No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique, clad in footed trousers, and slippers,with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair, with his eyes fixedon a mirror, a complete set of dentist’s instruments spread out beforehim, cleaning his teeth, which were charming, while he dictated _TheMonarchy according to the Charter_ to M. Pilorge, his secretary.Criticism, assuming an authoritative tone, preferred Lafon to Talma. M.de Féletez signed himself A.; M. Hoffmann signed himself Z. CharlesNodier wrote _Thérèse Aubert_. Divorce was abolished. Lyceums calledthemselves colleges. The collegians, decorated on the collar with agolden fleur-de-lys, fought each other _apropos_ of the King of Rome.The counter-police of the château had denounced to her Royal HighnessMadame, the portrait, everywhere exhibited, of M. the Duc d’Orléans,who made a better appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general ofhussars than M. the Duc de Berri, in his uniform of colonel-general ofdragoons—a serious inconvenience. The city of Paris was having the domeof the Invalides regilded at its own expense. Serious men askedthemselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or such anoccasion; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M.Clausel de Coussergues; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied. The comedianPicard, who belonged to the Academy, which the comedian Molière had notbeen able to do, had _The Two Philiberts_ played at the Odéon, uponwhose pediment the removal of the letters still allowed THEATRE OF THEEMPRESS to be plainly read. People took part for or against Cugnet deMontarlot. Fabvier was factious; Bavoux was revolutionary. The Liberal,Pélicier, published an edition of Voltaire, with the following title:_Works of Voltaire_, of the French Academy. “That will attractpurchasers,” said the ingenious editor. The general opinion was that M.Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century; envy was beginningto gnaw at him—a sign of glory; and this verse was composed on him:—
“Even when Loyson steals, one feels that he has paws.”

As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign, M. de Pins, Archbishop of Amasie,administered the diocese of Lyons. The quarrel over the valley ofDappes was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir fromCaptain, afterwards General Dufour. Saint-Simon, ignored, was erectinghis sublime dream. There was a celebrated Fourier at the Academy ofScience, whom posterity has forgotten; and in some garret an obscureFourier, whom the future will recall. Lord Byron was beginning to makehis mark; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to France inthese terms: _a certain Lord Baron_. David d’Angers was trying to workin marble. The Abbé Caron was speaking, in terms of praise, to aprivate gathering of seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines,of an unknown priest, named Félicité-Robert, who, at a latter date,became Lamennais. A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine withthe noise of a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of theTuileries, from the Pont Royal to the Pont Louis XV.; it was a piece ofmechanism which was not good for much; a sort of plaything, the idledream of a dream-ridden inventor; an utopia—a steamboat. The Parisiansstared indifferently at this useless thing. M. de Vaublanc, thereformer of the Institute by a coup d‘état, the distinguished author ofnumerous academicians, ordinances, and batches of members, after havingcreated them, could not succeed in becoming one himself. The FaubourgSaint-Germain and the pavilion de Marsan wished to have M. Delaveau forprefect of police, on account of his piety. Dupuytren and Récamierentered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre of the School of Medicine,and threatened each other with their fists on the subject of thedivinity of Jesus Christ. Cuvier, with one eye on Genesis and the otheron nature, tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils withtexts and by making mastodons flatter Moses.
M. François de Neufchâteau, the praiseworthy cultivator of the memoryof Parmentier, made a thousand efforts to have _pomme de terre_[potato] pronounced _parmentière_, and succeeded therein not at all.The Abbé Grégoire, ex-bishop, ex-conventionary, ex-senator, had passed,in the royalist polemics, to the state of “Infamous Grégoire.” Thelocution of which we have made use—_passed to the state of_—has beencondemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard. Under the third arch ofthe Pont de Jéna, the new stone with which, the two years previously,the mining aperture made by Blücher to blow up the bridge had beenstopped up, was still recognizable on account of its whiteness. Justicesummoned to its bar a man who, on seeing the Comte d’Artois enter NotreDame, had said aloud: _“Sapristi! I regret the time when I sawBonaparte and Talma enter the Bel Sauvage, arm in arm.”_ A seditiousutterance. Six months in prison. Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned;men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of battle made no secretof their recompense, and strutted immodestly in the light of day, inthe cynicism of riches and dignities; deserters from Ligny andQuatre-Bras, in the brazenness of their well-paid turpitude, exhibitedtheir devotion to the monarchy in the most barefaced manner.
This is what floats up confusedly, pell-mell, for the year 1817, and isnow forgotten. History neglects nearly all these particulars, andcannot do otherwise; the infinity would overwhelm it. Nevertheless,these details, which are wrongly called trivial,—there are no trivialfacts in humanity, nor little leaves in vegetation,—are useful. It isof the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuriesis composed. In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged “a finefarce.”




CHAPTER II—A DOUBLE QUARTETTE

These Parisians came, one from Toulouse, another from Limoges, thethird from Cahors, and the fourth from Montauban; but they werestudents; and when one says student, one says Parisian: to study inParis is to be born in Paris.
These young men were insignificant; every one has seen such faces; fourspecimens of humanity taken at random; neither good nor bad, neitherwise nor ignorant, neither geniuses nor fools; handsome, with thatcharming April which is called twenty years. They were four Oscars;for, at that epoch, Arthurs did not yet exist. _Burn for him theperfumes of Araby!_ exclaimed romance. _Oscar advances. Oscar, I shallbehold him!_ People had just emerged from Ossian; elegance wasScandinavian and Caledonian; the pure English style was only to prevaillater, and the first of the Arthurs, Wellington, had but just won thebattle of Waterloo.
These Oscars bore the names, one of Félix Tholomyès, of Toulouse; thesecond, Listolier, of Cahors; the next, Fameuil, of Limoges; the last,Blachevelle, of Montauban. Naturally, each of them had his mistress.Blachevelle loved Favourite, so named because she had been in England;Listolier adored Dahlia, who had taken for her nickname the name of aflower; Fameuil idolized Zéphine, an abridgment of Joséphine; Tholomyèshad Fantine, called the Blonde, because of her beautiful, sunny hair.
Favourite, Dahlia, Zéphine, and Fantine were four ravishing youngwomen, perfumed and radiant, still a little like working-women, and notyet entirely divorced from their needles; somewhat disturbed byintrigues, but still retaining on their faces something of the serenityof toil, and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives thefirst fall in woman. One of the four was called the young, because shewas the youngest of them, and one was called the old; the old one wastwenty-three. Not to conceal anything, the three first were moreexperienced, more heedless, and more emancipated into the tumult oflife than Fantine the Blonde, who was still in her first illusions.
Dahlia, Zéphine, and especially Favourite, could not have said as much.There had already been more than one episode in their romance, thoughhardly begun; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in thefirst chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second, and Gustavein the third. Poverty and coquetry are two fatal counsellors; onescolds and the other flatters, and the beautiful daughters of thepeople have both of them whispering in their ear, each on its own side.These badly guarded souls listen. Hence the falls which theyaccomplish, and the stones which are thrown at them. They areoverwhelmed with splendor of all that is immaculate and inaccessible.Alas! what if the Jungfrau were hungry?
Favourite having been in England, was admired by Dahlia and Zéphine.She had had an establishment of her own very early in life. Her fatherwas an old unmarried professor of mathematics, a brutal man and abraggart, who went out to give lessons in spite of his age. Thisprofessor, when he was a young man, had one day seen a chambermaid’sgown catch on a fender; he had fallen in love in consequence of thisaccident. The result had been Favourite. She met her father from timeto time, and he bowed to her. One morning an old woman with the air ofa devotee, had entered her apartments, and had said to her, “You do notknow me, Mamemoiselle?” “No.” “I am your mother.” Then the old womanopened the sideboard, and ate and drank, had a mattress which she ownedbrought in, and installed herself. This cross and pious old mothernever spoke to Favourite, remained hours without uttering a word,breakfasted, dined, and supped for four, and went down to the porter’squarters for company, where she spoke ill of her daughter.
It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn Dahlia toListolier, to others perhaps, to idleness. How could she make suchnails work? She who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on herhands. As for Zéphine, she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish andcaressing little way of saying “Yes, sir.”

The young men were comrades; the young girls were friends. Such lovesare always accompanied by such friendships.
Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things; the proof of this isthat, after making all due allowances for these little irregularhouseholds, Favourite, Zéphine, and Dahlia were philosophical youngwomen, while Fantine was a good girl.
Good! some one will exclaim; and Tholomyès? Solomon would reply thatlove forms a part of wisdom. We will confine ourselves to saying thatthe love of Fantine was a first love, a sole love, a faithful love.
She alone, of all the four, was not called “thou” by a single one ofthem.
Fantine was one of those beings who blossom, so to speak, from thedregs of the people. Though she had emerged from the most unfathomabledepths of social shadow, she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymousand the unknown. She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents? Who cansay? She had never known father or mother. She was called Fantine. WhyFantine? She had never borne any other name. At the epoch of her birththe Directory still existed. She had no family name; she had no family;no baptismal name; the Church no longer existed. She bore the namewhich pleased the first random passer-by, who had encountered her, whena very small child, running bare-legged in the street. She received thename as she received the water from the clouds upon her brow when itrained. She was called little Fantine. No one knew more than that. Thishuman creature had entered life in just this way. At the age of ten,Fantine quitted the town and went to service with some farmers in theneighborhood. At fifteen she came to Paris “to seek her fortune.”Fantine was beautiful, and remained pure as long as she could. She wasa lovely blonde, with fine teeth. She had gold and pearls for herdowry; but her gold was on her head, and her pearls were in her mouth.
She worked for her living; then, still for the sake of her living,—forthe heart, also, has its hunger,—she loved.
She loved Tholomyès.
An amour for him; passion for her. The streets of the Latin quarter,filled with throngs of students and grisettes, saw the beginning oftheir dream. Fantine had long evaded Tholomyès in the mazes of the hillof the Pantheon, where so many adventurers twine and untwine, but insuch a way as constantly to encounter him again. There is a way ofavoiding which resembles seeking. In short, the eclogue took place.
Blachevelle, Listolier, and Fameuil formed a sort of group of whichTholomyès was the head. It was he who possessed the wit.
Tholomyès was the antique old student; he was rich; he had an income offour thousand francs; four thousand francs! a splendid scandal on MountSainte-Geneviève. Tholomyès was a fast man of thirty, and badlypreserved. He was wrinkled and toothless, and he had the beginning of abald spot, of which he himself said with sadness, _the skull at thirty,the knee at forty_. His digestion was mediocre, and he had beenattacked by a watering in one eye. But in proportion as his youthdisappeared, gayety was kindled; he replaced his teeth withbuffooneries, his hair with mirth, his health with irony, his weepingeye laughed incessantly. He was dilapidated but still in flower. Hisyouth, which was packing up for departure long before its time, beat aretreat in good order, bursting with laughter, and no one saw anythingbut fire. He had had a piece rejected at the Vaudeville. He made a fewverses now and then. In addition to this he doubted everything to thelast degree, which is a vast force in the eyes of the weak. Being thusironical and bald, he was the leader. _Iron_ is an English word. Is itpossible that irony is derived from it?
One day Tholomyès took the three others aside, with the gesture of anoracle, and said to them:—
“Fantine, Dahlia, Zéphine, and Favourite have been teasing us fornearly a year to give them a surprise. We have promised them solemnlythat we would. They are forever talking about it to us, to me inparticular, just as the old women in Naples cry to Saint Januarius,‘_Faccia gialluta, fa o miracolo_, Yellow face, perform thy miracle,’so our beauties say to me incessantly, ‘Tholomyès, when will you bringforth your surprise?’ At the same time our parents keep writing to us.Pressure on both sides. The moment has arrived, it seems to me; let usdiscuss the question.”

Thereupon, Tholomyès lowered his voice and articulated something somirthful, that a vast and enthusiastic grin broke out upon the fourmouths simultaneously, and Blachevelle exclaimed, “That is an idea.”

A smoky tap-room presented itself; they entered, and the remainder oftheir confidential colloquy was lost in shadow.
The result of these shades was a dazzling pleasure party which tookplace on the following Sunday, the four young men inviting the fouryoung girls.



CHAPTER III—FOUR AND FOUR

It is hard nowadays to picture to one’s self what a pleasure-trip ofstudents and grisettes to the country was like, forty-five years ago.The suburbs of Paris are no longer the same; the physiognomy of whatmay be called circumparisian life has changed completely in the lasthalf-century; where there was the cuckoo, there is the railway car;where there was a tender-boat, there is now the steamboat; people speakof Fécamp nowadays as they spoke of Saint-Cloud in those days. TheParis of 1862 is a city which has France for its outskirts.
The four couples conscientiously went through with all the countryfollies possible at that time. The vacation was beginning, and it was awarm, bright, summer day. On the preceding day, Favourite, the only onewho knew how to write, had written the following to Tholomyès in thename of the four: “It is a good hour to emerge from happiness.” That iswhy they rose at five o’clock in the morning. Then they went toSaint-Cloud by the coach, looked at the dry cascade and exclaimed,“This must be very beautiful when there is water!” They breakfasted atthe _Tête-Noir_, where Castaing had not yet been; they treatedthemselves to a game of ring-throwing under the quincunx of trees ofthe grand fountain; they ascended Diogenes’ lantern, they gambled formacaroons at the roulette establishment of the Pont de Sèvres, pickedbouquets at Pateaux, bought reed-pipes at Neuilly, ate apple tartseverywhere, and were perfectly happy.
The young girls rustled and chatted like warblers escaped from theircage. It was a perfect delirium. From time to time they bestowed littletaps on the young men. Matutinal intoxication of life! adorable years!the wings of the dragonfly quiver. Oh, whoever you may be, do you notremember? Have you rambled through the brushwood, holding aside thebranches, on account of the charming head which is coming on behindyou? Have you slid, laughing, down a slope all wet with rain, with abeloved woman holding your hand, and crying, “Ah, my new boots! what astate they are in!”

Let us say at once that that merry obstacle, a shower, was lacking inthe case of this good-humored party, although Favourite had said asthey set out, with a magisterial and maternal tone, _“The slugs arecrawling in the paths,—a sign of rain, children.”_
All four were madly pretty. A good old classic poet, then famous, agood fellow who had an Éléonore, M. le Chevalier de Labouisse, as hestrolled that day beneath the chestnut-trees of Saint-Cloud, saw thempass about ten o’clock in the morning, and exclaimed, “There is one toomany of them,” as he thought of the Graces. Favourite, Blachevelle’sfriend, the one aged three and twenty, the old one, ran on in frontunder the great green boughs, jumped the ditches, stalked distractedlyover bushes, and presided over this merry-making with the spirit of ayoung female faun. Zéphine and Dahlia, whom chance had made beautifulin such a way that they set each off when they were together, andcompleted each other, never left each other, more from an instinct ofcoquetry than from friendship, and clinging to each other, they assumedEnglish poses; the first _keepsakes_ had just made their appearance,melancholy was dawning for women, as later on, Byronism dawned for men;and the hair of the tender sex began to droop dolefully. Zéphine andDahlia had their hair dressed in rolls. Listolier and Fameuil, who wereengaged in discussing their professors, explained to Fantine thedifference that existed between M. Delvincourt and M. Blondeau.
Blachevelle seemed to have been created expressly to carry Favourite’ssingle-bordered, imitation India shawl of Ternaux’s manufacture, on hisarm on Sundays.
Tholomyès followed, dominating the group. He was very gay, but one feltthe force of government in him; there was dictation in his joviality;his principal ornament was a pair of trousers of elephant-leg patternof nankeen, with straps of braided copper wire; he carried a stoutrattan worth two hundred francs in his hand, and, as he treated himselfto everything, a strange thing called a cigar in his mouth. Nothing wassacred to him; he smoked.
“That Tholomyès is astounding!” said the others, with veneration. “Whattrousers! What energy!”

As for Fantine, she was a joy to behold. Her splendid teeth hadevidently received an office from God,—laughter. She preferred to carryher little hat of sewed straw, with its long white strings, in her handrather than on her head. Her thick blond hair, which was inclined towave, and which easily uncoiled, and which it was necessary to fastenup incessantly, seemed made for the flight of Galatea under thewillows. Her rosy lips babbled enchantingly. The corners of her mouthvoluptuously turned up, as in the antique masks of Erigone, had an airof encouraging the audacious; but her long, shadowy lashes droopeddiscreetly over the jollity of the lower part of the face as though tocall a halt. There was something indescribably harmonious and strikingabout her entire dress. She wore a gown of mauve barège, little reddishbrown buskins, whose ribbons traced an X on her fine, white,open-worked stockings, and that sort of muslin spencer, a Marseillesinvention, whose name, _canezou_, a corruption of the words _quinzeaoût_, pronounced after the fashion of the Canebière, signifies fineweather, heat, and midday. The three others, less timid, as we havealready said, wore low-necked dresses without disguise, which insummer, beneath flower-adorned hats, are very graceful and enticing;but by the side of these audacious outfits, blond Fantine’s _canezou_,with its transparencies, its indiscretion, and its reticence,concealing and displaying at one and the same time, seemed an alluringgodsend of decency, and the famous Court of Love, presided over by theVicomtesse de Cette, with the sea-green eyes, would, perhaps, haveawarded the prize for coquetry to this _canezou_, in the contest forthe prize of modesty. The most ingenious is, at times, the wisest. Thisdoes happen.
Brilliant of face, delicate of profile, with eyes of a deep blue, heavylids, feet arched and small, wrists and ankles admirably formed, awhite skin which, here and there allowed the azure branching of theveins to be seen, joy, a cheek that was young and fresh, the robustthroat of the Juno of Ægina, a strong and supple nape of the neck,shoulders modelled as though by Coustou, with a voluptuous dimple inthe middle, visible through the muslin; a gayety cooled by dreaminess;sculptural and exquisite—such was Fantine; and beneath these feminineadornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue, and in thatstatue a soul.
Fantine was beautiful, without being too conscious of it. Those raredreamers, mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confronteverything with perfection, would have caught a glimpse in this littleworking-woman, through the transparency of her Parisian grace, of theancient sacred euphony. This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred.She was beautiful in the two ways—style and rhythm. Style is the formof the ideal; rhythm is its movement.
We have said that Fantine was joy; she was also modesty.
To an observer who studied her attentively, that which breathed fromher athwart all the intoxication of her age, the season, and her loveaffair, was an invincible expression of reserve and modesty. Sheremained a little astonished. This chaste astonishment is the shade ofdifference which separates Psyche from Venus. Fantine had the long,white, fine fingers of the vestal virgin who stirs the ashes of thesacred fire with a golden pin. Although she would have refused nothingto Tholomyès, as we shall have more than ample opportunity to see, herface in repose was supremely virginal; a sort of serious and almostaustere dignity suddenly overwhelmed her at certain times, and therewas nothing more singular and disturbing than to see gayety become sosuddenly extinct there, and meditation succeed to cheerfulness withoutany transition state. This sudden and sometimes severely accentuatedgravity resembled the disdain of a goddess. Her brow, her nose, herchin, presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite distinctfrom equilibrium of proportion, and from which harmony of countenanceresults; in the very characteristic interval which separates the baseof the nose from the upper lip, she had that imperceptible and charmingfold, a mysterious sign of chastity, which makes Barberousse fall inlove with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia.
Love is a fault; so be it. Fantine was innocence floating high overfault.



CHAPTER IV—THOLOMYÈS IS SO MERRY THAT HE SINGS A SPANISH DITTY

That day was composed of dawn, from one end to the other. All natureseemed to be having a holiday, and to be laughing. The flower-beds ofSaint-Cloud perfumed the air; the breath of the Seine rustled theleaves vaguely; the branches gesticulated in the wind, bees pillagedthe jasmines; a whole bohemia of butterflies swooped down upon theyarrow, the clover, and the sterile oats; in the august park of theKing of France there was a pack of vagabonds, the birds.
The four merry couples, mingled with the sun, the fields, the flowers,the trees, were resplendent.
And in this community of Paradise, talking, singing, running, dancing,chasing butterflies, plucking convolvulus, wetting their pink,open-work stockings in the tall grass, fresh, wild, without malice, allreceived, to some extent, the kisses of all, with the exception ofFantine, who was hedged about with that vague resistance of herscomposed of dreaminess and wildness, and who was in love. “You alwayshave a queer look about you,” said Favourite to her.
Such things are joys. These passages of happy couples are a profoundappeal to life and nature, and make a caress and light spring forthfrom everything. There was once a fairy who created the fields andforests expressly for those in love,—in that eternal hedge-school oflovers, which is forever beginning anew, and which will last as long asthere are hedges and scholars. Hence the popularity of spring amongthinkers. The patrician and the knife-grinder, the duke and the peer,the limb of the law, the courtiers and townspeople, as they used to sayin olden times, all are subjects of this fairy. They laugh and hunt,and there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis—what atransfiguration effected by love! Notaries’ clerks are gods. And thelittle cries, the pursuits through the grass, the waists embraced onthe fly, those jargons which are melodies, those adorations which burstforth in the manner of pronouncing a syllable, those cherries torn fromone mouth by another,—all this blazes forth and takes its place amongthe celestial glories. Beautiful women waste themselves sweetly. Theythink that this will never come to an end. Philosophers, poets,painters, observe these ecstasies and know not what to make of it, sogreatly are they dazzled by it. The departure for Cythera! exclaimsWatteau; Lancret, the painter of plebeians, contemplates his bourgeois,who have flitted away into the azure sky; Diderot stretches out hisarms to all these love idyls, and d’Urfé mingles druids with them.
After breakfast the four couples went to what was then called theKing’s Square to see a newly arrived plant from India, whose nameescapes our memory at this moment, and which, at that epoch, wasattracting all Paris to Saint-Cloud. It was an odd and charming shrubwith a long stem, whose numerous branches, bristling and leafless andas fine as threads, were covered with a million tiny white rosettes;this gave the shrub the air of a head of hair studded with flowers.There was always an admiring crowd about it.
After viewing the shrub, Tholomyès exclaimed, “I offer you asses!” andhaving agreed upon a price with the owner of the asses, they returnedby way of Vanvres and Issy. At Issy an incident occurred. The trulynational park, at that time owned by Bourguin the contractor, happenedto be wide open. They passed the gates, visited the manikin anchoritein his grotto, tried the mysterious little effects of the famouscabinet of mirrors, the wanton trap worthy of a satyr become amillionaire or of Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus. They hadstoutly shaken the swing attached to the two chestnut-trees celebratedby the Abbé de Bernis. As he swung these beauties, one after the other,producing folds in the fluttering skirts which Greuze would have foundto his taste, amid peals of laughter, the Toulousan Tholomyès, who wassomewhat of a Spaniard, Toulouse being the cousin of Tolosa, sang, to amelancholy chant, the old ballad _gallega_, probably inspired by somelovely maid dashing in full flight upon a rope between two trees:—
“Soy de Badajoz,        “Badajoz is my home,Amor me llama,          And Love is my name;Toda mi alma,             To my eyes in flame,Es en mi ojos,              All my soul doth come;Porque enseñas,         For instruction meetA tuas piernas.            I receive at thy feet”

Fantine alone refused to swing.
“I don’t like to have people put on airs like that,” mutteredFavourite, with a good deal of acrimony.
After leaving the asses there was a fresh delight; they crossed theSeine in a boat, and proceeding from Passy on foot they reached thebarrier of l‘Étoile. They had been up since five o’clock that morning,as the reader will remember; but _bah! there is no such thing asfatigue on Sunday_, said Favourite; _on Sunday fatigue does not work_.
About three o’clock the four couples, frightened at their happiness,were sliding down the Russian mountains, a singular edifice which thenoccupied the heights of Beaujon, and whose undulating line was visibleabove the trees of the Champs-Élysées.
From time to time Favourite exclaimed:—
“And the surprise? I claim the surprise.”

“Patience,” replied Tholomyès.



CHAPTER V—AT BOMBARDA’S

The Russian mountains having been exhausted, they began to think aboutdinner; and the radiant party of eight, somewhat weary at last, becamestranded in Bombarda’s public house, a branch establishment which hadbeen set up in the Champs-Élysées by that famous restaurant-keeper,Bombarda, whose sign could then be seen in the Rue de Rivoli, nearDelorme Alley.
A large but ugly room, with an alcove and a bed at the end (they hadbeen obliged to put up with this accommodation in view of the Sundaycrowd); two windows whence they could survey beyond the elms, the quayand the river; a magnificent August sunlight lightly touching thepanes; two tables; upon one of them a triumphant mountain of bouquets,mingled with the hats of men and women; at the other the four couplesseated round a merry confusion of platters, dishes, glasses, andbottles; jugs of beer mingled with flasks of wine; very little order onthe table, some disorder beneath it;
“They made beneath the tableA noise, a clatter of the feet that was abominable,”

says Molière.
This was the state which the shepherd idyl, begun at five o’clock inthe morning, had reached at half-past four in the afternoon. The sunwas setting; their appetites were satisfied.
The Champs-Élysées, filled with sunshine and with people, were nothingbut light and dust, the two things of which glory is composed. Thehorses of Marly, those neighing marbles, were prancing in a cloud ofgold. Carriages were going and coming. A squadron of magnificentbody-guards, with their clarions at their head, were descending theAvenue de Neuilly; the white flag, showing faintly rosy in the settingsun, floated over the dome of the Tuileries. The Place de la Concorde,which had become the Place Louis XV. once more, was choked with happypromenaders. Many wore the silver fleur-de-lys suspended from thewhite-watered ribbon, which had not yet wholly disappeared frombutton-holes in the year 1817. Here and there choruses of little girlsthrew to the winds, amid the passers-by, who formed into circles andapplauded, the then celebrated Bourbon air, which was destined tostrike the Hundred Days with lightning, and which had for its refrain:—
“Rendez-nous notre père de Gand,Rendez-nous notre père.”
“Give us back our father from Ghent,Give us back our father.”

Groups of dwellers in the suburbs, in Sunday array, sometimes evendecorated with the fleur-de-lys, like the bourgeois, scattered over thelarge square and the Marigny square, were playing at rings andrevolving on the wooden horses; others were engaged in drinking; somejourneyman printers had on paper caps; their laughter was audible.Everything was radiant. It was a time of undisputed peace and profoundroyalist security; it was the epoch when a special and private reportof Chief of Police Anglès to the King, on the subject of the suburbs ofParis, terminated with these lines:—
“Taking all things into consideration, Sire, there is nothing to befeared from these people. They are as heedless and as indolent as cats.The populace is restless in the provinces; it is not in Paris. Theseare very pretty men, Sire. It would take all of two of them to make oneof your grenadiers. There is nothing to be feared on the part of thepopulace of Paris the capital. It is remarkable that the stature ofthis population should have diminished in the last fifty years; and thepopulace of the suburbs is still more puny than at the time of theRevolution. It is not dangerous. In short, it is an amiable rabble.”

Prefects of the police do not deem it possible that a cat can transformitself into a lion; that does happen, however, and in that lies themiracle wrought by the populace of Paris. Moreover, the cat so despisedby Count Anglès possessed the esteem of the republics of old. In theireyes it was liberty incarnate; and as though to serve as pendant to theMinerva Aptera of the Piræus, there stood on the public square inCorinth the colossal bronze figure of a cat. The ingenuous police ofthe Restoration beheld the populace of Paris in too “rose-colored” alight; it is not so much of “an amiable rabble” as it is thought. TheParisian is to the Frenchman what the Athenian was to the Greek: no onesleeps more soundly than he, no one is more frankly frivolous and lazythan he, no one can better assume the air of forgetfulness; let him notbe trusted nevertheless; he is ready for any sort of cool deed; butwhen there is glory at the end of it, he is worthy of admiration inevery sort of fury. Give him a pike, he will produce the 10th ofAugust; give him a gun, you will have Austerlitz. He is Napoleon’s stayand Danton’s resource. Is it a question of country, he enlists; is it aquestion of liberty, he tears up the pavements. Beware! his hair filledwith wrath, is epic; his blouse drapes itself like the folds of achlamys. Take care! he will make of the first Rue Grenétat which comesto hand Caudine Forks. When the hour strikes, this man of the faubourgswill grow in stature; this little man will arise, and his gaze will beterrible, and his breath will become a tempest, and there will issueforth from that slender chest enough wind to disarrange the folds ofthe Alps. It is, thanks to the suburban man of Paris, that theRevolution, mixed with arms, conquers Europe. He sings; it is hisdelight. Proportion his song to his nature, and you will see! As longas he has for refrain nothing but _la Carmagnole_, he only overthrowsLouis XVI.; make him sing the _Marseillaise_, and he will free theworld.
This note jotted down on the margin of Anglès’ report, we will returnto our four couples. The dinner, as we have said, was drawing to itsclose.



CHAPTER VI—A CHAPTER IN WHICH THEY ADORE EACH OTHER

Chat at table, the chat of love; it is as impossible to reproduce oneas the other; the chat of love is a cloud; the chat at table is smoke.
Fameuil and Dahlia were humming. Tholomyès was drinking. Zéphine waslaughing, Fantine smiling, Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which hehad purchased at Saint-Cloud.
Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said:—
“Blachevelle, I adore you.”

This called forth a question from Blachevelle:—
“What would you do, Favourite, if I were to cease to love you?”

“I!” cried Favourite. “Ah! Do not say that even in jest! If you were tocease to love me, I would spring after you, I would scratch you, Ishould rend you, I would throw you into the water, I would have youarrested.”

Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who istickled in his self-love. Favourite resumed:—
“Yes, I would scream to the police! Ah! I should not restrain myself,not at all! Rabble!”

Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair, in an ecstasy, and closedboth eyes proudly.
Dahlia, as she ate, said in a low voice to Favourite, amid the uproar:—
“So you really idolize him deeply, that Blachevelle of yours?”

“I? I detest him,” replied Favourite in the same tone, seizing her forkagain. “He is avaricious. I love the little fellow opposite me in myhouse. He is very nice, that young man; do you know him? One can seethat he is an actor by profession. I love actors. As soon as he comesin, his mother says to him: ‘Ah! mon Dieu! my peace of mind is gone.There he goes with his shouting. But, my dear, you are splitting myhead!’ So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets, to black holes, as high ashe can mount, and there he sets to singing, declaiming, how do I knowwhat? so that he can be heard downstairs! He earns twenty sous a day atan attorney’s by penning quibbles. He is the son of a former precentorof Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas. Ah! he is very nice. He idolizes me so,that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes, he said tome: _‘Mamselle, make your gloves into fritters, and I will eat them.’_It is only artists who can say such things as that. Ah! he is verynice. I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow.Never mind; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him—how I lie! Hey! How Ido lie!”

Favourite paused, and then went on:—
“I am sad, you see, Dahlia. It has done nothing but rain all summer;the wind irritates me; the wind does not abate. Blachevelle is verystingy; there are hardly any green peas in the market; one does notknow what to eat. I have the spleen, as the English say, butter is sodear! and then you see it is horrible, here we are dining in a roomwith a bed in it, and that disgusts me with life.”




CHAPTER VII—THE WISDOM OF THOLOMYÈS

In the meantime, while some sang, the rest talked together tumultuouslyall at once; it was no longer anything but noise. Tholomyès intervened.
“Let us not talk at random nor too fast,” he exclaimed. “Let usreflect, if we wish to be brilliant. Too much improvisation empties themind in a stupid way. Running beer gathers no froth. No haste,gentlemen. Let us mingle majesty with the feast. Let us eat withmeditation; let us make haste slowly. Let us not hurry. Consider thespringtime; if it makes haste, it is done for; that is to say, it getsfrozen. Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees. Excess ofzeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners. No zeal, gentlemen!Grimod de la Reynière agrees with Talleyrand.”

A hollow sound of rebellion rumbled through the group.
“Leave us in peace, Tholomyès,” said Blachevelle.
“Down with the tyrant!” said Fameuil.
“Bombarda, Bombance, and Bambochel!” cried Listolier.
“Sunday exists,” resumed Fameuil.
“We are sober,” added Listolier.
“Tholomyès,” remarked Blachevelle, “contemplate my calmness [_moncalme_].”

“You are the Marquis of that,” retorted Tholomyès.
This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool.The Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist. All thefrogs held their peace.
“Friends,” cried Tholomyès, with the accent of a man who had recoveredhis empire, “Come to yourselves. This pun which has fallen from theskies must not be received with too much stupor. Everything which fallsin that way is not necessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect. Thepun is the dung of the mind which soars. The jest falls, no matterwhere; and the mind after producing a piece of stupidity plunges intothe azure depths. A whitish speck flattened against the rock does notprevent the condor from soaring aloft. Far be it from me to insult thepun! I honor it in proportion to its merits; nothing more. All the mostaugust, the most sublime, the most charming of humanity, and perhapsoutside of humanity, have made puns. Jesus Christ made a pun on St.Peter, Moses on Isaac, Æschylus on Polynices, Cleopatra on Octavius.And observe that Cleopatra’s pun preceded the battle of Actium, andthat had it not been for it, no one would have remembered the city ofToryne, a Greek name which signifies a ladle. That once conceded, Ireturn to my exhortation. I repeat, brothers, I repeat, no zeal, nohubbub, no excess; even in witticisms, gayety, jollities, or plays onwords. Listen to me. I have the prudence of Amphiaraüs and the baldnessof Cæsar. There must be a limit, even to rebuses. _Est modus in rebus_.
“There must be a limit, even to dinners. You are fond of appleturnovers, ladies; do not indulge in them to excess. Even in the matterof turnovers, good sense and art are requisite. Gluttony chastises theglutton, _Gula punit Gulax_. Indigestion is charged by the good Godwith preaching morality to stomachs. And remember this: each one of ourpassions, even love, has a stomach which must not be filled too full.In all things the word _finis_ must be written in good season;self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent; the boltmust be drawn on appetite; one must set one’s own fantasy to theviolin, and carry one’s self to the post. The sage is the man who knowshow, at a given moment, to effect his own arrest. Have some confidencein me, for I have succeeded to some extent in my study of the law,according to the verdict of my examinations, for I know the differencebetween the question put and the question pending, for I have sustaineda thesis in Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered atRome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was quæstor of the Parricide;because I am going to be a doctor, apparently it does not follow thatit is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile. I recommendyou to moderation in your desires. It is true that my name is FélixTholomyès; I speak well. Happy is he who, when the hour strikes, takesa heroic resolve, and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes.”

Favourite listened with profound attention.
“Félix,” said she, “what a pretty word! I love that name. It is Latin;it means prosper.”

Tholomyès went on:—
“Quirites, gentlemen, caballeros, my friends. Do you wish never to feelthe prick, to do without the nuptial bed, and to brave love? Nothingmore simple. Here is the receipt: lemonade, excessive exercise, hardlabor; work yourself to death, drag blocks, sleep not, hold vigil,gorge yourself with nitrous beverages, and potions of nymphæas; drinkemulsions of poppies and agnus castus; season this with a strict diet,starve yourself, and add thereto cold baths, girdles of herbs, theapplication of a plate of lead, lotions made with the subacetate oflead, and fomentations of oxycrat.”

“I prefer a woman,” said Listolier.
“Woman,” resumed Tholomyès; “distrust her. Woe to him who yieldshimself to the unstable heart of woman! Woman is perfidious anddisingenuous. She detests the serpent from professional jealousy. Theserpent is the shop over the way.”

“Tholomyès!” cried Blachevelle, “you are drunk!”

“Pardieu,” said Tholomyès.
“Then be gay,” resumed Blachevelle.
“I agree to that,” responded Tholomyès.
And, refilling his glass, he rose.
“Glory to wine! _Nunc te, Bacche, canam!_ Pardon me ladies; that isSpanish. And the proof of it, señoras, is this: like people, like cask.The arrobe of Castille contains sixteen litres; the cantaro ofAlicante, twelve; the almude of the Canaries, twenty-five; the cuartinof the Balearic Isles, twenty-six; the boot of Tzar Peter, thirty. Longlive that Tzar who was great, and long live his boot, which was stillgreater! Ladies, take the advice of a friend; make a mistake in yourneighbor if you see fit. The property of love is to err. A love affairis not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an Englishserving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing. It is notmade for that; it errs gayly, our gentle love. It has been said, erroris human; I say, error is love. Ladies, I idolize you all. O Zéphine, OJoséphine, face more than irregular, you would be charming were you notall askew. You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one hassat down by mistake. As for Favourite, O nymphs and muses! one day whenBlachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guérin-Boisseau, heespied a beautiful girl with white stockings well drawn up, whichdisplayed her legs. This prologue pleased him, and Blachevelle fell inlove. The one he loved was Favourite. O Favourite, thou hast Ionianlips. There was a Greek painter named Euphorion, who was surnamed thepainter of the lips. That Greek alone would have been worthy to paintthy mouth. Listen! before thee, there was never a creature worthy ofthe name. Thou wert made to receive the apple like Venus, or to eat itlike Eve; beauty begins with thee. I have just referred to Eve; it isthou who hast created her. Thou deservest the letters-patent of thebeautiful woman. O Favourite, I cease to address you as ‘thou,’ becauseI pass from poetry to prose. You were speaking of my name a littlewhile ago. That touched me; but let us, whoever we may be, distrustnames. They may delude us. I am called Félix, and I am not happy. Wordsare liars. Let us not blindly accept the indications which they affordus. It would be a mistake to write to Liège 2 for corks, and to Pau forgloves. Miss Dahlia, were I in your place, I would call myself Rosa. Aflower should smell sweet, and woman should have wit. I say nothing ofFantine; she is a dreamer, a musing, thoughtful, pensive person; she isa phantom possessed of the form of a nymph and the modesty of a nun,who has strayed into the life of a grisette, but who takes refuge inillusions, and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure withoutvery well knowing what she sees or what she is doing, and who, with hereyes fixed on heaven, wanders in a garden where there are more birdsthan are in existence. O Fantine, know this: I, Tholomyès, I am anillusion; but she does not even hear me, that blond maid of Chimeras!as for the rest, everything about her is freshness, suavity, youth,sweet morning light. O Fantine, maid worthy of being called Margueriteor Pearl, you are a woman from the beauteous Orient. Ladies, a secondpiece of advice: do not marry; marriage is a graft; it takes well orill; avoid that risk. But bah! what am I saying? I am wasting my words.Girls are incurable on the subject of marriage, and all that we wisemen can say will not prevent the waistcoat-makers and theshoe-stitchers from dreaming of husbands studded with diamonds. Well,so be it; but, my beauties, remember this, you eat too much sugar. Youhave but one fault, O woman, and that is nibbling sugar. O nibblingsex, your pretty little white teeth adore sugar. Now, heed me well,sugar is a salt. All salts are withering. Sugar is the most desiccatingof all salts; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins;hence the coagulation, and then the solidification of the blood; hencetubercles in the lungs, hence death. That is why diabetes borders onconsumption. Then, do not crunch sugar, and you will live. I turn tothe men: gentlemen, make conquest, rob each other of your well-belovedwithout remorse. Chassez across. In love there are no friends.Everywhere where there is a pretty woman hostility is open. No quarter,war to the death! a pretty woman is a _casus belli_; a pretty woman isflagrant misdemeanor. All the invasions of history have been determinedby petticoats. Woman is man’s right. Romulus carried off the Sabines;William carried off the Saxon women; Cæsar carried off the Roman women.The man who is not loved soars like a vulture over the mistresses ofother men; and for my own part, to all those unfortunate men who arewidowers, I throw the sublime proclamation of Bonaparte to the army ofItaly: “Soldiers, you are in need of everything; the enemy has it.”

Tholomyès paused.
“Take breath, Tholomyès,” said Blachevelle.
At the same moment Blachevelle, supported by Listolier and Fameuil,struck up to a plaintive air, one of those studio songs composed of thefirst words which come to hand, rhymed richly and not at all, asdestitute of sense as the gesture of the tree and the sound of thewind, which have their birth in the vapor of pipes, and are dissipatedand take their flight with them. This is the couplet by which the groupreplied to Tholomyès’ harangue:—
“The father turkey-cocks so graveSome money to an agent gave,That master good Clermont-TonnerreMight be made pope on Saint Johns’ day fair.But this good Clermont could not beMade pope, because no priest was he;And then their agent, whose wrath burned,With all their money back returned.”

This was not calculated to calm Tholomyès’ improvisation; he emptiedhis glass, filled, refilled it, and began again:—
“Down with wisdom! Forget all that I have said. Let us be neitherprudes nor prudent men nor prudhommes. I propose a toast to mirth; bemerry. Let us complete our course of law by folly and eating!Indigestion and the digest. Let Justinian be the male, and Feasting,the female! Joy in the depths! Live, O creation! The world is a greatdiamond. I am happy. The birds are astonishing. What a festivaleverywhere! The nightingale is a gratuitous Elleviou. Summer, I salutethee! O Luxembourg! O Georgics of the Rue Madame, and of the Allée del’Observatoire! O pensive infantry soldiers! O all those charmingnurses who, while they guard the children, amuse themselves! The pampasof America would please me if I had not the arcades of the Odéon. Mysoul flits away into the virgin forests and to the savannas. All isbeautiful. The flies buzz in the sun. The sun has sneezed out thehumming bird. Embrace me, Fantine!”

He made a mistake and embraced Favourite.



CHAPTER VIII—THE DEATH OF A HORSE

“The dinners are better at Édon’s than at Bombarda’s,” exclaimedZéphine.
“I prefer Bombarda to Édon,” declared Blachevelle. “There is moreluxury. It is more Asiatic. Look at the room downstairs; there aremirrors [_glaces_] on the walls.”

“I prefer them [_glaces_, ices] on my plate,” said Favourite.
Blachevelle persisted:—
“Look at the knives. The handles are of silver at Bombarda’s and ofbone at Édon’s. Now, silver is more valuable than bone.”

“Except for those who have a silver chin,” observed Tholomyès.
He was looking at the dome of the Invalides, which was visible fromBombarda’s windows.
A pause ensued.
“Tholomyès,” exclaimed Fameuil, “Listolier and I were having adiscussion just now.”

“A discussion is a good thing,” replied Tholomyès; “a quarrel isbetter.”

“We were disputing about philosophy.”

“Well?”

“Which do you prefer, Descartes or Spinoza?”

“Désaugiers,” said Tholomyès.
This decree pronounced, he took a drink, and went on:—
“I consent to live. All is not at an end on earth since we can stilltalk nonsense. For that I return thanks to the immortal gods. We lie.One lies, but one laughs. One affirms, but one doubts. The unexpectedbursts forth from the syllogism. That is fine. There are still humanbeings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box ofthe paradox merrily. This, ladies, which you are drinking with sotranquil an air is Madeira wine, you must know, from the vineyard ofCoural das Freiras, which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms abovethe level of the sea. Attention while you drink! three hundred andseventeen fathoms! and Monsieur Bombarda, the magnificent eating-housekeeper, gives you those three hundred and seventeen fathoms for fourfrancs and fifty centimes.”

Again Fameuil interrupted him:—
“Tholomyès, your opinions fix the law. Who is your favorite author?”

“Ber—”

“Quin?”

“No; Choux.”

And Tholomyès continued:—
“Honor to Bombarda! He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he couldbut get me an Indian dancing-girl, and Thygelion of Chæronea if hecould bring me a Greek courtesan; for, oh, ladies! there were Bombardasin Greece and in Egypt. Apuleius tells us of them. Alas! always thesame, and nothing new; nothing more unpublished by the creator increation! _Nil sub sole novum_, says Solomon; _amor omnibus idem_, saysVirgil; and Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark at Saint-Cloud,as Aspasia embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos. One lastword. Do you know what Aspasia was, ladies? Although she lived at anepoch when women had, as yet, no soul, she was a soul; a soul of a rosyand purple hue, more ardent hued than fire, fresher than the dawn.Aspasia was a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met; she wasthe goddess prostitute; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut. Aspasia wascreated in case a mistress should be needed for Prometheus.”

Tholomyès, once started, would have found some difficulty in stopping,had not a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment. Theshock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt. It was aBeauceron mare, old and thin, and one fit for the knacker, which wasdragging a very heavy cart. On arriving in front of Bombarda’s, theworn-out, exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further. Thisincident attracted a crowd. Hardly had the cursing and indignant carterhad time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word, _Mâtin_ (thejade), backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip, when the jade fell,never to rise again. On hearing the hubbub made by the passers-by,Tholomyès’ merry auditors turned their heads, and Tholomyès tookadvantage of the opportunity to bring his allocution to a close withthis melancholy strophe:—
“Elle était de ce monde ou coucous et carrossesOnt le même destin;Et, rosse, elle a vécu ce que vivant les rosses,L’espace d’un mâtin!” 3
“Poor horse!” sighed Fantine.
And Dahlia exclaimed:—
“There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses. How can one besuch a pitiful fool as that!”

At that moment Favourite, folding her arms and throwing her head back,looked resolutely at Tholomyès and said:—
“Come, now! the surprise?”

“Exactly. The moment has arrived,” replied Tholomyès. “Gentlemen, thehour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck. Wait for us amoment, ladies.”

“It begins with a kiss,” said Blachevelle.
“On the brow,” added Tholomyès.
Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress’s brow; then all fourfiled out through the door, with their fingers on their lips.
Favourite clapped her hands on their departure.
“It is beginning to be amusing already,” said she.
“Don’t be too long,” murmured Fantine; “we are waiting for you.”




CHAPTER IX—A MERRY END TO MIRTH

When the young girls were left alone, they leaned two by two on thewindow-sills, chatting, craning out their heads, and talking from onewindow to the other.
They saw the young men emerge from the Café Bombarda arm in arm. Thelatter turned round, made signs to them, smiled, and disappeared inthat dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into theChamps-Élysées.
“Don’t be long!” cried Fantine.
“What are they going to bring us?” said Zéphine.
“It will certainly be something pretty,” said Dahlia.
“For my part,” said Favourite, “I want it to be of gold.”

Their attention was soon distracted by the movements on the shore ofthe lake, which they could see through the branches of the large trees,and which diverted them greatly.
It was the hour for the departure of the mail-coaches and diligences.Nearly all the stage-coaches for the south and west passed through theChamps-Élysées. The majority followed the quay and went through thePassy Barrier. From moment to moment, some huge vehicle, painted yellowand black, heavily loaded, noisily harnessed, rendered shapeless bytrunks, tarpaulins, and valises, full of heads which immediatelydisappeared, rushed through the crowd with all the sparks of a forge,with dust for smoke, and an air of fury, grinding the pavements,changing all the paving-stones into steels. This uproar delighted theyoung girls. Favourite exclaimed:—
“What a row! One would say that it was a pile of chains flying away.”

It chanced that one of these vehicles, which they could only see withdifficulty through the thick elms, halted for a moment, then set outagain at a gallop. This surprised Fantine.
“That’s odd!” said she. “I thought the diligence never stopped.”

Favourite shrugged her shoulders.
“This Fantine is surprising. I am coming to take a look at her out ofcuriosity. She is dazzled by the simplest things. Suppose a case: I ama traveller; I say to the diligence, ‘I will go on in advance; youshall pick me up on the quay as you pass.’ The diligence passes, seesme, halts, and takes me. That is done every day. You do not know life,my dear.”

In this manner a certain time elapsed. All at once Favourite made amovement, like a person who is just waking up.
“Well,” said she, “and the surprise?”

“Yes, by the way,” joined in Dahlia, “the famous surprise?”

“They are a very long time about it!” said Fantine.
As Fantine concluded this sigh, the waiter who had served them atdinner entered. He held in his hand something which resembled a letter.
“What is that?” demanded Favourite.
The waiter replied:—
“It is a paper that those gentlemen left for these ladies.”

“Why did you not bring it at once?”

“Because,” said the waiter, “the gentlemen ordered me not to deliver itto the ladies for an hour.”

Favourite snatched the paper from the waiter’s hand. It was, in fact, aletter.
“Stop!” said she; “there is no address; but this is what is written onit—”

“THIS IS THE SURPRISE.”

She tore the letter open hastily, opened it, and read [she knew how toread]:—
“OUR BELOVED:—
“You must know that we have parents. Parents—you do not know much aboutsuch things. They are called fathers and mothers by the civil code,which is puerile and honest. Now, these parents groan, these old folksimplore us, these good men and these good women call us prodigal sons;they desire our return, and offer to kill calves for us. Beingvirtuous, we obey them. At the hour when you read this, five fieryhorses will be bearing us to our papas and mammas. We are pulling upour stakes, as Bossuet says. We are going; we are gone. We flee in thearms of Laffitte and on the wings of Caillard. The Toulouse diligencetears us from the abyss, and the abyss is you, O our little beauties!We return to society, to duty, to respectability, at full trot, at therate of three leagues an hour. It is necessary for the good of thecountry that we should be, like the rest of the world, prefects,fathers of families, rural police, and councillors of state. Venerateus. We are sacrificing ourselves. Mourn for us in haste, and replace uswith speed. If this letter lacerates you, do the same by it. Adieu.
“For the space of nearly two years we have made you happy. We bear youno grudge for that.                                 “Signed:BLACHEVELLE.FAMUEIL.LISTOLIER.FÉLIX THOLOMYÈS.

“_Postscriptum_. The dinner is paid for.”

The four young women looked at each other.
Favourite was the first to break the silence.
“Well!” she exclaimed, “it’s a very pretty farce, all the same.”

“It is very droll,” said Zéphine.
“That must have been Blachevelle’s idea,” resumed Favourite. “It makesme in love with him. No sooner is he gone than he is loved. This is anadventure, indeed.”

“No,” said Dahlia; “it was one of Tholomyès’ ideas. That is evident.
“In that case,” retorted Favourite, “death to Blachevelle, and longlive Tholomyès!”

“Long live Tholomyès!” exclaimed Dahlia and Zéphine.
And they burst out laughing.
Fantine laughed with the rest.
An hour later, when she had returned to her room, she wept. It was herfirst love affair, as we have said; she had given herself to thisTholomyès as to a husband, and the poor girl had a child.



BOOK FOURTH—TO CONFIDE IS SOMETIMES TO DELIVER INTO A PERSON’S POWER



CHAPTER I—ONE MOTHER MEETS ANOTHER MOTHER

There was, at Montfermeil, near Paris, during the first quarter of thiscentury, a sort of cook-shop which no longer exists. This cook-shop waskept by some people named Thénardier, husband and wife. It was situatedin Boulanger Lane. Over the door there was a board nailed flat againstthe wall. Upon this board was painted something which resembled a mancarrying another man on his back, the latter wearing the big giltepaulettes of a general, with large silver stars; red spots representedblood; the rest of the picture consisted of smoke, and probablyrepresented a battle. Below ran this inscription: AT THE SIGN OFSERGEANT OF WATERLOO (_Au Sargent de Waterloo_).
Nothing is more common than a cart or a truck at the door of ahostelry. Nevertheless, the vehicle, or, to speak more accurately, thefragment of a vehicle, which encumbered the street in front of thecook-shop of the _Sergeant of Waterloo_, one evening in the spring of1818, would certainly have attracted, by its mass, the attention of anypainter who had passed that way.
It was the fore-carriage of one of those trucks which are used inwooded tracts of country, and which serve to transport thick planks andthe trunks of trees. This fore-carriage was composed of a massive ironaxle-tree with a pivot, into which was fitted a heavy shaft, and whichwas supported by two huge wheels. The whole thing was compact,overwhelming, and misshapen. It seemed like the gun-carriage of anenormous cannon. The ruts of the road had bestowed on the wheels, thefellies, the hub, the axle, and the shaft, a layer of mud, a hideousyellowish daubing hue, tolerably like that with which people are fondof ornamenting cathedrals. The wood was disappearing under mud, and theiron beneath rust. Under the axle-tree hung, like drapery, a hugechain, worthy of some Goliath of a convict. This chain suggested, notthe beams, which it was its office to transport, but the mastodons andmammoths which it might have served to harness; it had the air of thegalleys, but of cyclopean and superhuman galleys, and it seemed to havebeen detached from some monster. Homer would have bound Polyphemus withit, and Shakespeare, Caliban.
Why was that fore-carriage of a truck in that place in the street? Inthe first place, to encumber the street; next, in order that it mightfinish the process of rusting. There is a throng of institutions in theold social order, which one comes across in this fashion as one walksabout outdoors, and which have no other reasons for existence than theabove.
The centre of the chain swung very near the ground in the middle, andin the loop, as in the rope of a swing, there were seated and grouped,on that particular evening, in exquisite interlacement, two littlegirls; one about two years and a half old, the other, eighteen months;the younger in the arms of the other. A handkerchief, cleverly knottedabout them, prevented their falling out. A mother had caught sight ofthat frightful chain, and had said, “Come! there’s a plaything for mychildren.”

The two children, who were dressed prettily and with some elegance,were radiant with pleasure; one would have said that they were tworoses amid old iron; their eyes were a triumph; their fresh cheeks werefull of laughter. One had chestnut hair; the other, brown. Theirinnocent faces were two delighted surprises; a blossoming shrub whichgrew near wafted to the passers-by perfumes which seemed to emanatefrom them; the child of eighteen months displayed her pretty littlebare stomach with the chaste indecency of childhood. Above and aroundthese two delicate heads, all made of happiness and steeped in light,the gigantic fore-carriage, black with rust, almost terrible, allentangled in curves and wild angles, rose in a vault, like the entranceof a cavern. A few paces apart, crouching down upon the threshold ofthe hostelry, the mother, not a very prepossessing woman, by the way,though touching at that moment, was swinging the two children by meansof a long cord, watching them carefully, for fear of accidents, withthat animal and celestial expression which is peculiar to maternity. Atevery backward and forward swing the hideous links emitted a stridentsound, which resembled a cry of rage; the little girls were inecstasies; the setting sun mingled in this joy, and nothing could bemore charming than this caprice of chance which had made of a chain ofTitans the swing of cherubim.
As she rocked her little ones, the mother hummed in a discordant voicea romance then celebrated:—
“It must be, said a warrior.”

Her song, and the contemplation of her daughters, prevented her hearingand seeing what was going on in the street.
In the meantime, some one had approached her, as she was beginning thefirst couplet of the romance, and suddenly she heard a voice sayingvery near her ear:—
“You have two beautiful children there, Madame.”

“To the fair and tender Imogene—”

replied the mother, continuing her romance; then she turned her head.
A woman stood before her, a few paces distant. This woman also had achild, which she carried in her arms.
She was carrying, in addition, a large carpet-bag, which seemed veryheavy.
This woman’s child was one of the most divine creatures that it ispossible to behold. It was a girl, two or three years of age. She couldhave entered into competition with the two other little ones, so far asthe coquetry of her dress was concerned; she wore a cap of fine linen,ribbons on her bodice, and Valenciennes lace on her cap. The folds ofher skirt were raised so as to permit a view of her white, firm, anddimpled leg. She was admirably rosy and healthy. The little beautyinspired a desire to take a bite from the apples of her cheeks. Of hereyes nothing could be known, except that they must be very large, andthat they had magnificent lashes. She was asleep.
She slept with that slumber of absolute confidence peculiar to her age.The arms of mothers are made of tenderness; in them children sleepprofoundly.
As for the mother, her appearance was sad and poverty-stricken. She wasdressed like a working-woman who is inclined to turn into a peasantagain. She was young. Was she handsome? Perhaps; but in that attire itwas not apparent. Her hair, a golden lock of which had escaped, seemedvery thick, but was severely concealed beneath an ugly, tight, close,nun-like cap, tied under the chin. A smile displays beautiful teethwhen one has them; but she did not smile. Her eyes did not seem to havebeen dry for a very long time. She was pale; she had a very weary andrather sickly appearance. She gazed upon her daughter asleep in herarms with the air peculiar to a mother who has nursed her own child. Alarge blue handkerchief, such as the Invalides use, was folded into afichu, and concealed her figure clumsily. Her hands were sunburnt andall dotted with freckles, her forefinger was hardened and laceratedwith the needle; she wore a cloak of coarse brown woollen stuff, alinen gown, and coarse shoes. It was Fantine.
It was Fantine, but difficult to recognize. Nevertheless, onscrutinizing her attentively, it was evident that she still retainedher beauty. A melancholy fold, which resembled the beginning of irony,wrinkled her right cheek. As for her toilette, that aerial toilette ofmuslin and ribbons, which seemed made of mirth, of folly, and of music,full of bells, and perfumed with lilacs had vanished like thatbeautiful and dazzling hoar-frost which is mistaken for diamonds in thesunlight; it melts and leaves the branch quite black.
Ten months had elapsed since the “pretty farce.”

What had taken place during those ten months? It can be divined.
After abandonment, straightened circumstances. Fantine had immediatelylost sight of Favourite, Zéphine and Dahlia; the bond once broken onthe side of the men, it was loosed between the women; they would havebeen greatly astonished had any one told them a fortnight later, thatthey had been friends; there no longer existed any reason for such athing. Fantine had remained alone. The father of her child gone,—alas!such ruptures are irrevocable,—she found herself absolutely isolated,minus the habit of work and plus the taste for pleasure. Drawn away byher _liaison_ with Tholomyès to disdain the pretty trade which sheknew, she had neglected to keep her market open; it was now closed toher. She had no resource. Fantine barely knew how to read, and did notknow how to write; in her childhood she had only been taught to signher name; she had a public letter-writer indite an epistle toTholomyès, then a second, then a third. Tholomyès replied to none ofthem. Fantine heard the gossips say, as they looked at her child: “Whotakes those children seriously! One only shrugs one’s shoulders oversuch children!” Then she thought of Tholomyès, who had shrugged hisshoulders over his child, and who did not take that innocent beingseriously; and her heart grew gloomy toward that man. But what was sheto do? She no longer knew to whom to apply. She had committed a fault,but the foundation of her nature, as will be remembered, was modestyand virtue. She was vaguely conscious that she was on the verge offalling into distress, and of gliding into a worse state. Courage wasnecessary; she possessed it, and held herself firm. The idea ofreturning to her native town of M. sur M. occurred to her. There, someone might possibly know her and give her work; yes, but it would benecessary to conceal her fault. In a confused way she perceived thenecessity of a separation which would be more painful than the firstone. Her heart contracted, but she took her resolution. Fantine, as weshall see, had the fierce bravery of life. She had already valiantlyrenounced finery, had dressed herself in linen, and had put all hersilks, all her ornaments, all her ribbons, and all her laces on herdaughter, the only vanity which was left to her, and a holy one it was.She sold all that she had, which produced for her two hundred francs;her little debts paid, she had only about eighty francs left. At theage of twenty-two, on a beautiful spring morning, she quitted Paris,bearing her child on her back. Any one who had seen these two passwould have had pity on them. This woman had, in all the world, nothingbut her child, and the child had, in all the world, no one but thiswoman. Fantine had nursed her child, and this had tired her chest, andshe coughed a little.
We shall have no further occasion to speak of M. Félix Tholomyès. Letus confine ourselves to saying, that, twenty years later, under KingLouis Philippe, he was a great provincial lawyer, wealthy andinfluential, a wise elector, and a very severe juryman; he was still aman of pleasure.
Towards the middle of the day, after having, from time to time, for thesake of resting herself, travelled, for three or four sous a league, inwhat was then known as the _Petites Voitures des Environs de Paris_,the “little suburban coach service,” Fantine found herself atMontfermeil, in the alley Boulanger.
As she passed the Thénardier hostelry, the two little girls, blissfulin the monster swing, had dazzled her in a manner, and she had haltedin front of that vision of joy.
Charms exist. These two little girls were a charm to this mother.
She gazed at them in much emotion. The presence of angels is anannouncement of Paradise. She thought that, above this inn, she beheldthe mysterious HERE of Providence. These two little creatures wereevidently happy. She gazed at them, she admired them, in such emotionthat at the moment when their mother was recovering her breath betweentwo couplets of her song, she could not refrain from addressing to herthe remark which we have just read:—
“You have two pretty children, Madame.”

The most ferocious creatures are disarmed by caresses bestowed on theiryoung.
The mother raised her head and thanked her, and bade the wayfarer sitdown on the bench at the door, she herself being seated on thethreshold. The two women began to chat.
“My name is Madame Thénardier,” said the mother of the two littlegirls. “We keep this inn.”

Then, her mind still running on her romance, she resumed hummingbetween her teeth:—
“It must be so; I am a knight,And I am off to Palestine.”

This Madame Thénardier was a sandy-complexioned woman, thin andangular—the type of the soldier’s wife in all its unpleasantness; andwhat was odd, with a languishing air, which she owed to her perusal ofromances. She was a simpering, but masculine creature. Old romancesproduce that effect when rubbed against the imagination of cook-shopwoman. She was still young; she was barely thirty. If this crouchingwoman had stood upright, her lofty stature and her frame of aperambulating colossus suitable for fairs, might have frightened thetraveller at the outset, troubled her confidence, and disturbed whatcaused what we have to relate to vanish. A person who is seated insteadof standing erect—destinies hang upon such a thing as that.
The traveller told her story, with slight modifications.
That she was a working-woman; that her husband was dead; that her workin Paris had failed her, and that she was on her way to seek itelsewhere, in her own native parts; that she had left Paris thatmorning on foot; that, as she was carrying her child, and feltfatigued, she had got into the Villemomble coach when she met it; thatfrom Villemomble she had come to Montfermeil on foot; that the littleone had walked a little, but not much, because she was so young, andthat she had been obliged to take her up, and the jewel had fallenasleep.
At this word she bestowed on her daughter a passionate kiss, which wokeher. The child opened her eyes, great blue eyes like her mother’s, andlooked at—what? Nothing; with that serious and sometimes severe air oflittle children, which is a mystery of their luminous innocence in thepresence of our twilight of virtue. One would say that they feelthemselves to be angels, and that they know us to be men. Then thechild began to laugh; and although the mother held fast to her, sheslipped to the ground with the unconquerable energy of a little beingwhich wished to run. All at once she caught sight of the two others inthe swing, stopped short, and put out her tongue, in sign ofadmiration.
Mother Thénardier released her daughters, made them descend from theswing, and said:—
“Now amuse yourselves, all three of you.”

Children become acquainted quickly at that age, and at the expirationof a minute the little Thénardiers were playing with the newcomer atmaking holes in the ground, which was an immense pleasure.
The newcomer was very gay; the goodness of the mother is written in thegayety of the child; she had seized a scrap of wood which served herfor a shovel, and energetically dug a cavity big enough for a fly. Thegrave-digger’s business becomes a subject for laughter when performedby a child.
The two women pursued their chat.
“What is your little one’s name?”

“Cosette.”

For Cosette, read Euphrasie. The child’s name was Euphrasie. But out ofEuphrasie the mother had made Cosette by that sweet and gracefulinstinct of mothers and of the populace which changes Josepha intoPepita, and Françoise into Sillette. It is a sort of derivative whichdisarranges and disconcerts the whole science of etymologists. We haveknown a grandmother who succeeded in turning Theodore into Gnon.
“How old is she?”

“She is going on three.”

“That is the age of my eldest.”

In the meantime, the three little girls were grouped in an attitude ofprofound anxiety and blissfulness; an event had happened; a big wormhad emerged from the ground, and they were afraid; and they were inecstasies over it.
Their radiant brows touched each other; one would have said that therewere three heads in one aureole.
“How easily children get acquainted at once!” exclaimed MotherThénardier; “one would swear that they were three sisters!”

This remark was probably the spark which the other mother had beenwaiting for. She seized the Thénardier’s hand, looked at her fixedly,and said:—
“Will you keep my child for me?”

The Thénardier made one of those movements of surprise which signifyneither assent nor refusal.
Cosette’s mother continued:—
“You see, I cannot take my daughter to the country. My work will notpermit it. With a child one can find no situation. People areridiculous in the country. It was the good God who caused me to passyour inn. When I caught sight of your little ones, so pretty, so clean,and so happy, it overwhelmed me. I said: ‘Here is a good mother. Thatis just the thing; that will make three sisters.’ And then, it will notbe long before I return. Will you keep my child for me?”

“I must see about it,” replied the Thénardier.
“I will give you six francs a month.”

Here a man’s voice called from the depths of the cook-shop:—
“Not for less than seven francs. And six months paid in advance.”

“Six times seven makes forty-two,” said the Thénardier.
“I will give it,” said the mother.
“And fifteen francs in addition for preliminary expenses,” added theman’s voice.
“Total, fifty-seven francs,” said Madame Thénardier. And she hummedvaguely, with these figures:—
“It must be, said a warrior.”

“I will pay it,” said the mother. “I have eighty francs. I shall haveenough left to reach the country, by travelling on foot. I shall earnmoney there, and as soon as I have a little I will return for mydarling.”

The man’s voice resumed:—
“The little one has an outfit?”

“That is my husband,” said the Thénardier.
“Of course she has an outfit, the poor treasure.—I understood perfectlythat it was your husband.—And a beautiful outfit, too! a senselessoutfit, everything by the dozen, and silk gowns like a lady. It ishere, in my carpet-bag.”

“You must hand it over,” struck in the man’s voice again.
“Of course I shall give it to you,” said the mother. “It would be veryqueer if I were to leave my daughter quite naked!”

The master’s face appeared.
“That’s good,” said he.
The bargain was concluded. The mother passed the night at the inn, gaveup her money and left her child, fastened her carpet-bag once more, nowreduced in volume by the removal of the outfit, and light henceforthand set out on the following morning, intending to return soon. Peoplearrange such departures tranquilly; but they are despairs!
A neighbor of the Thénardiers met this mother as she was setting out,and came back with the remark:—
“I have just seen a woman crying in the street so that it was enough torend your heart.”

When Cosette’s mother had taken her departure, the man said to thewoman:—
“That will serve to pay my note for one hundred and ten francs whichfalls due to-morrow; I lacked fifty francs. Do you know that I shouldhave had a bailiff and a protest after me? You played the mouse-trapnicely with your young ones.”

“Without suspecting it,” said the woman.



CHAPTER II—FIRST SKETCH OF TWO UNPREPOSSESSING FIGURES

The mouse which had been caught was a pitiful specimen; but the catrejoices even over a lean mouse.
Who were these Thénardiers?
Let us say a word or two of them now. We will complete the sketch lateron.
These beings belonged to that bastard class composed of coarse peoplewho have been successful, and of intelligent people who have descendedin the scale, which is between the class called “middle” and the classdenominated as “inferior,” and which combines some of the defects ofthe second with nearly all the vices of the first, without possessingthe generous impulse of the workingman nor the honest order of thebourgeois.
They were of those dwarfed natures which, if a dull fire chances towarm them up, easily become monstrous. There was in the woman asubstratum of the brute, and in the man the material for a blackguard.Both were susceptible, in the highest degree, of the sort of hideousprogress which is accomplished in the direction of evil. There existcrab-like souls which are continually retreating towards the darkness,retrograding in life rather than advancing, employing experience toaugment their deformity, growing incessantly worse, and becoming moreand more impregnated with an ever-augmenting blackness. This man andwoman possessed such souls.
Thénardier, in particular, was troublesome for a physiognomist. One canonly look at some men to distrust them; for one feels that they aredark in both directions. They are uneasy in the rear and threatening infront. There is something of the unknown about them. One can no moreanswer for what they have done than for what they will do. The shadowwhich they bear in their glance denounces them. From merely hearingthem utter a word or seeing them make a gesture, one obtains a glimpseof sombre secrets in their past and of sombre mysteries in theirfuture.
This Thénardier, if he himself was to be believed, had been a soldier—asergeant, he said. He had probably been through the campaign of 1815,and had even conducted himself with tolerable valor, it would seem. Weshall see later on how much truth there was in this. The sign of hishostelry was in allusion to one of his feats of arms. He had painted ithimself; for he knew how to do a little of everything, and badly.
It was at the epoch when the ancient classical romance which, afterhaving been _Clélie_, was no longer anything but _Lodoïska_, stillnoble, but ever more and more vulgar, having fallen from Mademoisellede Scudéri to Madame Bournon-Malarme, and from Madame de Lafayette toMadame Barthélemy-Hadot, was setting the loving hearts of theportresses of Paris aflame, and even ravaging the suburbs to someextent. Madame Thénardier was just intelligent enough to read this sortof books. She lived on them. In them she drowned what brains shepossessed. This had given her, when very young, and even a littlelater, a sort of pensive attitude towards her husband, a scamp of acertain depth, a ruffian lettered to the extent of the grammar, coarseand fine at one and the same time, but, so far as sentimentalism wasconcerned, given to the perusal of Pigault-Lebrun, and “in whatconcerns the sex,” as he said in his jargon—a downright, unmitigatedlout. His wife was twelve or fifteen years younger than he was. Lateron, when her hair, arranged in a romantically drooping fashion, beganto grow gray, when the Megæra began to be developed from the Pamela,the female Thénardier was nothing but a coarse, vicious woman, who haddabbled in stupid romances. Now, one cannot read nonsense withimpunity. The result was that her eldest daughter was named Éponine; asfor the younger, the poor little thing came near being called Gulnare;I know not to what diversion, effected by a romance of Ducray-Dumenil,she owed the fact that she merely bore the name of Azelma.
However, we will remark by the way, everything was not ridiculous andsuperficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding, and whichmay be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names. By the side ofthis romantic element which we have just indicated there is the socialsymptom. It is not rare for the neatherd’s boy nowadays to bear thename of Arthur, Alfred, or Alphonse, and for the vicomte—if there arestill any vicomtes—to be called Thomas, Pierre, or Jacques. Thisdisplacement, which places the “elegant” name on the plebeian and therustic name on the aristocrat, is nothing else than an eddy ofequality. The irresistible penetration of the new inspiration is thereas everywhere else. Beneath this apparent discord there is a great anda profound thing,—the French Revolution.



CHAPTER III—THE LARK

It is not all in all sufficient to be wicked in order to prosper. Thecook-shop was in a bad way.
Thanks to the traveller’s fifty-seven francs, Thénardier had been ableto avoid a protest and to honor his signature. On the following monththey were again in need of money. The woman took Cosette’s outfit toParis, and pawned it at the pawnbroker’s for sixty francs. As soon asthat sum was spent, the Thénardiers grew accustomed to look on thelittle girl merely as a child whom they were caring for out of charity;and they treated her accordingly. As she had no longer any clothes,they dressed her in the cast-off petticoats and chemises of theThénardier brats; that is to say, in rags. They fed her on what all therest had left—a little better than the dog, a little worse than thecat. Moreover, the cat and the dog were her habitual table-companions;Cosette ate with them under the table, from a wooden bowl similar totheirs.
The mother, who had established herself, as we shall see later on, atM. sur M., wrote, or, more correctly, caused to be written, a letterevery month, that she might have news of her child. The Thénardiersreplied invariably, “Cosette is doing wonderfully well.”

At the expiration of the first six months the mother sent seven francsfor the seventh month, and continued her remittances with tolerableregularity from month to month. The year was not completed whenThénardier said: “A fine favor she is doing us, in sooth! What does sheexpect us to do with her seven francs?” and he wrote to demand twelvefrancs. The mother, whom they had persuaded into the belief that herchild was happy, “and was coming on well,” submitted, and forwarded thetwelve francs.
Certain natures cannot love on the one hand without hating on theother. Mother Thénardier loved her two daughters passionately, whichcaused her to hate the stranger.
It is sad to think that the love of a mother can possess villainousaspects. Little as was the space occupied by Cosette, it seemed to heras though it were taken from her own, and that that little childdiminished the air which her daughters breathed. This woman, like manywomen of her sort, had a load of caresses and a burden of blows andinjuries to dispense each day. If she had not had Cosette, it iscertain that her daughters, idolized as they were, would have receivedthe whole of it; but the stranger did them the service to divert theblows to herself. Her daughters received nothing but caresses. Cosettecould not make a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavyshower of violent blows and unmerited chastisement. The sweet, feeblebeing, who should not have understood anything of this world or of God,incessantly punished, scolded, ill-used, beaten, and seeing beside hertwo little creatures like herself, who lived in a ray of dawn!
Madame Thénardier was vicious with Cosette. Éponine and Azelma werevicious. Children at that age are only copies of their mother. The sizeis smaller; that is all.
A year passed; then another.
People in the village said:—
“Those Thénardiers are good people. They are not rich, and yet they arebringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands!”

They thought that Cosette’s mother had forgotten her.
In the meanwhile, Thénardier, having learned, it is impossible to sayby what obscure means, that the child was probably a bastard, and thatthe mother could not acknowledge it, exacted fifteen francs a month,saying that “the creature” was growing and “eating,” and threatening tosend her away. “Let her not bother me,” he exclaimed, “or I’ll fire herbrat right into the middle of her secrets. I must have an increase.”The mother paid the fifteen francs.
From year to year the child grew, and so did her wretchedness.
As long as Cosette was little, she was the scape-goat of the two otherchildren; as soon as she began to develop a little, that is to say,before she was even five years old, she became the servant of thehousehold.
Five years old! the reader will say; that is not probable. Alas! it istrue. Social suffering begins at all ages. Have we not recently seenthe trial of a man named Dumollard, an orphan turned bandit, who, fromthe age of five, as the official documents state, being alone in theworld, “worked for his living and stole”?
Cosette was made to run on errands, to sweep the rooms, the courtyard,the street, to wash the dishes, to even carry burdens. The Thénardiersconsidered themselves all the more authorized to behave in this manner,since the mother, who was still at M. sur M., had become irregular inher payments. Some months she was in arrears.
If this mother had returned to Montfermeil at the end of these threeyears, she would not have recognized her child. Cosette, so pretty androsy on her arrival in that house, was now thin and pale. She had anindescribably uneasy look. “The sly creature,” said the Thénardiers.
Injustice had made her peevish, and misery had made her ugly. Nothingremained to her except her beautiful eyes, which inspired pain,because, large as they were, it seemed as though one beheld in them astill larger amount of sadness.
It was a heart-breaking thing to see this poor child, not yet six yearsold, shivering in the winter in her old rags of linen, full of holes,sweeping the street before daylight, with an enormous broom in her tinyred hands, and a tear in her great eyes.

  Enlarge
Cossette Sweeping  1b4-1-cossette-sweeping

She was called the _Lark_ in the neighborhood. The populace, who arefond of these figures of speech, had taken a fancy to bestow this nameon this trembling, frightened, and shivering little creature, no biggerthan a bird, who was awake every morning before any one else in thehouse or the village, and was always in the street or the fields beforedaybreak.
Only the little lark never sang.



BOOK FIFTH—THE DESCENT



CHAPTER I—THE HISTORY OF A PROGRESS IN BLACK GLASS TRINKETS

And in the meantime, what had become of that mother who according tothe people at Montfermeil, seemed to have abandoned her child? Wherewas she? What was she doing?
After leaving her little Cosette with the Thénardiers, she hadcontinued her journey, and had reached M. sur M.
This, it will be remembered, was in 1818.
Fantine had quitted her province ten years before. M. sur M. hadchanged its aspect. While Fantine had been slowly descending fromwretchedness to wretchedness, her native town had prospered.
About two years previously one of those industrial facts which are thegrand events of small districts had taken place.
This detail is important, and we regard it as useful to develop it atlength; we should almost say, to underline it.
From time immemorial, M. sur M. had had for its special industry theimitation of English jet and the black glass trinkets of Germany. Thisindustry had always vegetated, on account of the high price of the rawmaterial, which reacted on the manufacture. At the moment when Fantinereturned to M. sur M., an unheard-of transformation had taken place inthe production of “black goods.” Towards the close of 1815 a man, astranger, had established himself in the town, and had been inspiredwith the idea of substituting, in this manufacture, gum-lac for resin,and, for bracelets in particular, slides of sheet-iron simply laidtogether, for slides of soldered sheet-iron.
This very small change had effected a revolution.
This very small change had, in fact, prodigiously reduced the cost ofthe raw material, which had rendered it possible in the first place, toraise the price of manufacture, a benefit to the country; in the secondplace, to improve the workmanship, an advantage to the consumer; in thethird place, to sell at a lower price, while trebling the profit, whichwas a benefit to the manufacturer.
Thus three results ensued from one idea.
In less than three years the inventor of this process had become rich,which is good, and had made every one about him rich, which is better.He was a stranger in the Department. Of his origin, nothing was known;of the beginning of his career, very little. It was rumored that he hadcome to town with very little money, a few hundred francs at the most.
It was from this slender capital, enlisted in the service of aningenious idea, developed by method and thought, that he had drawn hisown fortune, and the fortune of the whole countryside.
On his arrival at M. sur M. he had only the garments, the appearance,and the language of a workingman.
It appears that on the very day when he made his obscure entry into thelittle town of M. sur M., just at nightfall, on a December evening,knapsack on back and thorn club in hand, a large fire had broken out inthe town-hall. This man had rushed into the flames and saved, at therisk of his own life, two children who belonged to the captain of thegendarmerie; this is why they had forgotten to ask him for hispassport. Afterwards they had learned his name. He was called FatherMadeleine.



CHAPTER II—MADELEINE

He was a man about fifty years of age, who had a preoccupied air, andwho was good. That was all that could be said about him.
Thanks to the rapid progress of the industry which he had so admirablyreconstructed, M. sur M. had become a rather important centre of trade.Spain, which consumes a good deal of black jet, made enormous purchasesthere each year. M. sur M. almost rivalled London and Berlin in thisbranch of commerce. Father Madeleine’s profits were such, that at theend of the second year he was able to erect a large factory, in whichthere were two vast workrooms, one for the men, and the other forwomen. Any one who was hungry could present himself there, and was sureof finding employment and bread. Father Madeleine required of the mengood will, of the women pure morals, and of all, probity. He hadseparated the work-rooms in order to separate the sexes, and so thatthe women and girls might remain discreet. On this point he wasinflexible. It was the only thing in which he was in a mannerintolerant. He was all the more firmly set on this severity, since M.sur M., being a garrison town, opportunities for corruption abounded.However, his coming had been a boon, and his presence was a godsend.Before Father Madeleine’s arrival, everything had languished in thecountry; now everything lived with a healthy life of toil. A strongcirculation warmed everything and penetrated everywhere. Slack seasonsand wretchedness were unknown. There was no pocket so obscure that ithad not a little money in it; no dwelling so lowly that there was notsome little joy within it.
Father Madeleine gave employment to every one. He exacted but onething: Be an honest man. Be an honest woman.
As we have said, in the midst of this activity of which he was thecause and the pivot, Father Madeleine made his fortune; but a singularthing in a simple man of business, it did not seem as though that werehis chief care. He appeared to be thinking much of others, and littleof himself. In 1820 he was known to have a sum of six hundred andthirty thousand francs lodged in his name with Laffitte; but beforereserving these six hundred and thirty thousand francs, he had spentmore than a million for the town and its poor.
The hospital was badly endowed; he founded six beds there. M. sur M. isdivided into the upper and the lower town. The lower town, in which helived, had but one school, a miserable hovel, which was falling toruin: he constructed two, one for girls, the other for boys. Heallotted a salary from his own funds to the two instructors, a salarytwice as large as their meagre official salary, and one day he said tosome one who expressed surprise, “The two prime functionaries of thestate are the nurse and the schoolmaster.” He created at his ownexpense an infant school, a thing then almost unknown in France, and afund for aiding old and infirm workmen. As his factory was a centre, anew quarter, in which there were a good many indigent families, roserapidly around him; he established there a free dispensary.
At first, when they watched his beginnings, the good souls said, “He’sa jolly fellow who means to get rich.” When they saw him enriching thecountry before he enriched himself, the good souls said, “He is anambitious man.” This seemed all the more probable since the man wasreligious, and even practised his religion to a certain degree, a thingwhich was very favorably viewed at that epoch. He went regularly to lowmass every Sunday. The local deputy, who nosed out all rivalryeverywhere, soon began to grow uneasy over this religion. This deputyhad been a member of the legislative body of the Empire, and shared thereligious ideas of a father of the Oratoire, known under the name ofFouché, Duc d’Otrante, whose creature and friend he had been. Heindulged in gentle raillery at God with closed doors. But when hebeheld the wealthy manufacturer Madeleine going to low mass at seveno’clock, he perceived in him a possible candidate, and resolved tooutdo him; he took a Jesuit confessor, and went to high mass and tovespers. Ambition was at that time, in the direct acceptation of theword, a race to the steeple. The poor profited by this terror as wellas the good God, for the honorable deputy also founded two beds in thehospital, which made twelve.
Nevertheless, in 1819 a rumor one morning circulated through the townto the effect that, on the representations of the prefect and inconsideration of the services rendered by him to the country, FatherMadeleine was to be appointed by the King, mayor of M. sur M. Those whohad pronounced this newcomer to be “an ambitious fellow,” seized withdelight on this opportunity which all men desire, to exclaim, “There!what did we say!” All M. sur M. was in an uproar. The rumor was wellfounded. Several days later the appointment appeared in the _Moniteur_.On the following day Father Madeleine refused.
In this same year of 1819 the products of the new process invented byMadeleine figured in the industrial exhibition; when the jury madetheir report, the King appointed the inventor a chevalier of the Legionof Honor. A fresh excitement in the little town. Well, so it was thecross that he wanted! Father Madeleine refused the cross.
Decidedly this man was an enigma. The good souls got out of theirpredicament by saying, “After all, he is some sort of an adventurer.”

We have seen that the country owed much to him; the poor owed himeverything; he was so useful and he was so gentle that people had beenobliged to honor and respect him. His workmen, in particular, adoredhim, and he endured this adoration with a sort of melancholy gravity.When he was known to be rich, “people in society” bowed to him, and hereceived invitations in the town; he was called, in town, MonsieurMadeleine; his workmen and the children continued to call him FatherMadeleine, and that was what was most adapted to make him smile. Inproportion as he mounted, throve, invitations rained down upon him.“Society” claimed him for its own. The prim little drawing-rooms on M.sur M., which, of course, had at first been closed to the artisan,opened both leaves of their folding-doors to the millionnaire. Theymade a thousand advances to him. He refused.
This time the good gossips had no trouble. “He is an ignorant man, ofno education. No one knows where he came from. He would not know how tobehave in society. It has not been absolutely proved that he knows howto read.”

When they saw him making money, they said, “He is a man of business.”When they saw him scattering his money about, they said, “He is anambitious man.” When he was seen to decline honors, they said, “He isan adventurer.” When they saw him repulse society, they said, “He is abrute.”

In 1820, five years after his arrival in M. sur M., the services whichhe had rendered to the district were so dazzling, the opinion of thewhole country round about was so unanimous, that the King againappointed him mayor of the town. He again declined; but the prefectresisted his refusal, all the notabilities of the place came to implorehim, the people in the street besought him; the urging was so vigorousthat he ended by accepting. It was noticed that the thing which seemedchiefly to bring him to a decision was the almost irritated apostropheaddressed to him by an old woman of the people, who called to him fromher threshold, in an angry way: _“A good mayor is a useful thing. Is hedrawing back before the good which he can do?”_
This was the third phase of his ascent. Father Madeleine had becomeMonsieur Madeleine. Monsieur Madeleine became Monsieur le Maire.



CHAPTER III—SUMS DEPOSITED WITH LAFFITTE

On the other hand, he remained as simple as on the first day. He hadgray hair, a serious eye, the sunburned complexion of a laborer, thethoughtful visage of a philosopher. He habitually wore a hat with awide brim, and a long coat of coarse cloth, buttoned to the chin. Hefulfilled his duties as mayor; but, with that exception, he lived insolitude. He spoke to but few people. He avoided polite attentions; heescaped quickly; he smiled to relieve himself of the necessity oftalking; he gave, in order to get rid of the necessity for smiling. Thewomen said of him, “What a good-natured bear!” His pleasure consistedin strolling in the fields.
He always took his meals alone, with an open book before him, which heread. He had a well-selected little library. He loved books; books arecold but safe friends. In proportion as leisure came to him withfortune, he seemed to take advantage of it to cultivate his mind. Ithad been observed that, ever since his arrival at M. sur M., hislanguage had grown more polished, more choice, and more gentle withevery passing year. He liked to carry a gun with him on his strolls,but he rarely made use of it. When he did happen to do so, his shootingwas something so infallible as to inspire terror. He never killed aninoffensive animal. He never shot at a little bird.
Although he was no longer young, it was thought that he was stillprodigiously strong. He offered his assistance to any one who was inneed of it, lifted a horse, released a wheel clogged in the mud, orstopped a runaway bull by the horns. He always had his pockets full ofmoney when he went out; but they were empty on his return. When hepassed through a village, the ragged brats ran joyously after him, andsurrounded him like a swarm of gnats.
It was thought that he must, in the past, have lived a country life,since he knew all sorts of useful secrets, which he taught to thepeasants. He taught them how to destroy scurf on wheat, by sprinklingit and the granary and inundating the cracks in the floor with asolution of common salt; and how to chase away weevils by hanging uporviot in bloom everywhere, on the walls and the ceilings, among thegrass and in the houses.
He had “recipes” for exterminating from a field, blight, tares,foxtail, and all parasitic growths which destroy the wheat. He defendeda rabbit warren against rats, simply by the odor of a guinea-pig whichhe placed in it.
One day he saw some country people busily engaged in pulling upnettles; he examined the plants, which were uprooted and already dried,and said: “They are dead. Nevertheless, it would be a good thing toknow how to make use of them. When the nettle is young, the leaf makesan excellent vegetable; when it is older, it has filaments and fibreslike hemp and flax. Nettle cloth is as good as linen cloth. Chopped up,nettles are good for poultry; pounded, they are good for horned cattle.The seed of the nettle, mixed with fodder, gives gloss to the hair ofanimals; the root, mixed with salt, produces a beautiful yellowcoloring-matter. Moreover, it is an excellent hay, which can be cuttwice. And what is required for the nettle? A little soil, no care, noculture. Only the seed falls as it is ripe, and it is difficult tocollect it. That is all. With the exercise of a little care, the nettlecould be made useful; it is neglected and it becomes hurtful. It isexterminated. How many men resemble the nettle!” He added, after apause: “Remember this, my friends: there are no such things as badplants or bad men. There are only bad cultivators.”

The children loved him because he knew how to make charming littletrifles of straw and cocoanuts.
When he saw the door of a church hung in black, he entered: he soughtout funerals as other men seek christenings. Widowhood and the grief ofothers attracted him, because of his great gentleness; he mingled withthe friends clad in mourning, with families dressed in black, with thepriests groaning around a coffin. He seemed to like to give to histhoughts for text these funereal psalmodies filled with the vision ofthe other world. With his eyes fixed on heaven, he listened with a sortof aspiration towards all the mysteries of the infinite, those sadvoices which sing on the verge of the obscure abyss of death.
He performed a multitude of good actions, concealing his agency in themas a man conceals himself because of evil actions. He penetrated housesprivately, at night; he ascended staircases furtively. A poor wretch onreturning to his attic would find that his door had been opened,sometimes even forced, during his absence. The poor man made a clamorover it: some malefactor had been there! He entered, and the firstthing he beheld was a piece of gold lying forgotten on some piece offurniture. The “malefactor” who had been there was Father Madeleine.
He was affable and sad. The people said: “There is a rich man who hasnot a haughty air. There is a happy man who has not a contented air.”

Some people maintained that he was a mysterious person, and that no oneever entered his chamber, which was a regular anchorite’s cell,furnished with winged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones andskulls of dead men! This was much talked of, so that one of the elegantand malicious young women of M. sur M. came to him one day, and asked:“Monsieur le Maire, pray show us your chamber. It is said to be agrotto.” He smiled, and introduced them instantly into this “grotto.”They were well punished for their curiosity. The room was very simplyfurnished in mahogany, which was rather ugly, like all furniture ofthat sort, and hung with paper worth twelve sous. They could seenothing remarkable about it, except two candlesticks of antique patternwhich stood on the chimney-piece and appeared to be silver, “for theywere hall-marked,” an observation full of the type of wit of pettytowns.
Nevertheless, people continued to say that no one ever got into theroom, and that it was a hermit’s cave, a mysterious retreat, a hole, atomb.
It was also whispered about that he had “immense” sums deposited withLaffitte, with this peculiar feature, that they were always at hisimmediate disposal, so that, it was added, M. Madeleine could make hisappearance at Laffitte’s any morning, sign a receipt, and carry off histwo or three millions in ten minutes. In reality, “these two or threemillions” were reducible, as we have said, to six hundred and thirty orforty thousand francs.



CHAPTER IV—M. MADELEINE IN MOURNING

At the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of M.Myriel, Bishop of D——, surnamed “Monseigneur Bienvenu,” who had died inthe odor of sanctity at the age of eighty-two.
The Bishop of D—— to supply here a detail which the papers omitted—hadbeen blind for many years before his death, and content to be blind, ashis sister was beside him.
Let us remark by the way, that to be blind and to be loved, is, infact, one of the most strangely exquisite forms of happiness upon thisearth, where nothing is complete. To have continually at one’s side awoman, a daughter, a sister, a charming being, who is there because youneed her and because she cannot do without you; to know that we areindispensable to a person who is necessary to us; to be able toincessantly measure one’s affection by the amount of her presence whichshe bestows on us, and to say to ourselves, “Since she consecrates thewhole of her time to me, it is because I possess the whole of herheart”; to behold her thought in lieu of her face; to be able to verifythe fidelity of one being amid the eclipse of the world; to regard therustle of a gown as the sound of wings; to hear her come and go,retire, speak, return, sing, and to think that one is the centre ofthese steps, of this speech; to manifest at each instant one’s personalattraction; to feel one’s self all the more powerful because of one’sinfirmity; to become in one’s obscurity, and through one’s obscurity,the star around which this angel gravitates,—few felicities equal this.The supreme happiness of life consists in the conviction that one isloved; loved for one’s own sake—let us say rather, loved in spite ofone’s self; this conviction the blind man possesses. To be served indistress is to be caressed. Does he lack anything? No. One does notlose the sight when one has love. And what love! A love whollyconstituted of virtue! There is no blindness where there is certainty.Soul seeks soul, gropingly, and finds it. And this soul, found andtested, is a woman. A hand sustains you; it is hers: a mouth lightlytouches your brow; it is her mouth: you hear a breath very near you; itis hers. To have everything of her, from her worship to her pity, neverto be left, to have that sweet weakness aiding you, to lean upon thatimmovable reed, to touch Providence with one’s hands, and to be able totake it in one’s arms,—God made tangible,—what bliss! The heart, thatobscure, celestial flower, undergoes a mysterious blossoming. One wouldnot exchange that shadow for all brightness! The angel soul is there,uninterruptedly there; if she departs, it is but to return again; shevanishes like a dream, and reappears like reality. One feels warmthapproaching, and behold! she is there. One overflows with serenity,with gayety, with ecstasy; one is a radiance amid the night. And thereare a thousand little cares. Nothings, which are enormous in that void.The most ineffable accents of the feminine voice employed to lull you,and supplying the vanished universe to you. One is caressed with thesoul. One sees nothing, but one feels that one is adored. It is aparadise of shadows.
It was from this paradise that Monseigneur Welcome had passed to theother.
The announcement of his death was reprinted by the local journal of M.sur M. On the following day, M. Madeleine appeared clad wholly inblack, and with crape on his hat.
This mourning was noticed in the town, and commented on. It seemed tothrow a light on M. Madeleine’s origin. It was concluded that somerelationship existed between him and the venerable Bishop. _“He hasgone into mourning for the Bishop of D——”_ said the drawing-rooms; thisraised M. Madeleine’s credit greatly, and procured for him, instantlyand at one blow, a certain consideration in the noble world of M. surM. The microscopic Faubourg Saint-Germain of the place meditatedraising the quarantine against M. Madeleine, the probable relative of abishop. M. Madeleine perceived the advancement which he had obtained,by the more numerous courtesies of the old women and the more plentifulsmiles of the young ones. One evening, a ruler in that petty greatworld, who was curious by right of seniority, ventured to ask him, “M.le Maire is doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of D——?”

He said, “No, Madame.”

“But,” resumed the dowager, “you are wearing mourning for him.”

He replied, “It is because I was a servant in his family in my youth.”

Another thing which was remarked, was, that every time that heencountered in the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about thecountry and seeking chimneys to sweep, the mayor had him summoned,inquired his name, and gave him money. The little Savoyards told eachother about it: a great many of them passed that way.



CHAPTER V—VAGUE FLASHES ON THE HORIZON

Little by little, and in the course of time, all this oppositionsubsided. There had at first been exercised against M. Madeleine, invirtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must submit to,blackening and calumnies; then they grew to be nothing more thanill-nature, then merely malicious remarks, then even this entirelydisappeared; respect became complete, unanimous, cordial, and towards1821 the moment arrived when the word “Monsieur le Maire” waspronounced at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as “Monseigneur theBishop” had been pronounced in D—— in 1815. People came from a distanceof ten leagues around to consult M. Madeleine. He put an end todifferences, he prevented lawsuits, he reconciled enemies. Every onetook him for the judge, and with good reason. It seemed as though hehad for a soul the book of the natural law. It was like an epidemic ofveneration, which in the course of six or seven years gradually tookpossession of the whole district.
One single man in the town, in the arrondissement, absolutely escapedthis contagion, and, whatever Father Madeleine did, remained hisopponent as though a sort of incorruptible and imperturbable instinctkept him on the alert and uneasy. It seems, in fact, as though thereexisted in certain men a veritable bestial instinct, though pure andupright, like all instincts, which creates antipathies and sympathies,which fatally separates one nature from another nature, which does nothesitate, which feels no disquiet, which does not hold its peace, andwhich never belies itself, clear in its obscurity, infallible,imperious, intractable, stubborn to all counsels of the intelligenceand to all the dissolvents of reason, and which, in whatever mannerdestinies are arranged, secretly warns the man-dog of the presence ofthe man-cat, and the man-fox of the presence of the man-lion.
It frequently happened that when M. Madeleine was passing along astreet, calm, affectionate, surrounded by the blessings of all, a manof lofty stature, clad in an iron-gray frock-coat, armed with a heavycane, and wearing a battered hat, turned round abruptly behind him, andfollowed him with his eyes until he disappeared, with folded arms and aslow shake of the head, and his upper lip raised in company with hislower to his nose, a sort of significant grimace which might betranslated by: “What is that man, after all? I certainly have seen himsomewhere. In any case, I am not his dupe.”

This person, grave with a gravity which was almost menacing, was one ofthose men who, even when only seen by a rapid glimpse, arrest thespectator’s attention.
His name was Javert, and he belonged to the police.
At M. sur M. he exercised the unpleasant but useful functions of aninspector. He had not seen Madeleine’s beginnings. Javert owed the postwhich he occupied to the protection of M. Chabouillet, the secretary ofthe Minister of State, Comte Anglès, then prefect of police at Paris.When Javert arrived at M. sur M. the fortune of the great manufacturerwas already made, and Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine.
Certain police officers have a peculiar physiognomy, which iscomplicated with an air of baseness mingled with an air of authority.Javert possessed this physiognomy minus the baseness.
It is our conviction that if souls were visible to the eyes, we shouldbe able to see distinctly that strange thing that each one individualof the human race corresponds to some one of the species of the animalcreation; and we could easily recognize this truth, hardly perceived bythe thinker, that from the oyster to the eagle, from the pig to thetiger, all animals exist in man, and that each one of them is in a man.Sometimes even several of them at a time.
Animals are nothing else than the figures of our virtues and our vices,straying before our eyes, the visible phantoms of our souls. God showsthem to us in order to induce us to reflect. Only since animals aremere shadows, God has not made them capable of education in the fullsense of the word; what is the use? On the contrary, our souls beingrealities and having a goal which is appropriate to them, God hasbestowed on them intelligence; that is to say, the possibility ofeducation. Social education, when well done, can always draw from asoul, of whatever sort it may be, the utility which it contains.
This, be it said, is of course from the restricted point of view of theterrestrial life which is apparent, and without prejudging the profoundquestion of the anterior or ulterior personality of the beings whichare not man. The visible _I_ in nowise authorizes the thinker to denythe latent _I_. Having made this reservation, let us pass on.
Now, if the reader will admit, for a moment, with us, that in every manthere is one of the animal species of creation, it will be easy for usto say what there was in Police Officer Javert.
The peasants of Asturias are convinced that in every litter of wolvesthere is one dog, which is killed by the mother because, otherwise, ashe grew up, he would devour the other little ones.
Give to this dog-son of a wolf a human face, and the result will beJavert.
Javert had been born in prison, of a fortune-teller, whose husband wasin the galleys. As he grew up, he thought that he was outside the paleof society, and he despaired of ever re-entering it. He observed thatsociety unpardoningly excludes two classes of men,—those who attack itand those who guard it; he had no choice except between these twoclasses; at the same time, he was conscious of an indescribablefoundation of rigidity, regularity, and probity, complicated with aninexpressible hatred for the race of bohemians whence he was sprung. Heentered the police; he succeeded there. At forty years of age he was aninspector.
During his youth he had been employed in the convict establishments ofthe South.
Before proceeding further, let us come to an understanding as to thewords, “human face,” which we have just applied to Javert.
The human face of Javert consisted of a flat nose, with two deepnostrils, towards which enormous whiskers ascended on his cheeks. Onefelt ill at ease when he saw these two forests and these two cavernsfor the first time. When Javert laughed,—and his laugh was rare andterrible,—his thin lips parted and revealed to view not only his teeth,but his gums, and around his nose there formed a flattened and savagefold, as on the muzzle of a wild beast. Javert, serious, was awatchdog; when he laughed, he was a tiger. As for the rest, he had verylittle skull and a great deal of jaw; his hair concealed his foreheadand fell over his eyebrows; between his eyes there was a permanent,central frown, like an imprint of wrath; his gaze was obscure; hismouth pursed up and terrible; his air that of ferocious command.
This man was composed of two very simple and two very good sentiments,comparatively; but he rendered them almost bad, by dint of exaggeratingthem,—respect for authority, hatred of rebellion; and in his eyes,murder, robbery, all crimes, are only forms of rebellion. He envelopedin a blind and profound faith every one who had a function in thestate, from the prime minister to the rural policeman. He covered withscorn, aversion, and disgust every one who had once crossed the legalthreshold of evil. He was absolute, and admitted no exceptions. On theone hand, he said, “The functionary can make no mistake; the magistrateis never the wrong.” On the other hand, he said, “These men areirremediably lost. Nothing good can come from them.” He fully sharedthe opinion of those extreme minds which attribute to human law I knownot what power of making, or, if the reader will have it so, ofauthenticating, demons, and who place a Styx at the base of society. Hewas stoical, serious, austere; a melancholy dreamer, humble andhaughty, like fanatics. His glance was like a gimlet, cold andpiercing. His whole life hung on these two words: watchfulness andsupervision. He had introduced a straight line into what is the mostcrooked thing in the world; he possessed the conscience of hisusefulness, the religion of his functions, and he was a spy as othermen are priests. Woe to the man who fell into his hands! He would havearrested his own father, if the latter had escaped from the galleys,and would have denounced his mother, if she had broken her ban. And hewould have done it with that sort of inward satisfaction which isconferred by virtue. And, withal, a life of privation, isolation,abnegation, chastity, with never a diversion. It was implacable duty;the police understood, as the Spartans understood Sparta, a pitilesslying in wait, a ferocious honesty, a marble informer, Brutus inVidocq.
Javert’s whole person was expressive of the man who spies and whowithdraws himself from observation. The mystical school of Joseph deMaistre, which at that epoch seasoned with lofty cosmogony those thingswhich were called the ultra newspapers, would not have failed todeclare that Javert was a symbol. His brow was not visible; itdisappeared beneath his hat: his eyes were not visible, since they werelost under his eyebrows: his chin was not visible, for it was plungedin his cravat: his hands were not visible; they were drawn up in hissleeves: and his cane was not visible; he carried it under his coat.But when the occasion presented itself, there was suddenly seen toemerge from all this shadow, as from an ambuscade, a narrow and angularforehead, a baleful glance, a threatening chin, enormous hands, and amonstrous cudgel.
In his leisure moments, which were far from frequent, he read, althoughhe hated books; this caused him to be not wholly illiterate. This couldbe recognized by some emphasis in his speech.
As we have said, he had no vices. When he was pleased with himself, hepermitted himself a pinch of snuff. Therein lay his connection withhumanity.
The reader will have no difficulty in understanding that Javert was theterror of that whole class which the annual statistics of the Ministryof Justice designates under the rubric, Vagrants. The name of Javertrouted them by its mere utterance; the face of Javert petrified them atsight.
Such was this formidable man.
Javert was like an eye constantly fixed on M. Madeleine. An eye full ofsuspicion and conjecture. M. Madeleine had finally perceived the fact;but it seemed to be of no importance to him. He did not even put aquestion to Javert; he neither sought nor avoided him; he bore thatembarrassing and almost oppressive gaze without appearing to notice it.He treated Javert with ease and courtesy, as he did all the rest of theworld.
It was divined, from some words which escaped Javert, that he hadsecretly investigated, with that curiosity which belongs to the race,and into which there enters as much instinct as will, all the anteriortraces which Father Madeleine might have left elsewhere. He seemed toknow, and he sometimes said in covert words, that some one had gleanedcertain information in a certain district about a family which haddisappeared. Once he chanced to say, as he was talking to himself, “Ithink I have him!” Then he remained pensive for three days, and utterednot a word. It seemed that the thread which he thought he held hadbroken.
Moreover, and this furnishes the necessary corrective for the tooabsolute sense which certain words might present, there can be nothingreally infallible in a human creature, and the peculiarity of instinctis that it can become confused, thrown off the track, and defeated.Otherwise, it would be superior to intelligence, and the beast would befound to be provided with a better light than man.
Javert was evidently somewhat disconcerted by the perfect naturalnessand tranquillity of M. Madeleine.
One day, nevertheless, his strange manner appeared to produce animpression on M. Madeleine. It was on the following occasion.



CHAPTER VI—FATHER FAUCHELEVENT

One morning M. Madeleine was passing through an unpaved alley of M. surM.; he heard a noise, and saw a group some distance away. Heapproached. An old man named Father Fauchelevent had just fallenbeneath his cart, his horse having tumbled down.
This Fauchelevent was one of the few enemies whom M. Madeleine had atthat time. When Madeleine arrived in the neighborhood, Fauchelevent, anex-notary and a peasant who was almost educated, had a business whichwas beginning to be in a bad way. Fauchelevent had seen this simpleworkman grow rich, while he, a lawyer, was being ruined. This hadfilled him with jealousy, and he had done all he could, on everyoccasion, to injure Madeleine. Then bankruptcy had come; and as the oldman had nothing left but a cart and a horse, and neither family norchildren, he had turned carter.
The horse had two broken legs and could not rise. The old man wascaught in the wheels. The fall had been so unlucky that the wholeweight of the vehicle rested on his breast. The cart was quite heavilyladen. Father Fauchelevent was rattling in the throat in the mostlamentable manner. They had tried, but in vain, to drag him out. Anunmethodical effort, aid awkwardly given, a wrong shake, might killhim. It was impossible to disengage him otherwise than by lifting thevehicle off of him. Javert, who had come up at the moment of theaccident, had sent for a jack-screw.
M. Madeleine arrived. People stood aside respectfully.
“Help!” cried old Fauchelevent. “Who will be good and save the oldman?”

M. Madeleine turned towards those present:—
“Is there a jack-screw to be had?”

“One has been sent for,” answered the peasant.
“How long will it take to get it?”

“They have gone for the nearest, to Flachot’s place, where there is afarrier; but it makes no difference; it will take a good quarter of anhour.”

“A quarter of an hour!” exclaimed Madeleine.
It had rained on the preceding night; the soil was soaked.
The cart was sinking deeper into the earth every moment, and crushingthe old carter’s breast more and more. It was evident that his ribswould be broken in five minutes more.
“It is impossible to wait another quarter of an hour,” said Madeleineto the peasants, who were staring at him.
“We must!”

“But it will be too late then! Don’t you see that the cart is sinking?”

“Well!”

“Listen,” resumed Madeleine; “there is still room enough under the cartto allow a man to crawl beneath it and raise it with his back. Onlyhalf a minute, and the poor man can be taken out. Is there any one herewho has stout loins and heart? There are five louis d’or to be earned!”

Not a man in the group stirred.
“Ten louis,” said Madeleine.
The persons present dropped their eyes. One of them muttered: “A manwould need to be devilish strong. And then he runs the risk of gettingcrushed!”

“Come,” began Madeleine again, “twenty louis.”

The same silence.
“It is not the will which is lacking,” said a voice.
M. Madeleine turned round, and recognized Javert. He had not noticedhim on his arrival.
Javert went on:—
“It is strength. One would have to be a terrible man to do such a thingas lift a cart like that on his back.”

Then, gazing fixedly at M. Madeleine, he went on, emphasizing everyword that he uttered:—
“Monsieur Madeleine, I have never known but one man capable of doingwhat you ask.”

Madeleine shuddered.
Javert added, with an air of indifference, but without removing hiseyes from Madeleine:—
“He was a convict.”

“Ah!” said Madeleine.
“In the galleys at Toulon.”

Madeleine turned pale.
Meanwhile, the cart continued to sink slowly. Father Faucheleventrattled in the throat, and shrieked:—
“I am strangling! My ribs are breaking! a screw! something! Ah!”

Madeleine glanced about him.
“Is there, then, no one who wishes to earn twenty louis and save thelife of this poor old man?”

No one stirred. Javert resumed:—
“I have never known but one man who could take the place of a screw,and he was that convict.”

“Ah! It is crushing me!” cried the old man.
Madeleine raised his head, met Javert’s falcon eye still fixed uponhim, looked at the motionless peasants, and smiled sadly. Then, withoutsaying a word, he fell on his knees, and before the crowd had even hadtime to utter a cry, he was underneath the vehicle.
A terrible moment of expectation and silence ensued.
They beheld Madeleine, almost flat on his stomach beneath that terribleweight, make two vain efforts to bring his knees and his elbowstogether. They shouted to him, “Father Madeleine, come out!” OldFauchelevent himself said to him, “Monsieur Madeleine, go away! You seethat I am fated to die! Leave me! You will get yourself crushed also!”Madeleine made no reply.
All the spectators were panting. The wheels had continued to sink, andit had become almost impossible for Madeleine to make his way fromunder the vehicle.
Suddenly the enormous mass was seen to quiver, the cart rose slowly,the wheels half emerged from the ruts. They heard a stifled voicecrying, “Make haste! Help!” It was Madeleine, who had just made a finaleffort.
They rushed forwards. The devotion of a single man had given force andcourage to all. The cart was raised by twenty arms. Old Faucheleventwas saved.
Madeleine rose. He was pale, though dripping with perspiration. Hisclothes were torn and covered with mud. All wept. The old man kissedhis knees and called him the good God. As for him, he bore upon hiscountenance an indescribable expression of happy and celestialsuffering, and he fixed his tranquil eye on Javert, who was stillstaring at him.



CHAPTER VII—FAUCHELEVENT BECOMES A GARDENER IN PARIS

Fauchelevent had dislocated his kneepan in his fall. Father Madeleinehad him conveyed to an infirmary which he had established for hisworkmen in the factory building itself, and which was served by twosisters of charity. On the following morning the old man found athousand-franc bank-note on his night-stand, with these words in FatherMadeleine’s writing: _“I purchase your horse and cart.”_ The cart wasbroken, and the horse was dead. Fauchelevent recovered, but his kneeremained stiff. M. Madeleine, on the recommendation of the sisters ofcharity and of his priest, got the good man a place as gardener in afemale convent in the Rue Saint-Antoine in Paris.
Some time afterwards, M. Madeleine was appointed mayor. The first timethat Javert beheld M. Madeleine clothed in the scarf which gave himauthority over the town, he felt the sort of shudder which a watch-dogmight experience on smelling a wolf in his master’s clothes. From thattime forth he avoided him as much as he possibly could. When therequirements of the service imperatively demanded it, and he could notdo otherwise than meet the mayor, he addressed him with profoundrespect.
This prosperity created at M. sur M. by Father Madeleine had, besidesthe visible signs which we have mentioned, another symptom which wasnonetheless significant for not being visible. This never deceives.When the population suffers, when work is lacking, when there is nocommerce, the tax-payer resists imposts through penury, he exhausts andoversteps his respite, and the state expends a great deal of money inthe charges for compelling and collection. When work is abundant, whenthe country is rich and happy, the taxes are paid easily and cost thestate nothing. It may be said, that there is one infallible thermometerof the public misery and riches,—the cost of collecting the taxes. Inthe course of seven years the expense of collecting the taxes haddiminished three-fourths in the arrondissement of M. sur M., and thisled to this arrondissement being frequently cited from all the rest byM. de Villèle, then Minister of Finance.
Such was the condition of the country when Fantine returned thither. Noone remembered her. Fortunately, the door of M. Madeleine’s factory waslike the face of a friend. She presented herself there, and wasadmitted to the women’s workroom. The trade was entirely new toFantine; she could not be very skilful at it, and she therefore earnedbut little by her day’s work; but it was sufficient; the problem wassolved; she was earning her living.



CHAPTER VIII—MADAME VICTURNIEN EXPENDS THIRTY FRANCS ON MORALITY

When Fantine saw that she was making her living, she felt joyful for amoment. To live honestly by her own labor, what mercy from heaven! Thetaste for work had really returned to her. She bought a looking-glass,took pleasure in surveying in it her youth, her beautiful hair, herfine teeth; she forgot many things; she thought only of Cosette and ofthe possible future, and was almost happy. She hired a little room andfurnished on credit on the strength of her future work—a lingeringtrace of her improvident ways. As she was not able to say that she wasmarried she took good care, as we have seen, not to mention her littlegirl.
At first, as the reader has seen, she paid the Thénardiers promptly. Asshe only knew how to sign her name, she was obliged to write through apublic letter-writer.
She wrote often, and this was noticed. It began to be said in anundertone, in the women’s workroom, that Fantine “wrote letters” andthat “she had ways about her.”

There is no one for spying on people’s actions like those who are notconcerned in them. Why does that gentleman never come except atnightfall? Why does Mr. So-and-So never hang his key on its nail onTuesday? Why does he always take the narrow streets? Why does Madamealways descend from her hackney-coach before reaching her house? Whydoes she send out to purchase six sheets of note paper, when she has a“whole stationer’s shop full of it?” etc. There exist beings who, forthe sake of obtaining the key to these enigmas, which are, moreover, ofno consequence whatever to them, spend more money, waste more time,take more trouble, than would be required for ten good actions, andthat gratuitously, for their own pleasure, without receiving any otherpayment for their curiosity than curiosity. They will follow up suchand such a man or woman for whole days; they will do sentry duty forhours at a time on the corners of the streets, under alley-way doors atnight, in cold and rain; they will bribe errand-porters, they will makethe drivers of hackney-coaches and lackeys tipsy, buy a waiting-maid,suborn a porter. Why? For no reason. A pure passion for seeing,knowing, and penetrating into things. A pure itch for talking. Andoften these secrets once known, these mysteries made public, theseenigmas illuminated by the light of day, bring on catastrophies, duels,failures, the ruin of families, and broken lives, to the great joy ofthose who have “found out everything,” without any interest in thematter, and by pure instinct. A sad thing.
Certain persons are malicious solely through a necessity for talking.Their conversation, the chat of the drawing-room, gossip of theanteroom, is like those chimneys which consume wood rapidly; they needa great amount of combustibles; and their combustibles are furnished bytheir neighbors.
So Fantine was watched.
In addition, many a one was jealous of her golden hair and of her whiteteeth.
It was remarked that in the workroom she often turned aside, in themidst of the rest, to wipe away a tear. These were the moments when shewas thinking of her child; perhaps, also, of the man whom she hadloved.
Breaking the gloomy bonds of the past is a mournful task.
It was observed that she wrote twice a month at least, and that shepaid the carriage on the letter. They managed to obtain the address:_Monsieur, Monsieur Thénardier, inn-keeper at Montfermeil_. The publicwriter, a good old man who could not fill his stomach with red winewithout emptying his pocket of secrets, was made to talk in thewine-shop. In short, it was discovered that Fantine had a child. “Shemust be a pretty sort of a woman.” An old gossip was found, who madethe trip to Montfermeil, talked to the Thénardiers, and said on herreturn: “For my five and thirty francs I have freed my mind. I haveseen the child.”

The gossip who did this thing was a gorgon named Madame Victurnien, theguardian and door-keeper of every one’s virtue. Madame Victurnien wasfifty-six, and re-enforced the mask of ugliness with the mask of age. Aquavering voice, a whimsical mind. This old dame had once beenyoung—astonishing fact! In her youth, in ’93, she had married a monkwho had fled from his cloister in a red cap, and passed from theBernardines to the Jacobins. She was dry, rough, peevish, sharp,captious, almost venomous; all this in memory of her monk, whose widowshe was, and who had ruled over her masterfully and bent her to hiswill. She was a nettle in which the rustle of the cassock was visible.At the Restoration she had turned bigot, and that with so much energythat the priests had forgiven her her monk. She had a small property,which she bequeathed with much ostentation to a religious community.She was in high favor at the episcopal palace of Arras. So this MadameVicturnien went to Montfermeil, and returned with the remark, “I haveseen the child.”

All this took time. Fantine had been at the factory for more than ayear, when, one morning, the superintendent of the workroom handed herfifty francs from the mayor, told her that she was no longer employedin the shop, and requested her, in the mayor’s name, to leave theneighborhood.
This was the very month when the Thénardiers, after having demandedtwelve francs instead of six, had just exacted fifteen francs insteadof twelve.
Fantine was overwhelmed. She could not leave the neighborhood; she wasin debt for her rent and furniture. Fifty francs was not sufficient tocancel this debt. She stammered a few supplicating words. Thesuperintendent ordered her to leave the shop on the instant. Besides,Fantine was only a moderately good workwoman. Overcome with shame, evenmore than with despair, she quitted the shop, and returned to her room.So her fault was now known to every one.
She no longer felt strong enough to say a word. She was advised to seethe mayor; she did not dare. The mayor had given her fifty francsbecause he was good, and had dismissed her because he was just. Shebowed before the decision.



CHAPTER IX—MADAME VICTURNIEN’S SUCCESS

So the monk’s widow was good for something.
But M. Madeleine had heard nothing of all this. Life is full of justsuch combinations of events. M. Madeleine was in the habit of almostnever entering the women’s workroom.
At the head of this room he had placed an elderly spinster, whom thepriest had provided for him, and he had full confidence in thissuperintendent,—a truly respectable person, firm, equitable, upright,full of the charity which consists in giving, but not having in thesame degree that charity which consists in understanding and inforgiving. M. Madeleine relied wholly on her. The best men are oftenobliged to delegate their authority. It was with this full power, andthe conviction that she was doing right, that the superintendent hadinstituted the suit, judged, condemned, and executed Fantine.
As regards the fifty francs, she had given them from a fund which M.Madeleine had intrusted to her for charitable purposes, and for givingassistance to the workwomen, and of which she rendered no account.
Fantine tried to obtain a situation as a servant in the neighborhood;she went from house to house. No one would have her. She could notleave town. The second-hand dealer, to whom she was in debt for herfurniture—and what furniture!—said to her, “If you leave, I will haveyou arrested as a thief.” The householder, whom she owed for her rent,said to her, “You are young and pretty; you can pay.” She divided thefifty francs between the landlord and the furniture-dealer, returned tothe latter three-quarters of his goods, kept only necessaries, andfound herself without work, without a trade, with nothing but her bed,and still about fifty francs in debt.
She began to make coarse shirts for soldiers of the garrison, andearned twelve sous a day. Her daughter cost her ten. It was at thispoint that she began to pay the Thénardiers irregularly.
However, the old woman who lighted her candle for her when she returnedat night, taught her the art of living in misery. Back of living onlittle, there is the living on nothing. These are the two chambers; thefirst is dark, the second is black.
Fantine learned how to live without fire entirely in the winter; how togive up a bird which eats a half a farthing’s worth of millet every twodays; how to make a coverlet of one’s petticoat, and a petticoat ofone’s coverlet; how to save one’s candle, by taking one’s meals by thelight of the opposite window. No one knows all that certain feeblecreatures, who have grown old in privation and honesty, can get out ofa sou. It ends by being a talent. Fantine acquired this sublime talent,and regained a little courage.
At this epoch she said to a neighbor, “Bah! I say to myself, by onlysleeping five hours, and working all the rest of the time at my sewing,I shall always manage to nearly earn my bread. And, then, when one issad, one eats less. Well, sufferings, uneasiness, a little bread on onehand, trouble on the other,—all this will support me.”

It would have been a great happiness to have her little girl with herin this distress. She thought of having her come. But what then! Makeher share her own destitution! And then, she was in debt to theThénardiers! How could she pay them? And the journey! How pay for that?
The old woman who had given her lessons in what may be called the lifeof indigence, was a sainted spinster named Marguerite, who was piouswith a true piety, poor and charitable towards the poor, and eventowards the rich, knowing how to write just sufficiently to signherself Marguerite, and believing in God, which is science.
There are many such virtuous people in this lower world; some day theywill be in the world above. This life has a morrow.
At first, Fantine had been so ashamed that she had not dared to go out.
When she was in the street, she divined that people turned round behindher, and pointed at her; every one stared at her and no one greetedher; the cold and bitter scorn of the passers-by penetrated her veryflesh and soul like a north wind.
It seems as though an unfortunate woman were utterly bare beneath thesarcasm and the curiosity of all in small towns. In Paris, at least, noone knows you, and this obscurity is a garment. Oh! how she would haveliked to betake herself to Paris! Impossible!
She was obliged to accustom herself to disrepute, as she had accustomedherself to indigence. Gradually she decided on her course. At theexpiration of two or three months she shook off her shame, and began togo about as though there were nothing the matter. “It is all the sameto me,” she said.
She went and came, bearing her head well up, with a bitter smile, andwas conscious that she was becoming brazen-faced.
Madame Victurnien sometimes saw her passing, from her window, noticedthe distress of “that creature” who, “thanks to her,” had been “putback in her proper place,” and congratulated herself. The happiness ofthe evil-minded is black.
Excess of toil wore out Fantine, and the little dry cough whichtroubled her increased. She sometimes said to her neighbor, Marguerite,“Just feel how hot my hands are!”

Nevertheless, when she combed her beautiful hair in the morning with anold broken comb, and it flowed about her like floss silk, sheexperienced a moment of happy coquetry.



CHAPTER X—RESULT OF THE SUCCESS

She had been dismissed towards the end of the winter; the summerpassed, but winter came again. Short days, less work. Winter: nowarmth, no light, no noonday, the evening joining on to the morning,fogs, twilight; the window is gray; it is impossible to see clearly atit. The sky is but a vent-hole. The whole day is a cavern. The sun hasthe air of a beggar. A frightful season! Winter changes the water ofheaven and the heart of man into a stone. Her creditors harrassed her.
Fantine earned too little. Her debts had increased. The Thénardiers,who were not promptly paid, wrote to her constantly letters whosecontents drove her to despair, and whose carriage ruined her. One daythey wrote to her that her little Cosette was entirely naked in thatcold weather, that she needed a woollen skirt, and that her mother mustsend at least ten francs for this. She received the letter, and crushedit in her hands all day long. That evening she went into a barber’sshop at the corner of the street, and pulled out her comb. Heradmirable golden hair fell to her knees.
“What splendid hair!” exclaimed the barber.
“How much will you give me for it?” said she.
“Ten francs.”

“Cut it off.”

She purchased a knitted petticoat and sent it to the Thénardiers. Thispetticoat made the Thénardiers furious. It was the money that theywanted. They gave the petticoat to Éponine. The poor Lark continued toshiver.
Fantine thought: “My child is no longer cold. I have clothed her withmy hair.” She put on little round caps which concealed her shorn head,and in which she was still pretty.
Dark thoughts held possession of Fantine’s heart.
When she saw that she could no longer dress her hair, she began to hateevery one about her. She had long shared the universal veneration forFather Madeleine; yet, by dint of repeating to herself that it was hewho had discharged her, that he was the cause of her unhappiness, shecame to hate him also, and most of all. When she passed the factory inworking hours, when the workpeople were at the door, she affected tolaugh and sing.
An old workwoman who once saw her laughing and singing in this fashionsaid, “There’s a girl who will come to a bad end.”

She took a lover, the first who offered, a man whom she did not love,out of bravado and with rage in her heart. He was a miserable scamp, asort of mendicant musician, a lazy beggar, who beat her, and whoabandoned her as she had taken him, in disgust.
She adored her child.
The lower she descended, the darker everything grew about her, the moreradiant shone that little angel at the bottom of her heart. She said,“When I get rich, I will have my Cosette with me;” and she laughed. Hercough did not leave her, and she had sweats on her back.
One day she received from the Thénardiers a letter couched in thefollowing terms: “Cosette is ill with a malady which is going therounds of the neighborhood. A miliary fever, they call it. Expensivedrugs are required. This is ruining us, and we can no longer pay forthem. If you do not send us forty francs before the week is out, thelittle one will be dead.”

She burst out laughing, and said to her old neighbor: “Ah! they aregood! Forty francs! the idea! That makes two napoleons! Where do theythink I am to get them? These peasants are stupid, truly.”

Nevertheless she went to a dormer window in the staircase and read theletter once more. Then she descended the stairs and emerged, runningand leaping and still laughing.
Some one met her and said to her, “What makes you so gay?”

She replied: “A fine piece of stupidity that some country people havewritten to me. They demand forty francs of me. So much for you, youpeasants!”

As she crossed the square, she saw a great many people collected arounda carriage of eccentric shape, upon the top of which stood a mandressed in red, who was holding forth. He was a quack dentist on hisrounds, who was offering to the public full sets of teeth, opiates,powders and elixirs.
Fantine mingled in the group, and began to laugh with the rest at theharangue, which contained slang for the populace and jargon forrespectable people. The tooth-puller espied the lovely, laughing girl,and suddenly exclaimed: “You have beautiful teeth, you girl there, whoare laughing; if you want to sell me your palettes, I will give you agold napoleon apiece for them.”

“What are my palettes?” asked Fantine.
“The palettes,” replied the dental professor, “are the front teeth, thetwo upper ones.”

“How horrible!” exclaimed Fantine.
“Two napoleons!” grumbled a toothless old woman who was present.“Here’s a lucky girl!”

Fantine fled and stopped her ears that she might not hear the hoarsevoice of the man shouting to her: “Reflect, my beauty! two napoleons;they may prove of service. If your heart bids you, come this evening tothe inn of the _Tillac d’Argent_; you will find me there.”

Fantine returned home. She was furious, and related the occurrence toher good neighbor Marguerite: “Can you understand such a thing? Is henot an abominable man? How can they allow such people to go about thecountry! Pull out my two front teeth! Why, I should be horrible! Myhair will grow again, but my teeth! Ah! what a monster of a man! Ishould prefer to throw myself head first on the pavement from the fifthstory! He told me that he should be at the _Tillac d’Argent_ thisevening.”

“And what did he offer?” asked Marguerite.
“Two napoleons.”

“That makes forty francs.”

“Yes,” said Fantine; “that makes forty francs.”

She remained thoughtful, and began her work. At the expiration of aquarter of an hour she left her sewing and went to read theThénardiers’ letter once more on the staircase.
On her return, she said to Marguerite, who was at work beside her:—
“What is a miliary fever? Do you know?”

“Yes,” answered the old spinster; “it is a disease.”

“Does it require many drugs?”

“Oh! terrible drugs.”

“How does one get it?”

“It is a malady that one gets without knowing how.”

“Then it attacks children?”

“Children in particular.”

“Do people die of it?”

“They may,” said Marguerite.
Fantine left the room and went to read her letter once more on thestaircase.
That evening she went out, and was seen to turn her steps in thedirection of the Rue de Paris, where the inns are situated.
The next morning, when Marguerite entered Fantine’s room beforedaylight,—for they always worked together, and in this manner used onlyone candle for the two,—she found Fantine seated on her bed, pale andfrozen. She had not lain down. Her cap had fallen on her knees. Hercandle had burned all night, and was almost entirely consumed.Marguerite halted on the threshold, petrified at this tremendouswastefulness, and exclaimed:—
“Lord! the candle is all burned out! Something has happened.”

Then she looked at Fantine, who turned toward her her head bereft ofits hair.
Fantine had grown ten years older since the preceding night.
“Jesus!” said Marguerite, “what is the matter with you, Fantine?”

“Nothing,” replied Fantine. “Quite the contrary. My child will not dieof that frightful malady, for lack of succor. I am content.”

So saying, she pointed out to the spinster two napoleons which wereglittering on the table.
“Ah! Jesus God!” cried Marguerite. “Why, it is a fortune! Where did youget those louis d’or?”

“I got them,” replied Fantine.
At the same time she smiled. The candle illuminated her countenance. Itwas a bloody smile. A reddish saliva soiled the corners of her lips,and she had a black hole in her mouth.
The two teeth had been extracted.
She sent the forty francs to Montfermeil.
After all it was a ruse of the Thénardiers to obtain money. Cosette wasnot ill.
Fantine threw her mirror out of the window. She had long since quittedher cell on the second floor for an attic with only a latch to fastenit, next the roof; one of those attics whose extremity forms an anglewith the floor, and knocks you on the head every instant. The pooroccupant can reach the end of his chamber as he can the end of hisdestiny, only by bending over more and more.
She had no longer a bed; a rag which she called her coverlet, amattress on the floor, and a seatless chair still remained. A littlerosebush which she had, had dried up, forgotten, in one corner. In theother corner was a butter-pot to hold water, which froze in winter, andin which the various levels of the water remained long marked by thesecircles of ice. She had lost her shame; she lost her coquetry. A finalsign. She went out, with dirty caps. Whether from lack of time or fromindifference, she no longer mended her linen. As the heels wore out,she dragged her stockings down into her shoes. This was evident fromthe perpendicular wrinkles. She patched her bodice, which was old andworn out, with scraps of calico which tore at the slightest movement.The people to whom she was indebted made “scenes” and gave her nopeace. She found them in the street, she found them again on herstaircase. She passed many a night weeping and thinking. Her eyes werevery bright, and she felt a steady pain in her shoulder towards the topof the left shoulder-blade. She coughed a great deal. She deeply hatedFather Madeleine, but made no complaint. She sewed seventeen hours aday; but a contractor for the work of prisons, who made the prisonerswork at a discount, suddenly made prices fall, which reduced the dailyearnings of working-women to nine sous. Seventeen hours of toil, andnine sous a day! Her creditors were more pitiless than ever. Thesecond-hand dealer, who had taken back nearly all his furniture, saidto her incessantly, “When will you pay me, you hussy?” What did theywant of her, good God! She felt that she was being hunted, andsomething of the wild beast developed in her. About the same time,Thénardier wrote to her that he had waited with decidedly too muchamiability and that he must have a hundred francs at once; otherwise hewould turn little Cosette out of doors, convalescent as she was fromher heavy illness, into the cold and the streets, and that she might dowhat she liked with herself, and die if she chose. “A hundred francs,”thought Fantine. “But in what trade can one earn a hundred sous a day?”

“Come!” said she, “let us sell what is left.”

The unfortunate girl became a woman of the town.



CHAPTER XI—CHRISTUS NOS LIBERAVIT

What is this history of Fantine? It is society purchasing a slave.
From whom? From misery.
From hunger, cold, isolation, destitution. A dolorous bargain. A soulfor a morsel of bread. Misery offers; society accepts.
The sacred law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization, but it doesnot, as yet, permeate it; it is said that slavery has disappeared fromEuropean civilization. This is a mistake. It still exists; but itweighs only upon the woman, and it is called prostitution.
It weighs upon the woman, that is to say, upon grace, weakness, beauty,maternity. This is not one of the least of man’s disgraces.
At the point in this melancholy drama which we have now reached,nothing is left to Fantine of that which she had formerly been.
She has become marble in becoming mire. Whoever touches her feels cold.She passes; she endures you; she ignores you; she is the severe anddishonored figure. Life and the social order have said their last wordfor her. All has happened to her that will happen to her. She has felteverything, borne everything, experienced everything, sufferedeverything, lost everything, mourned everything. She is resigned, withthat resignation which resembles indifference, as death resemblessleep. She no longer avoids anything. Let all the clouds fall upon her,and all the ocean sweep over her! What matters it to her? She is asponge that is soaked.
At least, she believes it to be so; but it is an error to imagine thatfate can be exhausted, and that one has reached the bottom of anythingwhatever.
Alas! What are all these fates, driven on pell-mell? Whither are theygoing? Why are they thus?
He who knows that sees the whole of the shadow.
He is alone. His name is God.



CHAPTER XII—M. BAMATABOIS’S INACTIVITY

There is in all small towns, and there was at M. sur M. in particular,a class of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundredfrancs with the same air with which their prototypes devour two hundredthousand francs a year in Paris. These are beings of the great neuterspecies: impotent men, parasites, cyphers, who have a little land, alittle folly, a little wit; who would be rustics in a drawing-room, andwho think themselves gentlemen in the dram-shop; who say, “My fields,my peasants, my woods”; who hiss actresses at the theatre to prove thatthey are persons of taste; quarrel with the officers of the garrison toprove that they are men of war; hunt, smoke, yawn, drink, smell oftobacco, play billiards, stare at travellers as they descend from thediligence, live at the café, dine at the inn, have a dog which eats thebones under the table, and a mistress who eats the dishes on the table;who stick at a sou, exaggerate the fashions, admire tragedy, despisewomen, wear out their old boots, copy London through Paris, and Paristhrough the medium of Pont-à-Mousson, grow old as dullards, never work,serve no use, and do no great harm.
M. Félix Tholomyès, had he remained in his own province and neverbeheld Paris, would have been one of these men.
If they were richer, one would say, “They are dandies;” if they werepoorer, one would say, “They are idlers.” They are simply men withoutemployment. Among these unemployed there are bores, the bored,dreamers, and some knaves.
At that period a dandy was composed of a tall collar, a big cravat, awatch with trinkets, three vests of different colors, worn one on topof the other—the red and blue inside; of a short-waisted olive coat,with a codfish tail, a double row of silver buttons set close to eachother and running up to the shoulder; and a pair of trousers of alighter shade of olive, ornamented on the two seams with an indefinite,but always uneven, number of lines, varying from one to eleven—a limitwhich was never exceeded. Add to this, high shoes with little irons onthe heels, a tall hat with a narrow brim, hair worn in a tuft, anenormous cane, and conversation set off by puns of Potier. Over all,spurs and a moustache. At that epoch moustaches indicated thebourgeois, and spurs the pedestrian.
The provincial dandy wore the longest of spurs and the fiercest ofmoustaches.
It was the period of the conflict of the republics of South Americawith the King of Spain, of Bolivar against Morillo. Narrow-brimmed hatswere royalist, and were called _morillos_; liberals wore hats with widebrims, which were called _bolivars_.
Eight or ten months, then, after that which is related in the precedingpages, towards the first of January, 1823, on a snowy evening, one ofthese dandies, one of these unemployed, a “right thinker,” for he worea morillo, and was, moreover, warmly enveloped in one of those largecloaks which completed the fashionable costume in cold weather, wasamusing himself by tormenting a creature who was prowling about in aball-dress, with neck uncovered and flowers in her hair, in front ofthe officers’ café. This dandy was smoking, for he was decidedlyfashionable.
Each time that the woman passed in front of him, he bestowed on her,together with a puff from his cigar, some apostrophe which heconsidered witty and mirthful, such as, “How ugly you are!—Will you getout of my sight?—You have no teeth!” etc., etc. This gentleman wasknown as M. Bamatabois. The woman, a melancholy, decorated spectrewhich went and came through the snow, made him no reply, did not evenglance at him, and nevertheless continued her promenade in silence, andwith a sombre regularity, which brought her every five minutes withinreach of this sarcasm, like the condemned soldier who returns under therods. The small effect which he produced no doubt piqued the lounger;and taking advantage of a moment when her back was turned, he crept upbehind her with the gait of a wolf, and stifling his laugh, bent down,picked up a handful of snow from the pavement, and thrust it abruptlyinto her back, between her bare shoulders. The woman uttered a roar,whirled round, gave a leap like a panther, and hurled herself upon theman, burying her nails in his face, with the most frightful words whichcould fall from the guard-room into the gutter. These insults, pouredforth in a voice roughened by brandy, did, indeed, proceed in hideouswise from a mouth which lacked its two front teeth. It was Fantine.
At the noise thus produced, the officers ran out in throngs from thecafé, passers-by collected, and a large and merry circle, hooting andapplauding, was formed around this whirlwind composed of two beings,whom there was some difficulty in recognizing as a man and a woman: theman struggling, his hat on the ground; the woman striking out with feetand fists, bareheaded, howling, minus hair and teeth, livid with wrath,horrible.
Suddenly a man of lofty stature emerged vivaciously from the crowd,seized the woman by her satin bodice, which was covered with mud, andsaid to her, “Follow me!”

The woman raised her head; her furious voice suddenly died away. Hereyes were glassy; she turned pale instead of livid, and she trembledwith a quiver of terror. She had recognized Javert.
The dandy took advantage of the incident to make his escape.



CHAPTER XIII—THE SOLUTION OF SOME QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THEMUNICIPAL POLICE

Javert thrust aside the spectators, broke the circle, and set out withlong strides towards the police station, which is situated at theextremity of the square, dragging the wretched woman after him. Sheyielded mechanically. Neither he nor she uttered a word. The cloud ofspectators followed, jesting, in a paroxysm of delight. Supreme miseryan occasion for obscenity.
On arriving at the police station, which was a low room, warmed by astove, with a glazed and grated door opening on the street, and guardedby a detachment, Javert opened the door, entered with Fantine, and shutthe door behind him, to the great disappointment of the curious, whoraised themselves on tiptoe, and craned their necks in front of thethick glass of the station-house, in their effort to see. Curiosity isa sort of gluttony. To see is to devour.
On entering, Fantine fell down in a corner, motionless and mute,crouching down like a terrified dog.
The sergeant of the guard brought a lighted candle to the table. Javertseated himself, drew a sheet of stamped paper from his pocket, andbegan to write.
This class of women is consigned by our laws entirely to the discretionof the police. The latter do what they please, punish them, as seemsgood to them, and confiscate at their will those two sorry things whichthey entitle their industry and their liberty. Javert was impassive;his grave face betrayed no emotion whatever. Nevertheless, he wasseriously and deeply preoccupied. It was one of those moments when hewas exercising without control, but subject to all the scruples of asevere conscience, his redoubtable discretionary power. At that momenthe was conscious that his police agent’s stool was a tribunal. He wasentering judgment. He judged and condemned. He summoned all the ideaswhich could possibly exist in his mind, around the great thing which hewas doing. The more he examined the deed of this woman, the moreshocked he felt. It was evident that he had just witnessed thecommission of a crime. He had just beheld, yonder, in the street,society, in the person of a freeholder and an elector, insulted andattacked by a creature who was outside all pales. A prostitute had madean attempt on the life of a citizen. He had seen that, he, Javert. Hewrote in silence.
When he had finished he signed the paper, folded it, and said to thesergeant of the guard, as he handed it to him, “Take three men andconduct this creature to jail.”

Then, turning to Fantine, “You are to have six months of it.” Theunhappy woman shuddered.
“Six months! six months of prison!” she exclaimed. “Six months in whichto earn seven sous a day! But what will become of Cosette? My daughter!my daughter! But I still owe the Thénardiers over a hundred francs; doyou know that, Monsieur Inspector?”

She dragged herself across the damp floor, among the muddy boots of allthose men, without rising, with clasped hands, and taking great strideson her knees.
“Monsieur Javert,” said she, “I beseech your mercy. I assure you that Iwas not in the wrong. If you had seen the beginning, you would haveseen. I swear to you by the good God that I was not to blame! Thatgentleman, the bourgeois, whom I do not know, put snow in my back. Hasany one the right to put snow down our backs when we are walking alongpeaceably, and doing no harm to any one? I am rather ill, as you see.And then, he had been saying impertinent things to me for a long time:‘You are ugly! you have no teeth!’ I know well that I have no longerthose teeth. I did nothing; I said to myself, ‘The gentleman is amusinghimself.’ I was honest with him; I did not speak to him. It was at thatmoment that he put the snow down my back. Monsieur Javert, goodMonsieur Inspector! is there not some person here who saw it and cantell you that this is quite true? Perhaps I did wrong to get angry. Youknow that one is not master of one’s self at the first moment. Onegives way to vivacity; and then, when some one puts something cold downyour back just when you are not expecting it! I did wrong to spoil thatgentleman’s hat. Why did he go away? I would ask his pardon. Oh, myGod! It makes no difference to me whether I ask his pardon. Do me thefavor to-day, for this once, Monsieur Javert. Hold! you do not knowthat in prison one can earn only seven sous a day; it is not thegovernment’s fault, but seven sous is one’s earnings; and just fancy, Imust pay one hundred francs, or my little girl will be sent to me. Oh,my God! I cannot have her with me. What I do is so vile! Oh, myCosette! Oh, my little angel of the Holy Virgin! what will become ofher, poor creature? I will tell you: it is the Thénardiers,inn-keepers, peasants; and such people are unreasonable. They wantmoney. Don’t put me in prison! You see, there is a little girl who willbe turned out into the street to get along as best she may, in the veryheart of the winter; and you must have pity on such a being, my goodMonsieur Javert. If she were older, she might earn her living; but itcannot be done at that age. I am not a bad woman at bottom. It is notcowardliness and gluttony that have made me what I am. If I have drunkbrandy, it was out of misery. I do not love it; but it benumbs thesenses. When I was happy, it was only necessary to glance into myclosets, and it would have been evident that I was not a coquettish anduntidy woman. I had linen, a great deal of linen. Have pity on me,Monsieur Javert!”

She spoke thus, rent in twain, shaken with sobs, blinded with tears,her neck bare, wringing her hands, and coughing with a dry, shortcough, stammering softly with a voice of agony. Great sorrow is adivine and terrible ray, which transfigures the unhappy. At that momentFantine had become beautiful once more. From time to time she paused,and tenderly kissed the police agent’s coat. She would have softened aheart of granite; but a heart of wood cannot be softened.
“Come!” said Javert, “I have heard you out. Have you entirely finished?You will get six months. Now march! The Eternal Father in person coulddo nothing more.”

At these solemn words, _“the Eternal Father in person could do nothingmore,”_ she understood that her fate was sealed. She sank down,murmuring, “Mercy!”

Javert turned his back.
The soldiers seized her by the arms.
A few moments earlier a man had entered, but no one had paid any heedto him. He shut the door, leaned his back against it, and listened toFantine’s despairing supplications.
At the instant when the soldiers laid their hands upon the unfortunatewoman, who would not rise, he emerged from the shadow, and said:—
“One moment, if you please.”

Javert raised his eyes and recognized M. Madeleine. He removed his hat,and, saluting him with a sort of aggrieved awkwardness:—
“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor—”

The words “Mr. Mayor” produced a curious effect upon Fantine. She roseto her feet with one bound, like a spectre springing from the earth,thrust aside the soldiers with both arms, walked straight up to M.Madeleine before any one could prevent her, and gazing intently at him,with a bewildered air, she cried:—
“Ah! so it is you who are M. le Maire!”

Then she burst into a laugh, and spit in his face.
M. Madeleine wiped his face, and said:—
“Inspector Javert, set this woman at liberty.”

Javert felt that he was on the verge of going mad. He experienced atthat moment, blow upon blow and almost simultaneously, the most violentemotions which he had ever undergone in all his life. To see a woman ofthe town spit in the mayor’s face was a thing so monstrous that, in hismost daring flights of fancy, he would have regarded it as a sacrilegeto believe it possible. On the other hand, at the very bottom of histhought, he made a hideous comparison as to what this woman was, and asto what this mayor might be; and then he, with horror, caught a glimpseof I know not what simple explanation of this prodigious attack. Butwhen he beheld that mayor, that magistrate, calmly wipe his face andsay, _“Set this woman at liberty,”_ he underwent a sort of intoxicationof amazement; thought and word failed him equally; the sum total ofpossible astonishment had been exceeded in his case. He remained mute.
The words had produced no less strange an effect on Fantine. She raisedher bare arm, and clung to the damper of the stove, like a person whois reeling. Nevertheless, she glanced about her, and began to speak ina low voice, as though talking to herself:—
“At liberty! I am to be allowed to go! I am not to go to prison for sixmonths! Who said that? It is not possible that any one could have saidthat. I did not hear aright. It cannot have been that monster of amayor! Was it you, my good Monsieur Javert, who said that I was to beset free? Oh, see here! I will tell you about it, and you will let mego. That monster of a mayor, that old blackguard of a mayor, is thecause of all. Just imagine, Monsieur Javert, he turned me out! allbecause of a pack of rascally women, who gossip in the workroom. Ifthat is not a horror, what is? To dismiss a poor girl who is doing herwork honestly! Then I could no longer earn enough, and all this miseryfollowed. In the first place, there is one improvement which thesegentlemen of the police ought to make, and that is, to prevent prisoncontractors from wronging poor people. I will explain it to you, yousee: you are earning twelve sous at shirt-making, the price falls tonine sous; and it is not enough to live on. Then one has to becomewhatever one can. As for me, I had my little Cosette, and I wasactually forced to become a bad woman. Now you understand how it isthat that blackguard of a mayor caused all the mischief. After that Istamped on that gentleman’s hat in front of the officers’ café; but hehad spoiled my whole dress with snow. We women have but one silk dressfor evening wear. You see that I did not do wrong deliberately—truly,Monsieur Javert; and everywhere I behold women who are far more wickedthan I, and who are much happier. O Monsieur Javert! it was you whogave orders that I am to be set free, was it not? Make inquiries, speakto my landlord; I am paying my rent now; they will tell you that I amperfectly honest. Ah! my God! I beg your pardon; I have unintentionallytouched the damper of the stove, and it has made it smoke.”

M. Madeleine listened to her with profound attention. While she wasspeaking, he fumbled in his waistcoat, drew out his purse and openedit. It was empty. He put it back in his pocket. He said to Fantine,“How much did you say that you owed?”

Fantine, who was looking at Javert only, turned towards him:—
“Was I speaking to you?”

Then, addressing the soldiers:—
“Say, you fellows, did you see how I spit in his face? Ah! you oldwretch of a mayor, you came here to frighten me, but I’m not afraid ofyou. I am afraid of Monsieur Javert. I am afraid of my good MonsieurJavert!”

So saying, she turned to the inspector again:—
“And yet, you see, Mr. Inspector, it is necessary to be just. Iunderstand that you are just, Mr. Inspector; in fact, it is perfectlysimple: a man amuses himself by putting snow down a woman’s back, andthat makes the officers laugh; one must divert themselves in some way;and we—well, we are here for them to amuse themselves with, of course!And then, you, you come; you are certainly obliged to preserve order,you lead off the woman who is in the wrong; but on reflection, sinceyou are a good man, you say that I am to be set at liberty; it is forthe sake of the little one, for six months in prison would prevent mysupporting my child. ‘Only, don’t do it again, you hussy!’ Oh! I won’tdo it again, Monsieur Javert! They may do whatever they please to menow; I will not stir. But to-day, you see, I cried because it hurt me.I was not expecting that snow from the gentleman at all; and then as Itold you, I am not well; I have a cough; I seem to have a burning ballin my stomach, and the doctor tells me, ‘Take care of yourself.’ Here,feel, give me your hand; don’t be afraid—it is here.”

She no longer wept, her voice was caressing; she placed Javert’s coarsehand on her delicate, white throat and looked smilingly at him.
All at once she rapidly adjusted her disordered garments, dropped thefolds of her skirt, which had been pushed up as she dragged herselfalong, almost to the height of her knee, and stepped towards the door,saying to the soldiers in a low voice, and with a friendly nod:—
“Children, Monsieur l’Inspecteur has said that I am to be released, andI am going.”

She laid her hand on the latch of the door. One step more and she wouldbe in the street.
Javert up to that moment had remained erect, motionless, with his eyesfixed on the ground, cast athwart this scene like some displacedstatue, which is waiting to be put away somewhere.
The sound of the latch roused him. He raised his head with anexpression of sovereign authority, an expression all the more alarmingin proportion as the authority rests on a low level, ferocious in thewild beast, atrocious in the man of no estate.
“Sergeant!” he cried, “don’t you see that that jade is walking off! Whobade you let her go?”

“I,” said Madeleine.
Fantine trembled at the sound of Javert’s voice, and let go of thelatch as a thief relinquishes the article which he has stolen. At thesound of Madeleine’s voice she turned around, and from that momentforth she uttered no word, nor dared so much as to breathe freely, buther glance strayed from Madeleine to Javert, and from Javert toMadeleine in turn, according to which was speaking.
It was evident that Javert must have been exasperated beyond measurebefore he would permit himself to apostrophize the sergeant as he haddone, after the mayor’s suggestion that Fantine should be set atliberty. Had he reached the point of forgetting the mayor’s presence?Had he finally declared to himself that it was impossible that any“authority” should have given such an order, and that the mayor mustcertainly have said one thing by mistake for another, without intendingit? Or, in view of the enormities of which he had been a witness forthe past two hours, did he say to himself, that it was necessary torecur to supreme resolutions, that it was indispensable that the smallshould be made great, that the police spy should transform himself intoa magistrate, that the policeman should become a dispenser of justice,and that, in this prodigious extremity, order, law, morality,government, society in its entirety, was personified in him, Javert?
However that may be, when M. Madeleine uttered that word, _I_, as wehave just heard, Police Inspector Javert was seen to turn toward themayor, pale, cold, with blue lips, and a look of despair, his wholebody agitated by an imperceptible quiver and an unprecedentedoccurrence, and say to him, with downcast eyes but a firm voice:—
“Mr. Mayor, that cannot be.”

“Why not?” said M. Madeleine.
“This miserable woman has insulted a citizen.”

“Inspector Javert,” replied the mayor, in a calm and conciliating tone,“listen. You are an honest man, and I feel no hesitation in explainingmatters to you. Here is the true state of the case: I was passingthrough the square just as you were leading this woman away; there werestill groups of people standing about, and I made inquiries and learnedeverything; it was the townsman who was in the wrong and who shouldhave been arrested by properly conducted police.”

Javert retorted:—
“This wretch has just insulted Monsieur le Maire.”

“That concerns me,” said M. Madeleine. “My own insult belongs to me, Ithink. I can do what I please about it.”

“I beg Monsieur le Maire’s pardon. The insult is not to him but to thelaw.”

“Inspector Javert,” replied M. Madeleine, “the highest law isconscience. I have heard this woman; I know what I am doing.”

“And I, Mr. Mayor, do not know what I see.”

“Then content yourself with obeying.”

“I am obeying my duty. My duty demands that this woman shall serve sixmonths in prison.”

M. Madeleine replied gently:—
“Heed this well; she will not serve a single day.”

At this decisive word, Javert ventured to fix a searching look on themayor and to say, but in a tone of voice that was still profoundlyrespectful:—
“I am sorry to oppose Monsieur le Maire; it is for the first time in mylife, but he will permit me to remark that I am within the bounds of myauthority. I confine myself, since Monsieur le Maire desires it, to thequestion of the gentleman. I was present. This woman flung herself onMonsieur Bamatabois, who is an elector and the proprietor of thathandsome house with a balcony, which forms the corner of the esplanade,three stories high and entirely of cut stone. Such things as there arein the world! In any case, Monsieur le Maire, this is a question ofpolice regulations in the streets, and concerns me, and I shall detainthis woman Fantine.”

Then M. Madeleine folded his arms, and said in a severe voice which noone in the town had heard hitherto:—
“The matter to which you refer is one connected with the municipalpolice. According to the terms of articles nine, eleven, fifteen, andsixty-six of the code of criminal examination, I am the judge. I orderthat this woman shall be set at liberty.”

Javert ventured to make a final effort.
“But, Mr. Mayor—”

“I refer you to article eighty-one of the law of the 13th of December,1799, in regard to arbitrary detention.”

“Monsieur le Maire, permit me—”

“Not another word.”

“But—”

“Leave the room,” said M. Madeleine.
Javert received the blow erect, full in the face, in his breast, like aRussian soldier. He bowed to the very earth before the mayor and leftthe room.
Fantine stood aside from the door and stared at him in amazement as hepassed.
Nevertheless, she also was the prey to a strange confusion. She hadjust seen herself a subject of dispute between two opposing powers. Shehad seen two men who held in their hands her liberty, her life, hersoul, her child, in combat before her very eyes; one of these men wasdrawing her towards darkness, the other was leading her back towardsthe light. In this conflict, viewed through the exaggerations ofterror, these two men had appeared to her like two giants; the onespoke like her demon, the other like her good angel. The angel hadconquered the demon, and, strange to say, that which made her shudderfrom head to foot was the fact that this angel, this liberator, was thevery man whom she abhorred, that mayor whom she had so long regarded asthe author of all her woes, that Madeleine! And at the very moment whenshe had insulted him in so hideous a fashion, he had saved her! Hadshe, then, been mistaken? Must she change her whole soul? She did notknow; she trembled. She listened in bewilderment, she looked on inaffright, and at every word uttered by M. Madeleine she felt thefrightful shades of hatred crumble and melt within her, and somethingwarm and ineffable, indescribable, which was both joy, confidence andlove, dawn in her heart.
When Javert had taken his departure, M. Madeleine turned to her andsaid to her in a deliberate voice, like a serious man who does not wishto weep and who finds some difficulty in speaking:—
“I have heard you. I knew nothing about what you have mentioned. Ibelieve that it is true, and I feel that it is true. I was evenignorant of the fact that you had left my shop. Why did you not applyto me? But here; I will pay your debts, I will send for your child, oryou shall go to her. You shall live here, in Paris, or where youplease. I undertake the care of your child and yourself. You shall notwork any longer if you do not like. I will give all the money yourequire. You shall be honest and happy once more. And listen! I declareto you that if all is as you say,—and I do not doubt it,—you have neverceased to be virtuous and holy in the sight of God. Oh! poor woman.”

This was more than Fantine could bear. To have Cosette! To leave thislife of infamy. To live free, rich, happy, respectable with Cosette; tosee all these realities of paradise blossom of a sudden in the midst ofher misery. She stared stupidly at this man who was talking to her, andcould only give vent to two or three sobs, “Oh! Oh! Oh!”

Her limbs gave way beneath her, she knelt in front of M. Madeleine, andbefore he could prevent her he felt her grasp his hand and press herlips to it.
Then she fainted.



BOOK SIXTH—JAVERT



CHAPTER I—THE BEGINNING OF REPOSE

M. Madeleine had Fantine removed to that infirmary which he hadestablished in his own house. He confided her to the sisters, who puther to bed. A burning fever had come on. She passed a part of the nightin delirium and raving. At length, however, she fell asleep.
On the morrow, towards midday, Fantine awoke. She heard some onebreathing close to her bed; she drew aside the curtain and saw M.Madeleine standing there and looking at something over her head. Hisgaze was full of pity, anguish, and supplication. She followed itsdirection, and saw that it was fixed on a crucifix which was nailed tothe wall.
Thenceforth, M. Madeleine was transfigured in Fantine’s eyes. He seemedto her to be clothed in light. He was absorbed in a sort of prayer. Shegazed at him for a long time without daring to interrupt him. At lastshe said timidly:—
“What are you doing?”

M. Madeleine had been there for an hour. He had been waiting forFantine to awake. He took her hand, felt of her pulse, and replied:—
“How do you feel?”

“Well, I have slept,” she replied; “I think that I am better. It isnothing.”

He answered, responding to the first question which she had put to himas though he had just heard it:—
“I was praying to the martyr there on high.”

And he added in his own mind, “For the martyr here below.”

M. Madeleine had passed the night and the morning in making inquiries.He knew all now. He knew Fantine’s history in all its heart-rendingdetails. He went on:—
“You have suffered much, poor mother. Oh! do not complain; you now havethe dowry of the elect. It is thus that men are transformed intoangels. It is not their fault they do not know how to go to workotherwise. You see this hell from which you have just emerged is thefirst form of heaven. It was necessary to begin there.”

He sighed deeply. But she smiled on him with that sublime smile inwhich two teeth were lacking.
That same night, Javert wrote a letter. The next morning be posted ithimself at the office of M. sur M. It was addressed to Paris, and thesuperscription ran: _To Monsieur Chabouillet, Secretary of Monsieur lePréfet of Police_. As the affair in the station-house had been bruitedabout, the post-mistress and some other persons who saw the letterbefore it was sent off, and who recognized Javert’s handwriting on thecover, thought that he was sending in his resignation.
M. Madeleine made haste to write to the Thénardiers. Fantine owed themone hundred and twenty francs. He sent them three hundred francs,telling them to pay themselves from that sum, and to fetch the childinstantly to M. sur M., where her sick mother required her presence.
This dazzled Thénardier. “The devil!” said the man to his wife; “don’tlet’s allow the child to go. This lark is going to turn into a milchcow. I see through it. Some ninny has taken a fancy to the mother.”

He replied with a very well drawn-up bill for five hundred and some oddfrancs. In this memorandum two indisputable items figured up over threehundred francs,—one for the doctor, the other for the apothecary whohad attended and physicked Éponine and Azelma through two longillnesses. Cosette, as we have already said, had not been ill. It wasonly a question of a trifling substitution of names. At the foot of thememorandum Thénardier wrote, _Received on account, three hundredfrancs_.
M. Madeleine immediately sent three hundred francs more, and wrote,“Make haste to bring Cosette.”

“Christi!” said Thénardier, “let’s not give up the child.”

In the meantime, Fantine did not recover. She still remained in theinfirmary.
The sisters had at first only received and nursed “that woman” withrepugnance. Those who have seen the bas-reliefs of Rheims will recallthe inflation of the lower lip of the wise virgins as they survey thefoolish virgins. The ancient scorn of the vestals for the ambubajæ isone of the most profound instincts of feminine dignity; the sistersfelt it with the double force contributed by religion. But in a fewdays Fantine disarmed them. She said all kinds of humble and gentlethings, and the mother in her provoked tenderness. One day the sistersheard her say amid her fever: “I have been a sinner; but when I have mychild beside me, it will be a sign that God has pardoned me. While Iwas leading a bad life, I should not have liked to have my Cosette withme; I could not have borne her sad, astonished eyes. It was for hersake that I did evil, and that is why God pardons me. I shall feel thebenediction of the good God when Cosette is here. I shall gaze at her;it will do me good to see that innocent creature. She knows nothing atall. She is an angel, you see, my sisters. At that age the wings havenot fallen off.”

M. Madeleine went to see her twice a day, and each time she asked him:—
“Shall I see my Cosette soon?”

He answered:—
“To-morrow, perhaps. She may arrive at any moment. I am expecting her.”

And the mother’s pale face grew radiant.
“Oh!” she said, “how happy I am going to be!”

We have just said that she did not recover her health. On the contrary,her condition seemed to become more grave from week to week. Thathandful of snow applied to her bare skin between her shoulder-bladeshad brought about a sudden suppression of perspiration, as aconsequence of which the malady which had been smouldering within herfor many years was violently developed at last. At that time peoplewere beginning to follow the fine Laënnec’s fine suggestions in thestudy and treatment of chest maladies. The doctor sounded Fantine’schest and shook his head.
M. Madeleine said to the doctor:—
“Well?”

“Has she not a child which she desires to see?” said the doctor.
“Yes.”

“Well! Make haste and get it here!”

M. Madeleine shuddered.
Fantine inquired:—
“What did the doctor say?”

M. Madeleine forced himself to smile.
“He said that your child was to be brought speedily. That that wouldrestore your health.”

“Oh!” she rejoined, “he is right! But what do those Thénardiers mean bykeeping my Cosette from me! Oh! she is coming. At last I beholdhappiness close beside me!”

In the meantime Thénardier did not “let go of the child,” and gave ahundred insufficient reasons for it. Cosette was not quite well enoughto take a journey in the winter. And then, there still remained somepetty but pressing debts in the neighborhood, and they were collectingthe bills for them, etc., etc.
“I shall send some one to fetch Cosette!” said Father Madeleine. “Ifnecessary, I will go myself.”

He wrote the following letter to Fantine’s dictation, and made her signit:—
“MONSIEUR THÉNARDIER:—You will deliver Cosette to this person.You will be paid for all the little things.I have the honor to salute you with respect.“FANTINE.”

In the meantime a serious incident occurred. Carve as we will themysterious block of which our life is made, the black vein of destinyconstantly reappears in it.



CHAPTER II—HOW JEAN MAY BECOME CHAMP

One morning M. Madeleine was in his study, occupied in arranging inadvance some pressing matters connected with the mayor’s office, incase he should decide to take the trip to Montfermeil, when he wasinformed that Police Inspector Javert was desirous of speaking withhim. Madeleine could not refrain from a disagreeable impression onhearing this name. Javert had avoided him more than ever since theaffair of the police-station, and M. Madeleine had not seen him.
“Admit him,” he said.
Javert entered.
M. Madeleine had retained his seat near the fire, pen in hand, his eyesfixed on the docket which he was turning over and annotating, and whichcontained the trials of the commission on highways for the infractionof police regulations. He did not disturb himself on Javert’s account.He could not help thinking of poor Fantine, and it suited him to beglacial in his manner.
Javert bestowed a respectful salute on the mayor, whose back was turnedto him. The mayor did not look at him, but went on annotating thisdocket.
Javert advanced two or three paces into the study, and halted, withoutbreaking the silence.
If any physiognomist who had been familiar with Javert, and who hadmade a lengthy study of this savage in the service of civilization,this singular composite of the Roman, the Spartan, the monk, and thecorporal, this spy who was incapable of a lie, this unspotted policeagent—if any physiognomist had known his secret and long-cherishedaversion for M. Madeleine, his conflict with the mayor on the subjectof Fantine, and had examined Javert at that moment, he would have saidto himself, “What has taken place?” It was evident to any oneacquainted with that clear, upright, sincere, honest, austere, andferocious conscience, that Javert had but just gone through some greatinterior struggle. Javert had nothing in his soul which he had not alsoin his countenance. Like violent people in general, he was subject toabrupt changes of opinion. His physiognomy had never been more peculiarand startling. On entering he bowed to M. Madeleine with a look inwhich there was neither rancor, anger, nor distrust; he halted a fewpaces in the rear of the mayor’s armchair, and there he stood,perfectly erect, in an attitude almost of discipline, with the cold,ingenuous roughness of a man who has never been gentle and who hasalways been patient; he waited without uttering a word, without makinga movement, in genuine humility and tranquil resignation, calm,serious, hat in hand, with eyes cast down, and an expression which washalf-way between that of a soldier in the presence of his officer and acriminal in the presence of his judge, until it should please the mayorto turn round. All the sentiments as well as all the memories which onemight have attributed to him had disappeared. That face, asimpenetrable and simple as granite, no longer bore any trace ofanything but a melancholy depression. His whole person breathedlowliness and firmness and an indescribable courageous despondency.
At last the mayor laid down his pen and turned half round.
“Well! What is it? What is the matter, Javert?”

Javert remained silent for an instant as though collecting his ideas,then raised his voice with a sort of sad solemnity, which did not,however, preclude simplicity.
“This is the matter, Mr. Mayor; a culpable act has been committed.”

“What act?”

“An inferior agent of the authorities has failed in respect, and in thegravest manner, towards a magistrate. I have come to bring the fact toyour knowledge, as it is my duty to do.”

“Who is the agent?” asked M. Madeleine.
“I,” said Javert.
“You?”

“I.”

“And who is the magistrate who has reason to complain of the agent?”

“You, Mr. Mayor.”

M. Madeleine sat erect in his armchair. Javert went on, with a severeair and his eyes still cast down.
“Mr. Mayor, I have come to request you to instigate the authorities todismiss me.”

M. Madeleine opened his mouth in amazement. Javert interrupted him:—
“You will say that I might have handed in my resignation, but that doesnot suffice. Handing in one’s resignation is honorable. I have failedin my duty; I ought to be punished; I must be turned out.”

And after a pause he added:—
“Mr. Mayor, you were severe with me the other day, and unjustly. Be soto-day, with justice.”

“Come, now! Why?” exclaimed M. Madeleine. “What nonsense is this? Whatis the meaning of this? What culpable act have you been guilty oftowards me? What have you done to me? What are your wrongs with regardto me? You accuse yourself; you wish to be superseded—”

“Turned out,” said Javert.
“Turned out; so it be, then. That is well. I do not understand.”

“You shall understand, Mr. Mayor.”

Javert sighed from the very bottom of his chest, and resumed, stillcoldly and sadly:—
“Mr. Mayor, six weeks ago, in consequence of the scene over that woman,I was furious, and I informed against you.”

“Informed against me!”

“At the Prefecture of Police in Paris.”

M. Madeleine, who was not in the habit of laughing much oftener thanJavert himself, burst out laughing now:—
“As a mayor who had encroached on the province of the police?”

“As an ex-convict.”

The mayor turned livid.
Javert, who had not raised his eyes, went on:—
“I thought it was so. I had had an idea for a long time; a resemblance;inquiries which you had caused to be made at Faverolles; the strengthof your loins; the adventure with old Fauchelevant; your skill inmarksmanship; your leg, which you drag a little;—I hardly know whatall,—absurdities! But, at all events, I took you for a certain JeanValjean.”

“A certain—What did you say the name was?”

“Jean Valjean. He was a convict whom I was in the habit of seeingtwenty years ago, when I was adjutant-guard of convicts at Toulon. Onleaving the galleys, this Jean Valjean, as it appears, robbed a bishop;then he committed another theft, accompanied with violence, on a publichighway on the person of a little Savoyard. He disappeared eight yearsago, no one knows how, and he has been sought, I fancied. In short, Idid this thing! Wrath impelled me; I denounced you at the Prefecture!”

M. Madeleine, who had taken up the docket again several moments beforethis, resumed with an air of perfect indifference:—
“And what reply did you receive?”

“That I was mad.”

“Well?”

“Well, they were right.”

“It is lucky that you recognize the fact.”

“I am forced to do so, since the real Jean Valjean has been found.”

The sheet of paper which M. Madeleine was holding dropped from hishand; he raised his head, gazed fixedly at Javert, and said with hisindescribable accent:—
“Ah!”

Javert continued:—
“This is the way it is, Mr. Mayor. It seems that there was in theneighborhood near Ailly-le-Haut-Clocher an old fellow who was calledFather Champmathieu. He was a very wretched creature. No one paid anyattention to him. No one knows what such people subsist on. Lately,last autumn, Father Champmathieu was arrested for the theft of somecider apples from—Well, no matter, a theft had been committed, a wallscaled, branches of trees broken. My Champmathieu was arrested. Hestill had the branch of apple-tree in his hand. The scamp is locked up.Up to this point it was merely an affair of a misdemeanor. But here iswhere Providence intervened.
“The jail being in a bad condition, the examining magistrate finds itconvenient to transfer Champmathieu to Arras, where the departmentalprison is situated. In this prison at Arras there is an ex-convictnamed Brevet, who is detained for I know not what, and who has beenappointed turnkey of the house, because of good behavior. Mr. Mayor, nosooner had Champmathieu arrived than Brevet exclaims: ‘Eh! Why, I knowthat man! He is a _fagot!_4 Take a good look at me, my good man! Youare Jean Valjean!’ ‘Jean Valjean! who’s Jean Valjean?’ Champmathieufeigns astonishment. ‘Don’t play the innocent dodge,’ says Brevet. ‘Youare Jean Valjean! You have been in the galleys of Toulon; it was twentyyears ago; we were there together.’ Champmathieu denies it. Parbleu!You understand. The case is investigated. The thing was well ventilatedfor me. This is what they discovered: This Champmathieu had been,thirty years ago, a pruner of trees in various localities, notably atFaverolles. There all trace of him was lost. A long time afterwards hewas seen again in Auvergne; then in Paris, where he is said to havebeen a wheelwright, and to have had a daughter, who was a laundress;but that has not been proved. Now, before going to the galleys fortheft, what was Jean Valjean? A pruner of trees. Where? At Faverolles.Another fact. This Valjean’s Christian name was Jean, and his mother’ssurname was Mathieu. What more natural to suppose than that, onemerging from the galleys, he should have taken his mother’s name forthe purpose of concealing himself, and have called himself JeanMathieu? He goes to Auvergne. The local pronunciation turns _Jean_ into_Chan_—he is called Chan Mathieu. Our man offers no opposition, andbehold him transformed into Champmathieu. You follow me, do you not?Inquiries were made at Faverolles. The family of Jean Valjean is nolonger there. It is not known where they have gone. You know that amongthose classes a family often disappears. Search was made, and nothingwas found. When such people are not mud, they are dust. And then, asthe beginning of the story dates thirty years back, there is no longerany one at Faverolles who knew Jean Valjean. Inquiries were made atToulon. Besides Brevet, there are only two convicts in existence whohave seen Jean Valjean; they are Cochepaille and Chenildieu, and aresentenced for life. They are taken from the galleys and confronted withthe pretended Champmathieu. They do not hesitate; he is Jean Valjeanfor them as well as for Brevet. The same age,—he is fifty-four,—thesame height, the same air, the same man; in short, it is he. It wasprecisely at this moment that I forwarded my denunciation to thePrefecture in Paris. I was told that I had lost my reason, and thatJean Valjean is at Arras, in the power of the authorities. You canimagine whether this surprised me, when I thought that I had that sameJean Valjean here. I write to the examining judge; he sends for me;Champmathieu is conducted to me—”

“Well?” interposed M. Madeleine.
Javert replied, his face incorruptible, and as melancholy as ever:—
“Mr. Mayor, the truth is the truth. I am sorry; but that man is JeanValjean. I recognized him also.”

M. Madeleine resumed in, a very low voice:—
“You are sure?”

Javert began to laugh, with that mournful laugh which comes fromprofound conviction.
“O! Sure!”

He stood there thoughtfully for a moment, mechanically taking pinchesof powdered wood for blotting ink from the wooden bowl which stood onthe table, and he added:—
“And even now that I have seen the real Jean Valjean, I do not see howI could have thought otherwise. I beg your pardon, Mr. Mayor.”

Javert, as he addressed these grave and supplicating words to the man,who six weeks before had humiliated him in the presence of the wholestation-house, and bade him “leave the room,”—Javert, that haughty man,was unconsciously full of simplicity and dignity,—M. Madeleine made noother reply to his prayer than the abrupt question:—
“And what does this man say?”

“Ah! Indeed, Mr. Mayor, it’s a bad business. If he is Jean Valjean, hehas his previous conviction against him. To climb a wall, to break abranch, to purloin apples, is a mischievous trick in a child; for a manit is a misdemeanor; for a convict it is a crime. Robbing andhousebreaking—it is all there. It is no longer a question ofcorrectional police; it is a matter for the Court of Assizes. It is nolonger a matter of a few days in prison; it is the galleys for life.And then, there is the affair with the little Savoyard, who willreturn, I hope. The deuce! there is plenty to dispute in the matter, isthere not? Yes, for any one but Jean Valjean. But Jean Valjean is a slydog. That is the way I recognized him. Any other man would have feltthat things were getting hot for him; he would struggle, he would cryout—the kettle sings before the fire; he would not be Jean Valjean, _etcetera_. But he has not the appearance of understanding; he says, ‘I amChampmathieu, and I won’t depart from that!’ He has an astonished air,he pretends to be stupid; it is far better. Oh! the rogue is clever!But it makes no difference. The proofs are there. He has beenrecognized by four persons; the old scamp will be condemned. The casehas been taken to the Assizes at Arras. I shall go there to give mytestimony. I have been summoned.”

M. Madeleine had turned to his desk again, and taken up his docket, andwas turning over the leaves tranquilly, reading and writing by turns,like a busy man. He turned to Javert:—
“That will do, Javert. In truth, all these details interest me butlittle. We are wasting our time, and we have pressing business on hand.Javert, you will betake yourself at once to the house of the womanBuseaupied, who sells herbs at the corner of the Rue Saint-Saulve. Youwill tell her that she must enter her complaint against carter PierreChesnelong. The man is a brute, who came near crushing this woman andher child. He must be punished. You will then go to M. Charcellay, RueMontre-de-Champigny. He complained that there is a gutter on theadjoining house which discharges rain-water on his premises, and isundermining the foundations of his house. After that, you will verifythe infractions of police regulations which have been reported to me inthe Rue Guibourg, at Widow Doris’s, and Rue du Garraud-Blanc, at MadameRenée le Bossé‘s, and you will prepare documents. But I am giving you agreat deal of work. Are you not to be absent? Did you not tell me thatyou were going to Arras on that matter in a week or ten days?”

“Sooner than that, Mr. Mayor.”

“On what day, then?”

“Why, I thought that I had said to Monsieur le Maire that the case wasto be tried to-morrow, and that I am to set out by diligence to-night.”

M. Madeleine made an imperceptible movement.
“And how long will the case last?”

“One day, at the most. The judgment will be pronounced to-morrowevening at latest. But I shall not wait for the sentence, which iscertain; I shall return here as soon as my deposition has been taken.”

“That is well,” said M. Madeleine.
And he dismissed Javert with a wave of the hand.
Javert did not withdraw.
“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor,” said he.
“What is it now?” demanded M. Madeleine.
“Mr. Mayor, there is still something of which I must remind you.”

“What is it?”

“That I must be dismissed.”

M. Madeleine rose.
“Javert, you are a man of honor, and I esteem you. You exaggerate yourfault. Moreover, this is an offence which concerns me. Javert, youdeserve promotion instead of degradation. I wish you to retain yourpost.”

Javert gazed at M. Madeleine with his candid eyes, in whose depths hisnot very enlightened but pure and rigid conscience seemed visible, andsaid in a tranquil voice:—
“Mr. Mayor, I cannot grant you that.”

“I repeat,” replied M. Madeleine, “that the matter concerns me.”

But Javert, heeding his own thought only, continued:—
“So far as exaggeration is concerned, I am not exaggerating. This isthe way I reason: I have suspected you unjustly. That is nothing. It isour right to cherish suspicion, although suspicion directed aboveourselves is an abuse. But without proofs, in a fit of rage, with theobject of wreaking my vengeance, I have denounced you as a convict,you, a respectable man, a mayor, a magistrate! That is serious, veryserious. I have insulted authority in your person, I, an agent of theauthorities! If one of my subordinates had done what I have done, Ishould have declared him unworthy of the service, and have expelledhim. Well? Stop, Mr. Mayor; one word more. I have often been severe inthe course of my life towards others. That is just. I have done well.Now, if I were not severe towards myself, all the justice that I havedone would become injustice. Ought I to spare myself more than others?No! What! I should be good for nothing but to chastise others, and notmyself! Why, I should be a blackguard! Those who say, ‘That blackguardof a Javert!’ would be in the right. Mr. Mayor, I do not desire thatyou should treat me kindly; your kindness roused sufficient bad bloodin me when it was directed to others. I want none of it for myself. Thekindness which consists in upholding a woman of the town against acitizen, the police agent against the mayor, the man who is downagainst the man who is up in the world, is what I call false kindness.That is the sort of kindness which disorganizes society. Good God! itis very easy to be kind; the difficulty lies in being just. Come! ifyou had been what I thought you, I should not have been kind to you,not I! You would have seen! Mr. Mayor, I must treat myself as I wouldtreat any other man. When I have subdued malefactors, when I haveproceeded with vigor against rascals, I have often said to myself, ‘Ifyou flinch, if I ever catch you in fault, you may rest at your ease!’ Ihave flinched, I have caught myself in a fault. So much the worse!Come, discharged, cashiered, expelled! That is well. I have arms. Iwill till the soil; it makes no difference to me. Mr. Mayor, the goodof the service demands an example. I simply require the discharge ofInspector Javert.”

All this was uttered in a proud, humble, despairing, yet convincedtone, which lent indescribable grandeur to this singular, honest man.
“We shall see,” said M. Madeleine.
And he offered him his hand.
Javert recoiled, and said in a wild voice:—
“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor, but this must not be. A mayor does not offer hishand to a police spy.”

He added between his teeth:—
“A police spy, yes; from the moment when I have misused the police. Iam no more than a police spy.”

Then he bowed profoundly, and directed his steps towards the door.
There he wheeled round, and with eyes still downcast:—
“Mr. Mayor,” he said, “I shall continue to serve until I amsuperseded.”

He withdrew. M. Madeleine remained thoughtfully listening to the firm,sure step, which died away on the pavement of the corridor.



BOOK SEVENTH—THE CHAMPMATHIEU AFFAIR



CHAPTER I—SISTER SIMPLICE

The incidents the reader is about to peruse were not all known at M.sur M. But the small portion of them which became known left such amemory in that town that a serious gap would exist in this book if wedid not narrate them in their most minute details. Among these detailsthe reader will encounter two or three improbable circumstances, whichwe preserve out of respect for the truth.
On the afternoon following the visit of Javert, M. Madeleine went tosee Fantine according to his wont.
Before entering Fantine’s room, he had Sister Simplice summoned.
The two nuns who performed the services of nurse in the infirmary,Lazariste ladies, like all sisters of charity, bore the names of SisterPerpétue and Sister Simplice.
Sister Perpétue was an ordinary villager, a sister of charity in acoarse style, who had entered the service of God as one enters anyother service. She was a nun as other women are cooks. This type is notso very rare. The monastic orders gladly accept this heavy peasantearthenware, which is easily fashioned into a Capuchin or an Ursuline.These rustics are utilized for the rough work of devotion. Thetransition from a drover to a Carmelite is not in the least violent;the one turns into the other without much effort; the fund of ignorancecommon to the village and the cloister is a preparation ready at hand,and places the boor at once on the same footing as the monk: a littlemore amplitude in the smock, and it becomes a frock. Sister Perpétuewas a robust nun from Marines near Pontoise, who chattered her patois,droned, grumbled, sugared the potion according to the bigotry or thehypocrisy of the invalid, treated her patients abruptly, roughly, wascrabbed with the dying, almost flung God in their faces, stoned theirdeath agony with prayers mumbled in a rage; was bold, honest, andruddy.
Sister Simplice was white, with a waxen pallor. Beside Sister Perpétue,she was the taper beside the candle. Vincent de Paul has divinelytraced the features of the Sister of Charity in these admirable words,in which he mingles as much freedom as servitude: “They shall have fortheir convent only the house of the sick; for cell only a hired room;for chapel only their parish church; for cloister only the streets ofthe town and the wards of the hospitals; for enclosure only obedience;for gratings only the fear of God; for veil only modesty.” This idealwas realized in the living person of Sister Simplice: she had neverbeen young, and it seemed as though she would never grow old. No onecould have told Sister Simplice’s age. She was a person—we dare not saya woman—who was gentle, austere, well-bred, cold, and who had neverlied. She was so gentle that she appeared fragile; but she was moresolid than granite. She touched the unhappy with fingers that werecharmingly pure and fine. There was, so to speak, silence in herspeech; she said just what was necessary, and she possessed a tone ofvoice which would have equally edified a confessional or enchanted adrawing-room. This delicacy accommodated itself to the serge gown,finding in this harsh contact a continual reminder of heaven and ofGod. Let us emphasize one detail. Never to have lied, never to havesaid, for any interest whatever, even in indifference, any single thingwhich was not the truth, the sacred truth, was Sister Simplice’sdistinctive trait; it was the accent of her virtue. She was almostrenowned in the congregation for this imperturbable veracity. The AbbéSicard speaks of Sister Simplice in a letter to the deaf-mute Massieu.However pure and sincere we may be, we all bear upon our candor thecrack of the little, innocent lie. She did not. Little lie, innocentlie—does such a thing exist? To lie is the absolute form of evil. Tolie a little is not possible: he who lies, lies the whole lie. To lieis the very face of the demon. Satan has two names; he is called Satanand Lying. That is what she thought; and as she thought, so she did.The result was the whiteness which we have mentioned—a whiteness whichcovered even her lips and her eyes with radiance. Her smile was white,her glance was white. There was not a single spider’s web, not a grainof dust, on the glass window of that conscience. On entering the orderof Saint Vincent de Paul, she had taken the name of Simplice by specialchoice. Simplice of Sicily, as we know, is the saint who preferred toallow both her breasts to be torn off rather than to say that she hadbeen born at Segesta when she had been born at Syracuse—a lie whichwould have saved her. This patron saint suited this soul.
Sister Simplice, on her entrance into the order, had had two faultswhich she had gradually corrected: she had a taste for dainties, andshe liked to receive letters. She never read anything but a book ofprayers printed in Latin, in coarse type. She did not understand Latin,but she understood the book.
This pious woman had conceived an affection for Fantine, probablyfeeling a latent virtue there, and she had devoted herself almostexclusively to her care.
M. Madeleine took Sister Simplice apart and recommended Fantine to herin a singular tone, which the sister recalled later on.
On leaving the sister, he approached Fantine.
Fantine awaited M. Madeleine’s appearance every day as one awaits a rayof warmth and joy. She said to the sisters, “I only live when Monsieurle Maire is here.”

She had a great deal of fever that day. As soon as she saw M. Madeleineshe asked him:—
“And Cosette?”

He replied with a smile:—
“Soon.”

M. Madeleine was the same as usual with Fantine. Only he remained anhour instead of half an hour, to Fantine’s great delight. He urgedevery one repeatedly not to allow the invalid to want for anything. Itwas noticed that there was a moment when his countenance became verysombre. But this was explained when it became known that the doctor hadbent down to his ear and said to him, “She is losing ground fast.”

Then he returned to the town-hall, and the clerk observed himattentively examining a road map of France which hung in his study. Hewrote a few figures on a bit of paper with a pencil.



CHAPTER II—THE PERSPICACITY OF MASTER SCAUFFLAIRE

From the town-hall he betook himself to the extremity of the town, to aFleming named Master Scaufflaer, French Scaufflaire, who let out“horses and cabriolets as desired.”

In order to reach this Scaufflaire, the shortest way was to take thelittle-frequented street in which was situated the parsonage of theparish in which M. Madeleine resided. The curé was, it was said, aworthy, respectable, and sensible man. At the moment when M. Madeleinearrived in front of the parsonage there was but one passer-by in thestreet, and this person noticed this: After the mayor had passed thepriest’s house he halted, stood motionless, then turned about, andretraced his steps to the door of the parsonage, which had an ironknocker. He laid his hand quickly on the knocker and lifted it; then hepaused again and stopped short, as though in thought, and after thelapse of a few seconds, instead of allowing the knocker to fallabruptly, he placed it gently, and resumed his way with a sort of hastewhich had not been apparent previously.
M. Madeleine found Master Scaufflaire at home, engaged in stitching aharness over.
“Master Scaufflaire,” he inquired, “have you a good horse?”

“Mr. Mayor,” said the Fleming, “all my horses are good. What do youmean by a good horse?”

“I mean a horse which can travel twenty leagues in a day.”

“The deuce!” said the Fleming. “Twenty leagues!”

“Yes.”

“Hitched to a cabriolet?”

“Yes.”

“And how long can he rest at the end of his journey?”

“He must be able to set out again on the next day if necessary.”

“To traverse the same road?”

“Yes.”

“The deuce! the deuce! And it is twenty leagues?”

M. Madeleine drew from his pocket the paper on which he had pencilledsome figures. He showed it to the Fleming. The figures were 5, 6, 8½.
“You see,” he said, “total, nineteen and a half; as well say twentyleagues.”

“Mr. Mayor,” returned the Fleming, “I have just what you want. Mylittle white horse—you may have seen him pass occasionally; he is asmall beast from Lower Boulonnais. He is full of fire. They wanted tomake a saddle-horse of him at first. Bah! He reared, he kicked, he laideverybody flat on the ground. He was thought to be vicious, and no oneknew what to do with him. I bought him. I harnessed him to a carriage.That is what he wanted, sir; he is as gentle as a girl; he goes likethe wind. Ah! indeed he must not be mounted. It does not suit his ideasto be a saddle-horse. Every one has his ambition. ‘Draw? Yes. Carry?No.’ We must suppose that is what he said to himself.”

“And he will accomplish the trip?”

“Your twenty leagues all at a full trot, and in less than eight hours.But here are the conditions.”

“State them.”

“In the first place, you will give him half an hour’s breathing spellmidway of the road; he will eat; and some one must be by while he iseating to prevent the stable boy of the inn from stealing his oats; forI have noticed that in inns the oats are more often drunk by the stablemen than eaten by the horses.”

“Some one will be by.”

“In the second place—is the cabriolet for Monsieur le Maire?”

“Yes.”

“Does Monsieur le Maire know how to drive?”

“Yes.”

“Well, Monsieur le Maire will travel alone and without baggage, inorder not to overload the horse?”

“Agreed.”

“But as Monsieur le Maire will have no one with him, he will be obligedto take the trouble himself of seeing that the oats are not stolen.”

“That is understood.”

“I am to have thirty francs a day. The days of rest to be paid foralso—not a farthing less; and the beast’s food to be at Monsieur leMaire’s expense.”

M. Madeleine drew three napoleons from his purse and laid them on thetable.
“Here is the pay for two days in advance.”

“Fourthly, for such a journey a cabriolet would be too heavy, and wouldfatigue the horse. Monsieur le Maire must consent to travel in a littletilbury that I own.”

“I consent to that.”

“It is light, but it has no cover.”

“That makes no difference to me.”

“Has Monsieur le Maire reflected that we are in the middle of winter?”

M. Madeleine did not reply. The Fleming resumed:—
“That it is very cold?”

M. Madeleine preserved silence.
Master Scaufflaire continued:—
“That it may rain?”

M. Madeleine raised his head and said:—
“The tilbury and the horse will be in front of my door to-morrowmorning at half-past four o’clock.”

“Of course, Monsieur le Maire,” replied Scaufflaire; then, scratching aspeck in the wood of the table with his thumb-nail, he resumed withthat careless air which the Flemings understand so well how to minglewith their shrewdness:—
“But this is what I am thinking of now: Monsieur le Maire has not toldme where he is going. Where is Monsieur le Maire going?”

He had been thinking of nothing else since the beginning of theconversation, but he did not know why he had not dared to put thequestion.
“Are your horse’s forelegs good?” said M. Madeleine.
“Yes, Monsieur le Maire. You must hold him in a little when going downhill. Are there many descends between here and the place whither youare going?”

“Do not forget to be at my door at precisely half-past four o’clockto-morrow morning,” replied M. Madeleine; and he took his departure.
The Fleming remained “utterly stupid,” as he himself said some timeafterwards.
The mayor had been gone two or three minutes when the door openedagain; it was the mayor once more.
He still wore the same impassive and preoccupied air.
“Monsieur Scaufflaire,” said he, “at what sum do you estimate the valueof the horse and tilbury which you are to let to me,—the one bearingthe other?”

“The one dragging the other, Monsieur le Maire,” said the Fleming, witha broad smile.
“So be it. Well?”

“Does Monsieur le Maire wish to purchase them or me?”

“No; but I wish to guarantee you in any case. You shall give me backthe sum at my return. At what value do you estimate your horse andcabriolet?”

“Five hundred francs, Monsieur le Maire.”

“Here it is.”

M. Madeleine laid a bank-bill on the table, then left the room; andthis time he did not return.
Master Scaufflaire experienced a frightful regret that he had not saida thousand francs. Besides the horse and tilbury together were worthbut a hundred crowns.
The Fleming called his wife, and related the affair to her. “Where thedevil could Monsieur le Maire be going?” They held counsel together.“He is going to Paris,” said the wife. “I don’t believe it,” said thehusband.
M. Madeleine had forgotten the paper with the figures on it, and it layon the chimney-piece. The Fleming picked it up and studied it. “Five,six, eight and a half? That must designate the posting relays.” Heturned to his wife:—
“I have found out.”

“What?”

“It is five leagues from here to Hesdin, six from Hesdin to Saint-Pol,eight and a half from Saint-Pol to Arras. He is going to Arras.”

Meanwhile, M. Madeleine had returned home. He had taken the longest wayto return from Master Scaufflaire’s, as though the parsonage door hadbeen a temptation for him, and he had wished to avoid it. He ascendedto his room, and there he shut himself up, which was a very simple act,since he liked to go to bed early. Nevertheless, the portress of thefactory, who was, at the same time, M. Madeleine’s only servant,noticed that the latter’s light was extinguished at half-past eight,and she mentioned it to the cashier when he came home, adding:—
“Is Monsieur le Maire ill? I thought he had a rather singular air.”

This cashier occupied a room situated directly under M. Madeleine’schamber. He paid no heed to the portress’s words, but went to bed andto sleep. Towards midnight he woke up with a start; in his sleep he hadheard a noise above his head. He listened; it was a footstep pacingback and forth, as though some one were walking in the room above him.He listened more attentively, and recognized M. Madeleine’s step. Thisstruck him as strange; usually, there was no noise in M. Madeleine’schamber until he rose in the morning. A moment later the cashier hearda noise which resembled that of a cupboard being opened, and then shutagain; then a piece of furniture was disarranged; then a pause ensued;then the step began again. The cashier sat up in bed, quite awake now,and staring; and through his window-panes he saw the reddish gleam of alighted window reflected on the opposite wall; from the direction ofthe rays, it could only come from the window of M. Madeleine’s chamber.The reflection wavered, as though it came rather from a fire which hadbeen lighted than from a candle. The shadow of the window-frame was notshown, which indicated that the window was wide open. The fact thatthis window was open in such cold weather was surprising. The cashierfell asleep again. An hour or two later he waked again. The same stepwas still passing slowly and regularly back and forth overhead.
The reflection was still visible on the wall, but now it was pale andpeaceful, like the reflection of a lamp or of a candle. The window wasstill open.
This is what had taken place in M. Madeleine’s room.



CHAPTER III—A TEMPEST IN A SKULL

The reader has, no doubt, already divined that M. Madeleine is no otherthan Jean Valjean.
We have already gazed into the depths of this conscience; the momenthas now come when we must take another look into it. We do so notwithout emotion and trepidation. There is nothing more terrible inexistence than this sort of contemplation. The eye of the spirit cannowhere find more dazzling brilliance and more shadow than in man; itcan fix itself on no other thing which is more formidable, morecomplicated, more mysterious, and more infinite. There is a spectaclemore grand than the sea; it is heaven: there is a spectacle more grandthan heaven; it is the inmost recesses of the soul.
To make the poem of the human conscience, were it only with referenceto a single man, were it only in connection with the basest of men,would be to blend all epics into one superior and definitive epic.Conscience is the chaos of chimæras, of lusts, and of temptations; thefurnace of dreams; the lair of ideas of which we are ashamed; it is thepandemonium of sophisms; it is the battlefield of the passions.Penetrate, at certain hours, past the livid face of a human being whois engaged in reflection, and look behind, gaze into that soul, gazeinto that obscurity. There, beneath that external silence, battles ofgiants, like those recorded in Homer, are in progress; skirmishes ofdragons and hydras and swarms of phantoms, as in Milton; visionarycircles, as in Dante. What a solemn thing is this infinity which everyman bears within him, and which he measures with despair against thecaprices of his brain and the actions of his life!
Alighieri one day met with a sinister-looking door, before which hehesitated. Here is one before us, upon whose threshold we hesitate. Letus enter, nevertheless.
We have but little to add to what the reader already knows of what hadhappened to Jean Valjean after the adventure with Little Gervais. Fromthat moment forth he was, as we have seen, a totally different man.What the Bishop had wished to make of him, that he carried out. It wasmore than a transformation; it was a transfiguration.
He succeeded in disappearing, sold the Bishop’s silver, reserving onlythe candlesticks as a souvenir, crept from town to town, traversedFrance, came to M. sur M., conceived the idea which we have mentioned,accomplished what we have related, succeeded in rendering himself safefrom seizure and inaccessible, and, thenceforth, established at M. surM., happy in feeling his conscience saddened by the past and the firsthalf of his existence belied by the last, he lived in peace, reassuredand hopeful, having henceforth only two thoughts,—to conceal his nameand to sanctify his life; to escape men and to return to God.
These two thoughts were so closely intertwined in his mind that theyformed but a single one there; both were equally absorbing andimperative and ruled his slightest actions. In general, they conspiredto regulate the conduct of his life; they turned him towards the gloom;they rendered him kindly and simple; they counselled him to the samethings. Sometimes, however, they conflicted. In that case, as thereader will remember, the man whom all the country of M. sur M. calledM. Madeleine did not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second—hissecurity to his virtue. Thus, in spite of all his reserve and all hisprudence, he had preserved the Bishop’s candlesticks, worn mourning forhim, summoned and interrogated all the little Savoyards who passed thatway, collected information regarding the families at Faverolles, andsaved old Fauchelevent’s life, despite the disquieting insinuations ofJavert. It seemed, as we have already remarked, as though he thought,following the example of all those who have been wise, holy, and just,that his first duty was not towards himself.
At the same time, it must be confessed, nothing just like this had yetpresented itself.
Never had the two ideas which governed the unhappy man whose sufferingswe are narrating, engaged in so serious a struggle. He understood thisconfusedly but profoundly at the very first words pronounced by Javert,when the latter entered his study. At the moment when that name, whichhe had buried beneath so many layers, was so strangely articulated, hewas struck with stupor, and as though intoxicated with the sinistereccentricity of his destiny; and through this stupor he felt thatshudder which precedes great shocks. He bent like an oak at theapproach of a storm, like a soldier at the approach of an assault. Hefelt shadows filled with thunders and lightnings descending upon hishead. As he listened to Javert, the first thought which occurred to himwas to go, to run and denounce himself, to take that Champmathieu outof prison and place himself there; this was as painful and as poignantas an incision in the living flesh. Then it passed away, and he said tohimself, “We will see! We will see!” He repressed this first, generousinstinct, and recoiled before heroism.
It would be beautiful, no doubt, after the Bishop’s holy words, afterso many years of repentance and abnegation, in the midst of a penitenceadmirably begun, if this man had not flinched for an instant, even inthe presence of so terrible a conjecture, but had continued to walkwith the same step towards this yawning precipice, at the bottom ofwhich lay heaven; that would have been beautiful; but it was not thus.We must render an account of the things which went on in this soul, andwe can only tell what there was there. He was carried away, at first,by the instinct of self-preservation; he rallied all his ideas inhaste, stifled his emotions, took into consideration Javert’s presence,that great danger, postponed all decision with the firmness of terror,shook off thought as to what he had to do, and resumed his calmness asa warrior picks up his buckler.
He remained in this state during the rest of the day, a whirlwindwithin, a profound tranquillity without. He took no “preservativemeasures,” as they may be called. Everything was still confused, andjostling together in his brain. His trouble was so great that he couldnot perceive the form of a single idea distinctly, and he could havetold nothing about himself, except that he had received a great blow.
He repaired to Fantine’s bed of suffering, as usual, and prolonged hisvisit, through a kindly instinct, telling himself that he must behavethus, and recommend her well to the sisters, in case he should beobliged to be absent himself. He had a vague feeling that he might beobliged to go to Arras; and without having the least in the world madeup his mind to this trip, he said to himself that being, as he was,beyond the shadow of any suspicion, there could be nothing out of theway in being a witness to what was to take place, and he engaged thetilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event.
He dined with a good deal of appetite.
On returning to his room, he communed with himself.
He examined the situation, and found it unprecedented; so unprecedentedthat in the midst of his reverie he rose from his chair, moved by someinexplicable impulse of anxiety, and bolted his door. He feared lestsomething more should enter. He was barricading himself againstpossibilities.
A moment later he extinguished his light; it embarrassed him.
It seemed to him as though he might be seen.
By whom?
Alas! That on which he desired to close the door had already entered;that which he desired to blind was staring him in the face,—hisconscience.
His conscience; that is to say, God.
Nevertheless, he deluded himself at first; he had a feeling of securityand of solitude; the bolt once drawn, he thought himself impregnable;the candle extinguished, he felt himself invisible. Then he tookpossession of himself: he set his elbows on the table, leaned his headon his hand, and began to meditate in the dark.
“Where do I stand? Am not I dreaming? What have I heard? Is it reallytrue that I have seen that Javert, and that he spoke to me in thatmanner? Who can that Champmathieu be? So he resembles me! Is itpossible? When I reflect that yesterday I was so tranquil, and so farfrom suspecting anything! What was I doing yesterday at this hour? Whatis there in this incident? What will the end be? What is to be done?”

This was the torment in which he found himself. His brain had lost itspower of retaining ideas; they passed like waves, and he clutched hisbrow in both hands to arrest them.
Nothing but anguish extricated itself from this tumult whichoverwhelmed his will and his reason, and from which he sought to drawproof and resolution.
His head was burning. He went to the window and threw it wide open.There were no stars in the sky. He returned and seated himself at thetable.
The first hour passed in this manner.
Gradually, however, vague outlines began to take form and to fixthemselves in his meditation, and he was able to catch a glimpse withprecision of the reality,—not the whole situation, but some of thedetails. He began by recognizing the fact that, critical andextraordinary as was this situation, he was completely master of it.
This only caused an increase of his stupor.
Independently of the severe and religious aim which he had assigned tohis actions, all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but ahole in which to bury his name. That which he had always feared most ofall in his hours of self-communion, during his sleepless nights, was toever hear that name pronounced; he had said to himself, that that wouldbe the end of all things for him; that on the day when that name madeits reappearance it would cause his new life to vanish from about him,and—who knows?—perhaps even his new soul within him, also. He shudderedat the very thought that this was possible. Assuredly, if any one hadsaid to him at such moments that the hour would come when that namewould ring in his ears, when the hideous words, Jean Valjean, wouldsuddenly emerge from the darkness and rise in front of him, when thatformidable light, capable of dissipating the mystery in which he hadenveloped himself, would suddenly blaze forth above his head, and thatthat name would not menace him, that that light would but produce anobscurity more dense, that this rent veil would but increase themystery, that this earthquake would solidify his edifice, that thisprodigious incident would have no other result, so far as he wasconcerned, if so it seemed good to him, than that of rendering hisexistence at once clearer and more impenetrable, and that, out of hisconfrontation with the phantom of Jean Valjean, the good and worthycitizen Monsieur Madeleine would emerge more honored, more peaceful,and more respected than ever—if any one had told him that, he wouldhave tossed his head and regarded the words as those of a madman. Well,all this was precisely what had just come to pass; all thataccumulation of impossibilities was a fact, and God had permitted thesewild fancies to become real things!
His reverie continued to grow clearer. He came more and more to anunderstanding of his position.
It seemed to him that he had but just waked up from some inexplicabledream, and that he found himself slipping down a declivity in themiddle of the night, erect, shivering, holding back all in vain, on thevery brink of the abyss. He distinctly perceived in the darkness astranger, a man unknown to him, whom destiny had mistaken for him, andwhom she was thrusting into the gulf in his stead; in order that thegulf might close once more, it was necessary that some one, himself orthat other man, should fall into it: he had only let things take theircourse.
The light became complete, and he acknowledged this to himself: Thathis place was empty in the galleys; that do what he would, it was stillawaiting him; that the theft from little Gervais had led him back toit; that this vacant place would await him, and draw him on until hefilled it; that this was inevitable and fatal; and then he said tohimself, “that, at this moment, he had a substitute; that it appearedthat a certain Champmathieu had that ill luck, and that, as regardshimself, being present in the galleys in the person of thatChampmathieu, present in society under the name of M. Madeleine, he hadnothing more to fear, provided that he did not prevent men from sealingover the head of that Champmathieu this stone of infamy which, like thestone of the sepulchre, falls once, never to rise again.”

All this was so strange and so violent, that there suddenly took placein him that indescribable movement, which no man feels more than two orthree times in the course of his life, a sort of convulsion of theconscience which stirs up all that there is doubtful in the heart,which is composed of irony, of joy, and of despair, and which may becalled an outburst of inward laughter.
He hastily relighted his candle.
“Well, what then?” he said to himself; “what am I afraid of? What isthere in all that for me to think about? I am safe; all is over. I hadbut one partly open door through which my past might invade my life,and behold that door is walled up forever! That Javert, who has beenannoying me so long; that terrible instinct which seemed to havedivined me, which had divined me—good God! and which followed meeverywhere; that frightful hunting-dog, always making a point at me, isthrown off the scent, engaged elsewhere, absolutely turned from thetrail: henceforth he is satisfied; he will leave me in peace; he hashis Jean Valjean. Who knows? it is even probable that he will wish toleave town! And all this has been brought about without any aid fromme, and I count for nothing in it! Ah! but where is the misfortune inthis? Upon my honor, people would think, to see me, that somecatastrophe had happened to me! After all, if it does bring harm tosome one, that is not my fault in the least: it is Providence which hasdone it all; it is because it wishes it so to be, evidently. Have I theright to disarrange what it has arranged? What do I ask now? Why shouldI meddle? It does not concern me; what! I am not satisfied: but whatmore do I want? The goal to which I have aspired for so many years, thedream of my nights, the object of my prayers to Heaven,—security,—Ihave now attained; it is God who wills it; I can do nothing against thewill of God, and why does God will it? In order that I may continuewhat I have begun, that I may do good, that I may one day be a grandand encouraging example, that it may be said at last, that a littlehappiness has been attached to the penance which I have undergone, andto that virtue to which I have returned. Really, I do not understandwhy I was afraid, a little while ago, to enter the house of that goodcuré, and to ask his advice; this is evidently what he would have saidto me: It is settled; let things take their course; let the good God doas he likes!”

Thus did he address himself in the depths of his own conscience,bending over what may be called his own abyss; he rose from his chair,and began to pace the room: “Come,” said he, “let us think no moreabout it; my resolve is taken!” but he felt no joy.
Quite the reverse.
One can no more prevent thought from recurring to an idea than one canthe sea from returning to the shore: the sailor calls it the tide; theguilty man calls it remorse; God upheaves the soul as he does theocean.
After the expiration of a few moments, do what he would, he resumed thegloomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened,saying that which he would have preferred to ignore, and listened tothat which he would have preferred not to hear, yielding to thatmysterious power which said to him: “Think!” as it said to anothercondemned man, two thousand years ago, “March on!”

Before proceeding further, and in order to make ourselves fullyunderstood, let us insist upon one necessary observation.
It is certain that people do talk to themselves; there is no livingbeing who has not done it. It may even be said that the word is never amore magnificent mystery than when it goes from thought to consciencewithin a man, and when it returns from conscience to thought; it is inthis sense only that the words so often employed in this chapter, _hesaid, he exclaimed_, must be understood; one speaks to one’s self,talks to one’s self, exclaims to one’s self without breaking theexternal silence; there is a great tumult; everything about us talksexcept the mouth. The realities of the soul are nonetheless realitiesbecause they are not visible and palpable.
So he asked himself where he stood. He interrogated himself upon that“settled resolve.” He confessed to himself that all that he had justarranged in his mind was monstrous, that “to let things take theircourse, to let the good God do as he liked,” was simply horrible; toallow this error of fate and of men to be carried out, not to hinderit, to lend himself to it through his silence, to do nothing, in short,was to do everything! that this was hypocritical baseness in the lastdegree! that it was a base, cowardly, sneaking, abject, hideous crime!
For the first time in eight years, the wretched man had just tasted thebitter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action.
He spit it out with disgust.
He continued to question himself. He asked himself severely what he hadmeant by this, “My object is attained!” He declared to himself that hislife really had an object; but what object? To conceal his name? Todeceive the police? Was it for so petty a thing that he had done allthat he had done? Had he not another and a grand object, which was thetrue one—to save, not his person, but his soul; to become honest andgood once more; to be a just man? Was it not that above all, thatalone, which he had always desired, which the Bishop had enjoined uponhim—to shut the door on his past? But he was not shutting it! greatGod! he was re-opening it by committing an infamous action! He wasbecoming a thief once more, and the most odious of thieves! He wasrobbing another of his existence, his life, his peace, his place in thesunshine. He was becoming an assassin. He was murdering, morallymurdering, a wretched man. He was inflicting on him that frightfulliving death, that death beneath the open sky, which is called thegalleys. On the other hand, to surrender himself to save that man,struck down with so melancholy an error, to resume his own name, tobecome once more, out of duty, the convict Jean Valjean, that was, intruth, to achieve his resurrection, and to close forever that hellwhence he had just emerged; to fall back there in appearance was toescape from it in reality. This must be done! He had done nothing if hedid not do all this; his whole life was useless; all his penitence waswasted. There was no longer any need of saying, “What is the use?” Hefelt that the Bishop was there, that the Bishop was present all themore because he was dead, that the Bishop was gazing fixedly at him,that henceforth Mayor Madeleine, with all his virtues, would beabominable to him, and that the convict Jean Valjean would be pure andadmirable in his sight; that men beheld his mask, but that the Bishopsaw his face; that men saw his life, but that the Bishop beheld hisconscience. So he must go to Arras, deliver the false Jean Valjean, anddenounce the real one. Alas! that was the greatest of sacrifices, themost poignant of victories, the last step to take; but it must be done.Sad fate! he would enter into sanctity only in the eyes of God when hereturned to infamy in the eyes of men.
“Well,” said he, “let us decide upon this; let us do our duty; let ussave this man.” He uttered these words aloud, without perceiving thathe was speaking aloud.
He took his books, verified them, and put them in order. He flung inthe fire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassedtradesmen. He wrote and sealed a letter, and on the envelope it mighthave been read, had there been any one in his chamber at the moment,_To Monsieur Laffitte, Banker, Rue d’Artois, Paris_. He drew from hissecretary a pocket-book which contained several bank-notes and thepassport of which he had made use that same year when he went to theelections.
Any one who had seen him during the execution of these various acts,into which there entered such grave thought, would have had nosuspicion of what was going on within him. Only occasionally did hislips move; at other times he raised his head and fixed his gaze uponsome point of the wall, as though there existed at that point somethingwhich he wished to elucidate or interrogate.
When he had finished the letter to M. Laffitte, he put it into hispocket, together with the pocket-book, and began his walk once more.
His reverie had not swerved from its course. He continued to see hisduty clearly, written in luminous letters, which flamed before his eyesand changed its place as he altered the direction of his glance:—
_“Go! Tell your name! Denounce yourself!”_
In the same way he beheld, as though they had passed before him invisible forms, the two ideas which had, up to that time, formed thedouble rule of his soul,—the concealment of his name, thesanctification of his life. For the first time they appeared to him asabsolutely distinct, and he perceived the distance which separatedthem. He recognized the fact that one of these ideas was, necessarily,good, while the other might become bad; that the first wasself-devotion, and that the other was personality; that the one said,_my neighbour_, and that the other said, _myself_; that one emanatedfrom the light, and the other from darkness.
They were antagonistic. He saw them in conflict. In proportion as hemeditated, they grew before the eyes of his spirit. They had nowattained colossal statures, and it seemed to him that he beheld withinhimself, in that infinity of which we were recently speaking, in themidst of the darkness and the lights, a goddess and a giant contending.
He was filled with terror; but it seemed to him that the good thoughtwas getting the upper hand.
He felt that he was on the brink of the second decisive crisis of hisconscience and of his destiny; that the Bishop had marked the firstphase of his new life, and that Champmathieu marked the second. Afterthe grand crisis, the grand test.
But the fever, allayed for an instant, gradually resumed possession ofhim. A thousand thoughts traversed his mind, but they continued tofortify him in his resolution.
One moment he said to himself that he was, perhaps, taking the mattertoo keenly; that, after all, this Champmathieu was not interesting, andthat he had actually been guilty of theft.
He answered himself: “If this man has, indeed, stolen a few apples,that means a month in prison. It is a long way from that to thegalleys. And who knows? Did he steal? Has it been proved? The name ofJean Valjean overwhelms him, and seems to dispense with proofs. Do notthe attorneys for the Crown always proceed in this manner? He issupposed to be a thief because he is known to be a convict.”

In another instant the thought had occurred to him that, when hedenounced himself, the heroism of his deed might, perhaps, be takeninto consideration, and his honest life for the last seven years, andwhat he had done for the district, and that they would have mercy onhim.
But this supposition vanished very quickly, and he smiled bitterly ashe remembered that the theft of the forty sous from little Gervais puthim in the position of a man guilty of a second offence afterconviction, that this affair would certainly come up, and, according tothe precise terms of the law, would render him liable to penalservitude for life.
He turned aside from all illusions, detached himself more and more fromearth, and sought strength and consolation elsewhere. He told himselfthat he must do his duty; that perhaps he should not be more unhappyafter doing his duty than after having avoided it; that if he _allowedthings to take their own course_, if he remained at M. sur M., hisconsideration, his good name, his good works, the deference andveneration paid to him, his charity, his wealth, his popularity, hisvirtue, would be seasoned with a crime. And what would be the taste ofall these holy things when bound up with this hideous thing? while, ifhe accomplished his sacrifice, a celestial idea would be mingled withthe galleys, the post, the iron necklet, the green cap, unceasing toil,and pitiless shame.
At length he told himself that it must be so, that his destiny was thusallotted, that he had not authority to alter the arrangements made onhigh, that, in any case, he must make his choice: virtue without andabomination within, or holiness within and infamy without.
The stirring up of these lugubrious ideas did not cause his courage tofail, but his brain grow weary. He began to think of other things, ofindifferent matters, in spite of himself.
The veins in his temples throbbed violently; he still paced to and fro;midnight sounded first from the parish church, then from the town-hall;he counted the twelve strokes of the two clocks, and compared thesounds of the two bells; he recalled in this connection the fact that,a few days previously, he had seen in an ironmonger’s shop an ancientclock for sale, upon which was written the name, _Antoine-Albin deRomainville_.
He was cold; he lighted a small fire; it did not occur to him to closethe window.
In the meantime he had relapsed into his stupor; he was obliged to makea tolerably vigorous effort to recall what had been the subject of histhoughts before midnight had struck; he finally succeeded in doingthis.
“Ah! yes,” he said to himself, “I had resolved to inform againstmyself.”

And then, all of a sudden, he thought of Fantine.
“Hold!” said he, “and what about that poor woman?”

Here a fresh crisis declared itself.
Fantine, by appearing thus abruptly in his reverie, produced the effectof an unexpected ray of light; it seemed to him as though everythingabout him were undergoing a change of aspect: he exclaimed:—
“Ah! but I have hitherto considered no one but myself; it is proper forme to hold my tongue or to denounce myself, to conceal my person or tosave my soul, to be a despicable and respected magistrate, or aninfamous and venerable convict; it is I, it is always I and nothing butI: but, good God! all this is egotism; these are diverse forms ofegotism, but it is egotism all the same. What if I were to think alittle about others? The highest holiness is to think of others; come,let us examine the matter. The _I_ excepted, the _I_ effaced, the _I_forgotten, what would be the result of all this? What if I denouncemyself? I am arrested; this Champmathieu is released; I am put back inthe galleys; that is well—and what then? What is going on here? Ah!here is a country, a town, here are factories, an industry, workers,both men and women, aged grandsires, children, poor people! All this Ihave created; all these I provide with their living; everywhere wherethere is a smoking chimney, it is I who have placed the brand on thehearth and meat in the pot; I have created ease, circulation, credit;before me there was nothing; I have elevated, vivified, informed withlife, fecundated, stimulated, enriched the whole country-side; lackingme, the soul is lacking; I take myself off, everything dies: and thiswoman, who has suffered so much, who possesses so many merits in spiteof her fall; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been! Andthat child whom I meant to go in search of, whom I have promised to hermother; do I not also owe something to this woman, in reparation forthe evil which I have done her? If I disappear, what happens? Themother dies; the child becomes what it can; that is what will takeplace, if I denounce myself. If I do not denounce myself? come, let ussee how it will be if I do not denounce myself.”

After putting this question to himself, he paused; he seemed to undergoa momentary hesitation and trepidation; but it did not last long, andhe answered himself calmly:—
“Well, this man is going to the galleys; it is true, but what thedeuce! he has stolen! There is no use in my saying that he has not beenguilty of theft, for he has! I remain here; I go on: in ten years Ishall have made ten millions; I scatter them over the country; I havenothing of my own; what is that to me? It is not for myself that I amdoing it; the prosperity of all goes on augmenting; industries arearoused and animated; factories and shops are multiplied; families, ahundred families, a thousand families, are happy; the district becomespopulated; villages spring up where there were only farms before; farmsrise where there was nothing; wretchedness disappears, and withwretchedness debauchery, prostitution, theft, murder; all vicesdisappear, all crimes: and this poor mother rears her child; and beholda whole country rich and honest! Ah! I was a fool! I was absurd! whatwas that I was saying about denouncing myself? I really must payattention and not be precipitate about anything. What! because it wouldhave pleased me to play the grand and generous; this is melodrama,after all; because I should have thought of no one but myself, theidea! for the sake of saving from a punishment, a trifle exaggerated,perhaps, but just at bottom, no one knows whom, a thief, agood-for-nothing, evidently, a whole country-side must perish! a poorwoman must die in the hospital! a poor little girl must die in thestreet! like dogs; ah, this is abominable! And without the mother evenhaving seen her child once more, almost without the child’s havingknown her mother; and all that for the sake of an old wretch of anapple-thief who, most assuredly, has deserved the galleys for somethingelse, if not for that; fine scruples, indeed, which save a guilty manand sacrifice the innocent, which save an old vagabond who has only afew years to live at most, and who will not be more unhappy in thegalleys than in his hovel, and which sacrifice a whole population,mothers, wives, children. This poor little Cosette who has no one inthe world but me, and who is, no doubt, blue with cold at this momentin the den of those Thénardiers; those peoples are rascals; and I wasgoing to neglect my duty towards all these poor creatures; and I wasgoing off to denounce myself; and I was about to commit thatunspeakable folly! Let us put it at the worst: suppose that there is awrong action on my part in this, and that my conscience will reproachme for it some day, to accept, for the good of others, these reproacheswhich weigh only on myself; this evil action which compromises my soulalone; in that lies self-sacrifice; in that alone there is virtue.”

He rose and resumed his march; this time, he seemed to be content.
Diamonds are found only in the dark places of the earth; truths arefound only in the depths of thought. It seemed to him, that, afterhaving descended into these depths, after having long groped among thedarkest of these shadows, he had at last found one of these diamonds,one of these truths, and that he now held it in his hand, and he wasdazzled as he gazed upon it.
“Yes,” he thought, “this is right; I am on the right road; I have thesolution; I must end by holding fast to something; my resolve is taken;let things take their course; let us no longer vacillate; let us nolonger hang back; this is for the interest of all, not for my own; I amMadeleine, and Madeleine I remain. Woe to the man who is Jean Valjean!I am no longer he; I do not know that man; I no longer know anything;it turns out that some one is Jean Valjean at the present moment; lethim look out for himself; that does not concern me; it is a fatal namewhich was floating abroad in the night; if it halts and descends on ahead, so much the worse for that head.”

He looked into the little mirror which hung above his chimney-piece,and said:—
“Hold! it has relieved me to come to a decision; I am quite another mannow.”

He proceeded a few paces further, then he stopped short.
“Come!” he said, “I must not flinch before any of the consequences ofthe resolution which I have once adopted; there are still threads whichattach me to that Jean Valjean; they must be broken; in this very roomthere are objects which would betray me, dumb things which would bearwitness against me; it is settled; all these things must disappear.”

He fumbled in his pocket, drew out his purse, opened it, and took out asmall key; he inserted the key in a lock whose aperture could hardly beseen, so hidden was it in the most sombre tones of the design whichcovered the wall-paper; a secret receptacle opened, a sort of falsecupboard constructed in the angle between the wall and thechimney-piece; in this hiding-place there were some rags—a blue linenblouse, an old pair of trousers, an old knapsack, and a huge thorncudgel shod with iron at both ends. Those who had seen Jean Valjean atthe epoch when he passed through D—— in October, 1815, could easilyhave recognized all the pieces of this miserable outfit.
He had preserved them as he had preserved the silver candlesticks, inorder to remind himself continually of his starting-point, but he hadconcealed all that came from the galleys, and he had allowed thecandlesticks which came from the Bishop to be seen.
He cast a furtive glance towards the door, as though he feared that itwould open in spite of the bolt which fastened it; then, with a quickand abrupt movement, he took the whole in his arms at once, withoutbestowing so much as a glance on the things which he had so religiouslyand so perilously preserved for so many years, and flung them all,rags, cudgel, knapsack, into the fire.

  Enlarge
Candlesticks Into the Fire  1b7-3-into-the-fire

He closed the false cupboard again, and with redoubled precautions,henceforth unnecessary, since it was now empty, he concealed the doorbehind a heavy piece of furniture, which he pushed in front of it.
After the lapse of a few seconds, the room and the opposite wall werelighted up with a fierce, red, tremulous glow. Everything was on fire;the thorn cudgel snapped and threw out sparks to the middle of thechamber.
As the knapsack was consumed, together with the hideous rags which itcontained, it revealed something which sparkled in the ashes. Bybending over, one could have readily recognized a coin,—no doubt theforty-sou piece stolen from the little Savoyard.
He did not look at the fire, but paced back and forth with the samestep.
All at once his eye fell on the two silver candlesticks, which shonevaguely on the chimney-piece, through the glow.
“Hold!” he thought; “the whole of Jean Valjean is still in them. Theymust be destroyed also.”

He seized the two candlesticks.
There was still fire enough to allow of their being put out of shape,and converted into a sort of unrecognizable bar of metal.
He bent over the hearth and warmed himself for a moment. He felt asense of real comfort. “How good warmth is!” said he.
He stirred the live coals with one of the candlesticks.
A minute more, and they were both in the fire.
At that moment it seemed to him that he heard a voice within himshouting: “Jean Valjean! Jean Valjean!”

His hair rose upright: he became like a man who is listening to someterrible thing.
“Yes, that’s it! finish!” said the voice. “Complete what you are about!Destroy these candlesticks! Annihilate this souvenir! Forget theBishop! Forget everything! Destroy this Champmathieu, do! That isright! Applaud yourself! So it is settled, resolved, fixed, agreed:here is an old man who does not know what is wanted of him, who has,perhaps, done nothing, an innocent man, whose whole misfortune lies inyour name, upon whom your name weighs like a crime, who is about to betaken for you, who will be condemned, who will finish his days inabjectness and horror. That is good! Be an honest man yourself; remainMonsieur le Maire; remain honorable and honored; enrich the town;nourish the indigent; rear the orphan; live happy, virtuous, andadmired; and, during this time, while you are here in the midst of joyand light, there will be a man who will wear your red blouse, who willbear your name in ignominy, and who will drag your chain in thegalleys. Yes, it is well arranged thus. Ah, wretch!”

The perspiration streamed from his brow. He fixed a haggard eye on thecandlesticks. But that within him which had spoken had not finished.The voice continued:—
“Jean Valjean, there will be around you many voices, which will make agreat noise, which will talk very loud, and which will bless you, andonly one which no one will hear, and which will curse you in the dark.Well! listen, infamous man! All those benedictions will fall backbefore they reach heaven, and only the malediction will ascend to God.”

This voice, feeble at first, and which had proceeded from the mostobscure depths of his conscience, had gradually become startling andformidable, and he now heard it in his very ear. It seemed to him thatit had detached itself from him, and that it was now speaking outsideof him. He thought that he heard the last words so distinctly, that heglanced around the room in a sort of terror.
“Is there any one here?” he demanded aloud, in utter bewilderment.
Then he resumed, with a laugh which resembled that of an idiot:—
“How stupid I am! There can be no one!”

There was some one; but the person who was there was of those whom thehuman eye cannot see.
He placed the candlesticks on the chimney-piece.
Then he resumed his monotonous and lugubrious tramp, which troubled thedreams of the sleeping man beneath him, and awoke him with a start.
This tramping to and fro soothed and at the same time intoxicated him.It sometimes seems, on supreme occasions, as though people moved aboutfor the purpose of asking advice of everything that they may encounterby change of place. After the lapse of a few minutes he no longer knewhis position.
He now recoiled in equal terror before both the resolutions at which hehad arrived in turn. The two ideas which counselled him appeared to himequally fatal. What a fatality! What conjunction that that Champmathieushould have been taken for him; to be overwhelmed by precisely themeans which Providence seemed to have employed, at first, to strengthenhis position!
There was a moment when he reflected on the future. Denounce himself,great God! Deliver himself up! With immense despair he faced all thathe should be obliged to leave, all that he should be obliged to take uponce more. He should have to bid farewell to that existence which wasso good, so pure, so radiant, to the respect of all, to honor, toliberty. He should never more stroll in the fields; he should nevermore hear the birds sing in the month of May; he should never morebestow alms on the little children; he should never more experience thesweetness of having glances of gratitude and love fixed upon him; heshould quit that house which he had built, that little chamber!Everything seemed charming to him at that moment. Never again should heread those books; never more should he write on that little table ofwhite wood; his old portress, the only servant whom he kept, wouldnever more bring him his coffee in the morning. Great God! instead ofthat, the convict gang, the iron necklet, the red waistcoat, the chainon his ankle, fatigue, the cell, the camp bed all those horrors whichhe knew so well! At his age, after having been what he was! If he wereonly young again! but to be addressed in his old age as “thou” by anyone who pleased; to be searched by the convict-guard; to receive thegalley-sergeant’s cudgellings; to wear iron-bound shoes on his barefeet; to have to stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer ofthe roundsman who visits the gang; to submit to the curiosity ofstrangers, who would be told: “That man yonder is the famous JeanValjean, who was mayor of M. sur M.”; and at night, dripping withperspiration, overwhelmed with lassitude, their green caps drawn overtheir eyes, to remount, two by two, the ladder staircase of the galleysbeneath the sergeant’s whip. Oh, what misery! Can destiny, then, be asmalicious as an intelligent being, and become as monstrous as the humanheart?
And do what he would, he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemmawhich lay at the foundation of his reverie: “Should he remain inparadise and become a demon? Should he return to hell and become anangel?”

What was to be done? Great God! what was to be done?
The torment from which he had escaped with so much difficulty wasunchained afresh within him. His ideas began to grow confused oncemore; they assumed a kind of stupefied and mechanical quality which ispeculiar to despair. The name of Romainville recurred incessantly tohis mind, with the two verses of a song which he had heard in the past.He thought that Romainville was a little grove near Paris, where younglovers go to pluck lilacs in the month of April.
He wavered outwardly as well as inwardly. He walked like a little childwho is permitted to toddle alone.
At intervals, as he combated his lassitude, he made an effort torecover the mastery of his mind. He tried to put to himself, for thelast time, and definitely, the problem over which he had, in a manner,fallen prostrate with fatigue: Ought he to denounce himself? Ought heto hold his peace? He could not manage to see anything distinctly. Thevague aspects of all the courses of reasoning which had been sketchedout by his meditations quivered and vanished, one after the other, intosmoke. He only felt that, to whatever course of action he made up hismind, something in him must die, and that of necessity, and without hisbeing able to escape the fact; that he was entering a sepulchre on theright hand as much as on the left; that he was passing through a deathagony,—the agony of his happiness, or the agony of his virtue.
Alas! all his resolution had again taken possession of him. He was nofurther advanced than at the beginning.
Thus did this unhappy soul struggle in its anguish. Eighteen hundredyears before this unfortunate man, the mysterious Being in whom aresummed up all the sanctities and all the sufferings of humanity hadalso long thrust aside with his hand, while the olive-trees quivered inthe wild wind of the infinite, the terrible cup which appeared to Himdripping with darkness and overflowing with shadows in the depths allstudded with stars.



CHAPTER IV—FORMS ASSUMED BY SUFFERING DURING SLEEP

Three o’clock in the morning had just struck, and he had been walkingthus for five hours, almost uninterruptedly, when he at length allowedhimself to drop into his chair.
There he fell asleep and had a dream.
This dream, like the majority of dreams, bore no relation to thesituation, except by its painful and heart-rending character, but itmade an impression on him. This nightmare struck him so forcibly thathe wrote it down later on. It is one of the papers in his ownhandwriting which he has bequeathed to us. We think that we have herereproduced the thing in strict accordance with the text.
Of whatever nature this dream may be, the history of this night wouldbe incomplete if we were to omit it: it is the gloomy adventure of anailing soul.
Here it is. On the envelope we find this line inscribed, “The Dream Ihad that Night.”

“I was in a plain; a vast, gloomy plain, where there was no grass. Itdid not seem to me to be daylight nor yet night.
“I was walking with my brother, the brother of my childish years, thebrother of whom, I must say, I never think, and whom I now hardlyremember.
“We were conversing and we met some passers-by. We were talking of aneighbor of ours in former days, who had always worked with her windowopen from the time when she came to live on the street. As we talked wefelt cold because of that open window.
“There were no trees in the plain. We saw a man passing close to us. Hewas entirely nude, of the hue of ashes, and mounted on a horse whichwas earth color. The man had no hair; we could see his skull and theveins on it. In his hand he held a switch which was as supple as avine-shoot and as heavy as iron. This horseman passed and said nothingto us.
“My brother said to me, ‘Let us take to the hollow road.’
“There existed a hollow way wherein one saw neither a single shrub nora spear of moss. Everything was dirt-colored, even the sky. Afterproceeding a few paces, I received no reply when I spoke: I perceivedthat my brother was no longer with me.
“I entered a village which I espied. I reflected that it must beRomainville. (Why Romainville?)5
“The first street that I entered was deserted. I entered a secondstreet. Behind the angle formed by the two streets, a man was standingerect against the wall. I said to this man:—
“‘What country is this? Where am I?’ The man made no reply. I saw thedoor of a house open, and I entered.
“The first chamber was deserted. I entered the second. Behind the doorof this chamber a man was standing erect against the wall. I inquiredof this man, ‘Whose house is this? Where am I?’ The man replied not.
“The house had a garden. I quitted the house and entered the garden.The garden was deserted. Behind the first tree I found a man standingupright. I said to this man, ‘What garden is this? Where am I?’ The mandid not answer.
“I strolled into the village, and perceived that it was a town. All thestreets were deserted, all the doors were open. Not a single livingbeing was passing in the streets, walking through the chambers orstrolling in the gardens. But behind each angle of the walls, behindeach door, behind each tree, stood a silent man. Only one was to beseen at a time. These men watched me pass.
“I left the town and began to ramble about the fields.
“After the lapse of some time I turned back and saw a great crowdcoming up behind me. I recognized all the men whom I had seen in thattown. They had strange heads. They did not seem to be in a hurry, yetthey walked faster than I did. They made no noise as they walked. In aninstant this crowd had overtaken and surrounded me. The faces of thesemen were earthen in hue.
“Then the first one whom I had seen and questioned on entering the townsaid to me:—
“‘Whither are you going! Do you not know that you have been dead thislong time?’
“I opened my mouth to reply, and I perceived that there was no one nearme.”

He woke. He was icy cold. A wind which was chill like the breeze ofdawn was rattling the leaves of the window, which had been left open ontheir hinges. The fire was out. The candle was nearing its end. It wasstill black night.
He rose, he went to the window. There were no stars in the sky evenyet.
From his window the yard of the house and the street were visible. Asharp, harsh noise, which made him drop his eyes, resounded from theearth.
Below him he perceived two red stars, whose rays lengthened andshortened in a singular manner through the darkness.
As his thoughts were still half immersed in the mists of sleep, “Hold!”said he, “there are no stars in the sky. They are on earth now.”

But this confusion vanished; a second sound similar to the first rousedhim thoroughly; he looked and recognized the fact that these two starswere the lanterns of a carriage. By the light which they cast he wasable to distinguish the form of this vehicle. It was a tilburyharnessed to a small white horse. The noise which he had heard was thetrampling of the horse’s hoofs on the pavement.
“What vehicle is this?” he said to himself. “Who is coming here soearly in the morning?”

At that moment there came a light tap on the door of his chamber.
He shuddered from head to foot, and cried in a terrible voice:—
“Who is there?”

Some one said:—
“I, Monsieur le Maire.”

He recognized the voice of the old woman who was his portress.
“Well!” he replied, “what is it?”

“Monsieur le Maire, it is just five o’clock in the morning.”

“What is that to me?”

“The cabriolet is here, Monsieur le Maire.”

“What cabriolet?”

“The tilbury.”

“What tilbury?”

“Did not Monsieur le Maire order a tilbury?”

“No,” said he.
“The coachman says that he has come for Monsieur le Maire.”

“What coachman?”

“M. Scaufflaire’s coachman.”

“M. Scaufflaire?”

That name sent a shudder over him, as though a flash of lightning hadpassed in front of his face.
“Ah! yes,” he resumed; “M. Scaufflaire!”

If the old woman could have seen him at that moment, she would havebeen frightened.
A tolerably long silence ensued. He examined the flame of the candlewith a stupid air, and from around the wick he took some of the burningwax, which he rolled between his fingers. The old woman waited for him.She even ventured to uplift her voice once more:—
“What am I to say, Monsieur le Maire?”

“Say that it is well, and that I am coming down.”




CHAPTER V—HINDRANCES

The posting service from Arras to M. sur M. was still operated at thisperiod by small mail-wagons of the time of the Empire. Thesemail-wagons were two-wheeled cabriolets, upholstered inside withfawn-colored leather, hung on springs, and having but two seats, onefor the postboy, the other for the traveller. The wheels were armedwith those long, offensive axles which keep other vehicles at adistance, and which may still be seen on the road in Germany. Thedespatch box, an immense oblong coffer, was placed behind the vehicleand formed a part of it. This coffer was painted black, and thecabriolet yellow.
These vehicles, which have no counterparts nowadays, had somethingdistorted and hunchbacked about them; and when one saw them passing inthe distance, and climbing up some road to the horizon, they resembledthe insects which are called, I think, termites, and which, though withbut little corselet, drag a great train behind them. But they travelledat a very rapid rate. The post-wagon which set out from Arras at oneo’clock every night, after the mail from Paris had passed, arrived atM. sur M. a little before five o’clock in the morning.
That night the wagon which was descending to M. sur M. by the Hesdinroad, collided at the corner of a street, just as it was entering thetown, with a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse, which was goingin the opposite direction, and in which there was but one person, a manenveloped in a mantle. The wheel of the tilbury received quite aviolent shock. The postman shouted to the man to stop, but thetraveller paid no heed and pursued his road at full gallop.
“That man is in a devilish hurry!” said the postman.
The man thus hastening on was the one whom we have just seen strugglingin convulsions which are certainly deserving of pity.
Whither was he going? He could not have told. Why was he hastening? Hedid not know. He was driving at random, straight ahead. Whither? ToArras, no doubt; but he might have been going elsewhere as well. Attimes he was conscious of it, and he shuddered. He plunged into thenight as into a gulf. Something urged him forward; something drew himon. No one could have told what was taking place within him; every onewill understand it. What man is there who has not entered, at leastonce in his life, into that obscure cavern of the unknown?
However, he had resolved on nothing, decided nothing, formed no plan,done nothing. None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive.He was, more than ever, as he had been at the first moment.
Why was he going to Arras?
He repeated what he had already said to himself when he had hiredScaufflaire’s cabriolet: that, whatever the result was to be, there wasno reason why he should not see with his own eyes, and judge of mattersfor himself; that this was even prudent; that he must know what tookplace; that no decision could be arrived at without having observed andscrutinized; that one made mountains out of everything from a distance;that, at any rate, when he should have seen that Champmathieu, somewretch, his conscience would probably be greatly relieved to allow himto go to the galleys in his stead; that Javert would indeed be there;and that Brevet, that Chenildieu, that Cochepaille, old convicts whohad known him; but they certainly would not recognize him;—bah! what anidea! that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the truth; thatall conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu, andthat there is nothing so headstrong as suppositions and conjectures;that accordingly there was no danger.
That it was, no doubt, a dark moment, but that he should emerge fromit; that, after all, he held his destiny, however bad it might be, inhis own hand; that he was master of it. He clung to this thought.
At bottom, to tell the whole truth, he would have preferred not to goto Arras.
Nevertheless, he was going thither.
As he meditated, he whipped up his horse, which was proceeding at thatfine, regular, and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a halfan hour.
In proportion as the cabriolet advanced, he felt something within himdraw back.
At daybreak he was in the open country; the town of M. sur M. lay farbehind him. He watched the horizon grow white; he stared at all thechilly figures of a winter’s dawn as they passed before his eyes, butwithout seeing them. The morning has its spectres as well as theevening. He did not see them; but without his being aware of it, and bymeans of a sort of penetration which was almost physical, these blacksilhouettes of trees and of hills added some gloomy and sinisterquality to the violent state of his soul.
Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings whichsometimes border on the highway, he said to himself, “And yet there arepeople there within who are sleeping!”

The trot of the horse, the bells on the harness, the wheels on theroad, produced a gentle, monotonous noise. These things are charmingwhen one is joyous, and lugubrious when one is sad.
It was broad daylight when he arrived at Hesdin. He halted in front ofthe inn, to allow the horse a breathing spell, and to have him givensome oats.
The horse belonged, as Scaufflaire had said, to that small race of theBoulonnais, which has too much head, too much belly, and not enoughneck and shoulders, but which has a broad chest, a large crupper, thin,fine legs, and solid hoofs—a homely, but a robust and healthy race. Theexcellent beast had travelled five leagues in two hours, and had not adrop of sweat on his loins.
He did not get out of the tilbury. The stableman who brought the oatssuddenly bent down and examined the left wheel.
“Are you going far in this condition?” said the man.
He replied, with an air of not having roused himself from his reverie:—
“Why?”

“Have you come from a great distance?” went on the man.
“Five leagues.”

“Ah!”

“Why do you say, ‘Ah?’”

The man bent down once more, was silent for a moment, with his eyesfixed on the wheel; then he rose erect and said:—
“Because, though this wheel has travelled five leagues, it certainlywill not travel another quarter of a league.”

He sprang out of the tilbury.
“What is that you say, my friend?”

“I say that it is a miracle that you should have travelled five leagueswithout you and your horse rolling into some ditch on the highway. Justsee here!”

The wheel really had suffered serious damage. The shock administered bythe mail-wagon had split two spokes and strained the hub, so that thenut no longer held firm.
“My friend,” he said to the stableman, “is there a wheelwright here?”

“Certainly, sir.”

“Do me the service to go and fetch him.”

“He is only a step from here. Hey! Master Bourgaillard!”

Master Bourgaillard, the wheelwright, was standing on his ownthreshold. He came, examined the wheel and made a grimace like asurgeon when the latter thinks a limb is broken.
“Can you repair this wheel immediately?”

“Yes, sir.”

“When can I set out again?”

“To-morrow.”

“To-morrow!”

“There is a long day’s work on it. Are you in a hurry, sir?”

“In a very great hurry. I must set out again in an hour at the latest.”

“Impossible, sir.”

“I will pay whatever you ask.”

“Impossible.”

“Well, in two hours, then.”

“Impossible to-day. Two new spokes and a hub must be made. Monsieurwill not be able to start before to-morrow morning.”

“The matter cannot wait until to-morrow. What if you were to replacethis wheel instead of repairing it?”

“How so?”

“You are a wheelwright?”

“Certainly, sir.”

“Have you not a wheel that you can sell me? Then I could start again atonce.”

“A spare wheel?”

“Yes.”

“I have no wheel on hand that would fit your cabriolet. Two wheels makea pair. Two wheels cannot be put together hap-hazard.”

“In that case, sell me a pair of wheels.”

“Not all wheels fit all axles, sir.”

“Try, nevertheless.”

“It is useless, sir. I have nothing to sell but cart-wheels. We are buta poor country here.”

“Have you a cabriolet that you can let me have?”

The wheelwright had seen at the first glance that the tilbury was ahired vehicle. He shrugged his shoulders.
“You treat the cabriolets that people let you so well! If I had one, Iwould not let it to you!”

“Well, sell it to me, then.”

“I have none.”

“What! not even a spring-cart? I am not hard to please, as you see.”

“We live in a poor country. There is, in truth,” added the wheelwright,“an old calash under the shed yonder, which belongs to a bourgeois ofthe town, who gave it to me to take care of, and who only uses it onthe thirty-sixth of the month—never, that is to say. I might let thatto you, for what matters it to me? But the bourgeois must not see itpass—and then, it is a calash; it would require two horses.”

“I will take two post-horses.”

“Where is Monsieur going?”

“To Arras.”

“And Monsieur wishes to reach there to-day?”

“Yes, of course.”

“By taking two post-horses?”

“Why not?”

“Does it make any difference whether Monsieur arrives at four o’clockto-morrow morning?”

“Certainly not.”

“There is one thing to be said about that, you see, by takingpost-horses—Monsieur has his passport?”

“Yes.”

“Well, by taking post-horses, Monsieur cannot reach Arras beforeto-morrow. We are on a crossroad. The relays are badly served, thehorses are in the fields. The season for ploughing is just beginning;heavy teams are required, and horses are seized upon everywhere, fromthe post as well as elsewhere. Monsieur will have to wait three or fourhours at the least at every relay. And, then, they drive at a walk.There are many hills to ascend.”

“Come then, I will go on horseback. Unharness the cabriolet. Some onecan surely sell me a saddle in the neighborhood.”

“Without doubt. But will this horse bear the saddle?”

“That is true; you remind me of that; he will not bear it.”

“Then—”

“But I can surely hire a horse in the village?”

“A horse to travel to Arras at one stretch?”

“Yes.”

“That would require such a horse as does not exist in these parts. Youwould have to buy it to begin with, because no one knows you. But youwill not find one for sale nor to let, for five hundred francs, or fora thousand.”

“What am I to do?”

“The best thing is to let me repair the wheel like an honest man, andset out on your journey to-morrow.”

“To-morrow will be too late.”

“The deuce!”

“Is there not a mail-wagon which runs to Arras? When will it pass?”

“To-night. Both the posts pass at night; the one going as well as theone coming.”

“What! It will take you a day to mend this wheel?”

“A day, and a good long one.”

“If you set two men to work?”

“If I set ten men to work.”

“What if the spokes were to be tied together with ropes?”

“That could be done with the spokes, not with the hub; and the felly isin a bad state, too.”

“Is there any one in this village who lets out teams?”

“No.”

“Is there another wheelwright?”

The stableman and the wheelwright replied in concert, with a toss ofthe head.
“No.”

He felt an immense joy.
It was evident that Providence was intervening. That it was it who hadbroken the wheel of the tilbury and who was stopping him on the road.He had not yielded to this sort of first summons; he had just madeevery possible effort to continue the journey; he had loyally andscrupulously exhausted all means; he had been deterred neither by theseason, nor fatigue, nor by the expense; he had nothing with which toreproach himself. If he went no further, that was no fault of his. Itdid not concern him further. It was no longer his fault. It was not theact of his own conscience, but the act of Providence.
He breathed again. He breathed freely and to the full extent of hislungs for the first time since Javert’s visit. It seemed to him thatthe hand of iron which had held his heart in its grasp for the lasttwenty hours had just released him.
It seemed to him that God was for him now, and was manifesting Himself.
He said to himself that he had done all he could, and that now he hadnothing to do but retrace his steps quietly.
If his conversation with the wheelwright had taken place in a chamberof the inn, it would have had no witnesses, no one would have heardhim, things would have rested there, and it is probable that we shouldnot have had to relate any of the occurrences which the reader is aboutto peruse; but this conversation had taken place in the street. Anycolloquy in the street inevitably attracts a crowd. There are alwayspeople who ask nothing better than to become spectators. While he wasquestioning the wheelwright, some people who were passing back andforth halted around them. After listening for a few minutes, a younglad, to whom no one had paid any heed, detached himself from the groupand ran off.
At the moment when the traveller, after the inward deliberation whichwe have just described, resolved to retrace his steps, this childreturned. He was accompanied by an old woman.
“Monsieur,” said the woman, “my boy tells me that you wish to hire acabriolet.”

These simple words uttered by an old woman led by a child made theperspiration trickle down his limbs. He thought that he beheld the handwhich had relaxed its grasp reappear in the darkness behind him, readyto seize him once more.
He answered:—
“Yes, my good woman; I am in search of a cabriolet which I can hire.”

And he hastened to add:—
“But there is none in the place.”

“Certainly there is,” said the old woman.
“Where?” interpolated the wheelwright.
“At my house,” replied the old woman.
He shuddered. The fatal hand had grasped him again.
The old woman really had in her shed a sort of basket spring-cart. Thewheelwright and the stable-man, in despair at the prospect of thetraveller escaping their clutches, interfered.
“It was a frightful old trap; it rests flat on the axle; it is anactual fact that the seats were suspended inside it by leather thongs;the rain came into it; the wheels were rusted and eaten with moisture;it would not go much further than the tilbury; a regular ramshackle oldstage-wagon; the gentleman would make a great mistake if he trustedhimself to it,” etc., etc.
All this was true; but this trap, this ramshackle old vehicle, thisthing, whatever it was, ran on its two wheels and could go to Arras.
He paid what was asked, left the tilbury with the wheelwright to berepaired, intending to reclaim it on his return, had the white horseput to the cart, climbed into it, and resumed the road which he hadbeen travelling since morning.
At the moment when the cart moved off, he admitted that he had felt, amoment previously, a certain joy in the thought that he should not gowhither he was now proceeding. He examined this joy with a sort ofwrath, and found it absurd. Why should he feel joy at turning back?After all, he was taking this trip of his own free will. No one wasforcing him to it.
And assuredly nothing would happen except what he should choose.
As he left Hesdin, he heard a voice shouting to him: “Stop! Stop!” Hehalted the cart with a vigorous movement which contained a feverish andconvulsive element resembling hope.
It was the old woman’s little boy.
“Monsieur,” said the latter, “it was I who got the cart for you.”

“Well?”

“You have not given me anything.”

He who gave to all so readily thought this demand exorbitant and almostodious.
“Ah! it’s you, you scamp?” said he; “you shall have nothing.”

He whipped up his horse and set off at full speed.
He had lost a great deal of time at Hesdin. He wanted to make it good.The little horse was courageous, and pulled for two; but it was themonth of February, there had been rain; the roads were bad. And then,it was no longer the tilbury. The cart was very heavy, and in addition,there were many ascents.
He took nearly four hours to go from Hesdin to Saint-Pol; four hoursfor five leagues.
At Saint-Pol he had the horse unharnessed at the first inn he came toand led to the stable; as he had promised Scaufflaire, he stood besidethe manger while the horse was eating; he thought of sad and confusingthings.
The inn-keeper’s wife came to the stable.
“Does not Monsieur wish to breakfast?”

“Come, that is true; I even have a good appetite.”

He followed the woman, who had a rosy, cheerful face; she led him tothe public room where there were tables covered with waxed cloth.
“Make haste!” said he; “I must start again; I am in a hurry.”

A big Flemish servant-maid placed his knife and fork in all haste; helooked at the girl with a sensation of comfort.
“That is what ailed me,” he thought; “I had not breakfasted.”

His breakfast was served; he seized the bread, took a mouthful, andthen slowly replaced it on the table, and did not touch it again.
A carter was eating at another table; he said to this man:—
“Why is their bread so bitter here?”

The carter was a German and did not understand him.
He returned to the stable and remained near the horse.
An hour later he had quitted Saint-Pol and was directing his coursetowards Tinques, which is only five leagues from Arras.
What did he do during this journey? Of what was he thinking? As in themorning, he watched the trees, the thatched roofs, the tilled fieldspass by, and the way in which the landscape, broken at every turn ofthe road, vanished; this is a sort of contemplation which sometimessuffices to the soul, and almost relieves it from thought. What is moremelancholy and more profound than to see a thousand objects for thefirst and the last time? To travel is to be born and to die at everyinstant; perhaps, in the vaguest region of his mind, he did makecomparisons between the shifting horizon and our human existence: allthe things of life are perpetually fleeing before us; the dark andbright intervals are intermingled; after a dazzling moment, an eclipse;we look, we hasten, we stretch out our hands to grasp what is passing;each event is a turn in the road, and, all at once, we are old; we feela shock; all is black; we distinguish an obscure door; the gloomy horseof life, which has been drawing us halts, and we see a veiled andunknown person unharnessing amid the shadows.
Twilight was falling when the children who were coming out of schoolbeheld this traveller enter Tinques; it is true that the days werestill short; he did not halt at Tinques; as he emerged from thevillage, a laborer, who was mending the road with stones, raised hishead and said to him:—
“That horse is very much fatigued.”

The poor beast was, in fact, going at a walk.
“Are you going to Arras?” added the road-mender.
“Yes.”

“If you go on at that rate you will not arrive very early.”

He stopped his horse, and asked the laborer:—
“How far is it from here to Arras?”

“Nearly seven good leagues.”

“How is that? the posting guide only says five leagues and a quarter.”

“Ah!” returned the road-mender, “so you don’t know that the road isunder repair? You will find it barred a quarter of an hour further on;there is no way to proceed further.”

“Really?”

“You will take the road on the left, leading to Carency; you will crossthe river; when you reach Camblin, you will turn to the right; that isthe road to Mont-Saint-Éloy which leads to Arras.”

“But it is night, and I shall lose my way.”

“You do not belong in these parts?”

“No.”

“And, besides, it is all crossroads; stop! sir,” resumed theroad-mender; “shall I give you a piece of advice? your horse is tired;return to Tinques; there is a good inn there; sleep there; you canreach Arras to-morrow.”

“I must be there this evening.”

“That is different; but go to the inn all the same, and get an extrahorse; the stable-boy will guide you through the crossroads.”

He followed the road-mender’s advice, retraced his steps, and, half anhour later, he passed the same spot again, but this time at full speed,with a good horse to aid; a stable-boy, who called himself a postilion,was seated on the shaft of the cariole.
Still, he felt that he had lost time.
Night had fully come.
They turned into the crossroad; the way became frightfully bad; thecart lurched from one rut to the other; he said to the postilion:—
“Keep at a trot, and you shall have a double fee.”

In one of the jolts, the whiffle-tree broke.
“There’s the whiffle-tree broken, sir,” said the postilion; “I don’tknow how to harness my horse now; this road is very bad at night; ifyou wish to return and sleep at Tinques, we could be in Arras earlyto-morrow morning.”

He replied, “Have you a bit of rope and a knife?”

“Yes, sir.”

He cut a branch from a tree and made a whiffle-tree of it.
This caused another loss of twenty minutes; but they set out again at agallop.
The plain was gloomy; low-hanging, black, crisp fogs crept over thehills and wrenched themselves away like smoke: there were whitishgleams in the clouds; a strong breeze which blew in from the seaproduced a sound in all quarters of the horizon, as of some one movingfurniture; everything that could be seen assumed attitudes of terror.How many things shiver beneath these vast breaths of the night!
He was stiff with cold; he had eaten nothing since the night before; hevaguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in theneighborhood of D——, eight years previously, and it seemed butyesterday.
The hour struck from a distant tower; he asked the boy:—
“What time is it?”

“Seven o’clock, sir; we shall reach Arras at eight; we have but threeleagues still to go.”

At that moment, he for the first time indulged in this reflection,thinking it odd the while that it had not occurred to him sooner: thatall this trouble which he was taking was, perhaps, useless; that he didnot know so much as the hour of the trial; that he should, at least,have informed himself of that; that he was foolish to go thus straightahead without knowing whether he would be of any service or not; thenhe sketched out some calculations in his mind: that, ordinarily, thesittings of the Court of Assizes began at nine o’clock in the morning;that it could not be a long affair; that the theft of the apples wouldbe very brief; that there would then remain only a question ofidentity, four or five depositions, and very little for the lawyers tosay; that he should arrive after all was over.
The postilion whipped up the horses; they had crossed the river andleft Mont-Saint-Éloy behind them.
The night grew more profound.



CHAPTER VI—SISTER SIMPLICE PUT TO THE PROOF

But at that moment Fantine was joyous.
She had passed a very bad night; her cough was frightful; her fever haddoubled in intensity; she had had dreams: in the morning, when thedoctor paid his visit, she was delirious; he assumed an alarmed look,and ordered that he should be informed as soon as M. Madeleine arrived.
All the morning she was melancholy, said but little, and laid plaits inher sheets, murmuring the while, in a low voice, calculations whichseemed to be calculations of distances. Her eyes were hollow andstaring. They seemed almost extinguished at intervals, then lighted upagain and shone like stars. It seems as though, at the approach of acertain dark hour, the light of heaven fills those who are quitting thelight of earth.
Each time that Sister Simplice asked her how she felt, she repliedinvariably, “Well. I should like to see M. Madeleine.”

Some months before this, at the moment when Fantine had just lost herlast modesty, her last shame, and her last joy, she was the shadow ofherself; now she was the spectre of herself. Physical suffering hadcompleted the work of moral suffering. This creature of five and twentyhad a wrinkled brow, flabby cheeks, pinched nostrils, teeth from whichthe gums had receded, a leaden complexion, a bony neck, prominentshoulder-blades, frail limbs, a clayey skin, and her golden hair wasgrowing out sprinkled with gray. Alas! how illness improvises old-age!
At midday the physician returned, gave some directions, inquiredwhether the mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary, and shookhis head.
M. Madeleine usually came to see the invalid at three o’clock. Asexactness is kindness, he was exact.
About half-past two, Fantine began to be restless. In the course oftwenty minutes, she asked the nun more than ten times, “What time isit, sister?”

Three o’clock struck. At the third stroke, Fantine sat up in bed; shewho could, in general, hardly turn over, joined her yellow, fleshlesshands in a sort of convulsive clasp, and the nun heard her utter one ofthose profound sighs which seem to throw off dejection. Then Fantineturned and looked at the door.
No one entered; the door did not open.
She remained thus for a quarter of an hour, her eyes riveted on thedoor, motionless and apparently holding her breath. The sister darednot speak to her. The clock struck a quarter past three. Fantine fellback on her pillow.
She said nothing, but began to plait the sheets once more.
Half an hour passed, then an hour, no one came; every time the clockstruck, Fantine started up and looked towards the door, then fell backagain.
Her thought was clearly perceptible, but she uttered no name, she madeno complaint, she blamed no one. But she coughed in a melancholy way.One would have said that something dark was descending upon her. Shewas livid and her lips were blue. She smiled now and then.
Five o’clock struck. Then the sister heard her say, very low andgently, “He is wrong not to come to-day, since I am going awayto-morrow.”

Sister Simplice herself was surprised at M. Madeleine’s delay.
In the meantime, Fantine was staring at the tester of her bed. Sheseemed to be endeavoring to recall something. All at once she began tosing in a voice as feeble as a breath. The nun listened. This is whatFantine was singing:—
“Lovely things we will buyAs we stroll the faubourgs through.Roses are pink, corn-flowers are blue,I love my love, corn-flowers are blue.

“Yestere’en the Virgin Mary came near my stove, in a broidered mantleclad, and said to me, ‘Here, hide ‘neath my veil the child whom you oneday begged from me. Haste to the city, buy linen, buy a needle, buythread.’
“Lovely things we will buyAs we stroll the faubourgs through.

“Dear Holy Virgin, beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbonsdecked. God may give me his loveliest star; I prefer the child thouhast granted me. ‘Madame, what shall I do with this linen fine?’—‘Makeof it clothes for thy new-born babe.’
“Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue,I love my love, and corn-flowers are blue.

“‘Wash this linen.’—‘Where?’—‘In the stream. Make of it, soiling not,spoiling not, a petticoat fair with its bodice fine, which I willembroider and fill with flowers.’—‘Madame, the child is no longer here;what is to be done?’—‘Then make of it a winding-sheet in which to buryme.’
“Lovely things we will buyAs we stroll the faubourgs through,Roses are pink, corn-flowers are blue,I love my love, corn-flowers are blue.”

This song was an old cradle romance with which she had, in former days,lulled her little Cosette to sleep, and which had never recurred to hermind in all the five years during which she had been parted from herchild. She sang it in so sad a voice, and to so sweet an air, that itwas enough to make any one, even a nun, weep. The sister, accustomed asshe was to austerities, felt a tear spring to her eyes.
The clock struck six. Fantine did not seem to hear it. She no longerseemed to pay attention to anything about her.
Sister Simplice sent a serving-maid to inquire of the portress of thefactory, whether the mayor had returned, and if he would not come tothe infirmary soon. The girl returned in a few minutes.
Fantine was still motionless and seemed absorbed in her own thoughts.
The servant informed Sister Simplice in a very low tone, that the mayorhad set out that morning before six o’clock, in a little tilburyharnessed to a white horse, cold as the weather was; that he had gonealone, without even a driver; that no one knew what road he had taken;that people said he had been seen to turn into the road to Arras; thatothers asserted that they had met him on the road to Paris. That whenhe went away he had been very gentle, as usual, and that he had merelytold the portress not to expect him that night.
While the two women were whispering together, with their backs turnedto Fantine’s bed, the sister interrogating, the servant conjecturing,Fantine, with the feverish vivacity of certain organic maladies, whichunite the free movements of health with the frightful emaciation ofdeath, had raised herself to her knees in bed, with her shrivelledhands resting on the bolster, and her head thrust through the openingof the curtains, and was listening. All at once she cried:—
“You are speaking of M. Madeleine! Why are you talking so low? What ishe doing? Why does he not come?”

Her voice was so abrupt and hoarse that the two women thought theyheard the voice of a man; they wheeled round in affright.
“Answer me!” cried Fantine.
The servant stammered:—
“The portress told me that he could not come to-day.”

“Be calm, my child,” said the sister; “lie down again.”

Fantine, without changing her attitude, continued in a loud voice, andwith an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending:—
“He cannot come? Why not? You know the reason. You are whispering it toeach other there. I want to know it.”

The servant-maid hastened to say in the nun’s ear, “Say that he is busywith the city council.”

Sister Simplice blushed faintly, for it was a lie that the maid hadproposed to her.
On the other hand, it seemed to her that the mere communication of thetruth to the invalid would, without doubt, deal her a terrible blow,and that this was a serious matter in Fantine’s present state. Herflush did not last long; the sister raised her calm, sad eyes toFantine, and said, “Monsieur le Maire has gone away.”

Fantine raised herself and crouched on her heels in the bed: her eyessparkled; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face.
“Gone!” she cried; “he has gone to get Cosette.”

Then she raised her arms to heaven, and her white face becameineffable; her lips moved; she was praying in a low voice.
When her prayer was finished, “Sister,” she said, “I am willing to liedown again; I will do anything you wish; I was naughty just now; I begyour pardon for having spoken so loud; it is very wrong to talk loudly;I know that well, my good sister, but, you see, I am very happy: thegood God is good; M. Madeleine is good; just think! he has gone toMontfermeil to get my little Cosette.”

She lay down again, with the nun’s assistance, helped the nun toarrange her pillow, and kissed the little silver cross which she woreon her neck, and which Sister Simplice had given her.
“My child,” said the sister, “try to rest now, and do not talk anymore.”

Fantine took the sister’s hand in her moist hands, and the latter waspained to feel that perspiration.
“He set out this morning for Paris; in fact, he need not even gothrough Paris; Montfermeil is a little to the left as you come thence.Do you remember how he said to me yesterday, when I spoke to him ofCosette, _Soon, soon?_ He wants to give me a surprise, you know! hemade me sign a letter so that she could be taken from the Thénardiers;they cannot say anything, can they? they will give back Cosette, forthey have been paid; the authorities will not allow them to keep thechild since they have received their pay. Do not make signs to me thatI must not talk, sister! I am extremely happy; I am doing well; I amnot ill at all any more; I am going to see Cosette again; I am evenquite hungry; it is nearly five years since I saw her last; you cannotimagine how much attached one gets to children, and then, she will beso pretty; you will see! If you only knew what pretty little rosyfingers she had! In the first place, she will have very beautifulhands; she had ridiculous hands when she was only a year old; likethis! she must be a big girl now; she is seven years old; she is quitea young lady; I call her Cosette, but her name is really Euphrasie.Stop! this morning I was looking at the dust on the chimney-piece, andI had a sort of idea come across me, like that, that I should seeCosette again soon. Mon Dieu! how wrong it is not to see one’s childrenfor years! One ought to reflect that life is not eternal. Oh, how goodM. le Maire is to go! it is very cold! it is true; he had on his cloak,at least? he will be here to-morrow, will he not? to-morrow will be afestival day; to-morrow morning, sister, you must remind me to put onmy little cap that has lace on it. What a place that Montfermeil is! Itook that journey on foot once; it was very long for me, but thediligences go very quickly! he will be here to-morrow with Cosette: howfar is it from here to Montfermeil?”

The sister, who had no idea of distances, replied, “Oh, I think that hewill be here to-morrow.”

“To-morrow! to-morrow!” said Fantine, “I shall see Cosette to-morrow!you see, good sister of the good God, that I am no longer ill; I ammad; I could dance if any one wished it.”

A person who had seen her a quarter of an hour previously would nothave understood the change; she was all rosy now; she spoke in a livelyand natural voice; her whole face was one smile; now and then shetalked, she laughed softly; the joy of a mother is almost infantile.
“Well,” resumed the nun, “now that you are happy, mind me, and do nottalk any more.”

Fantine laid her head on her pillow and said in a low voice: “Yes, liedown again; be good, for you are going to have your child; SisterSimplice is right; every one here is right.”

And then, without stirring, without even moving her head, she began tostare all about her with wide-open eyes and a joyous air, and she saidnothing more.
The sister drew the curtains together again, hoping that she would fallinto a doze. Between seven and eight o’clock the doctor came; nothearing any sound, he thought Fantine was asleep, entered softly, andapproached the bed on tiptoe; he opened the curtains a little, and, bythe light of the taper, he saw Fantine’s big eyes gazing at him.
She said to him, “She will be allowed to sleep beside me in a littlebed, will she not, sir?”

The doctor thought that she was delirious. She added:—
“See! there is just room.”

The doctor took Sister Simplice aside, and she explained matters tohim; that M. Madeleine was absent for a day or two, and that in theirdoubt they had not thought it well to undeceive the invalid, whobelieved that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil; that it was possible,after all, that her guess was correct: the doctor approved.
He returned to Fantine’s bed, and she went on:—
“You see, when she wakes up in the morning, I shall be able to say goodmorning to her, poor kitten, and when I cannot sleep at night, I canhear her asleep; her little gentle breathing will do me good.”

“Give me your hand,” said the doctor.
She stretched out her arm, and exclaimed with a laugh:—
“Ah, hold! in truth, you did not know it; I am cured; Cosette willarrive to-morrow.”

The doctor was surprised; she was better; the pressure on her chest haddecreased; her pulse had regained its strength; a sort of life hadsuddenly supervened and reanimated this poor, worn-out creature.
“Doctor,” she went on, “did the sister tell you that M. le Maire hasgone to get that mite of a child?”

The doctor recommended silence, and that all painful emotions should beavoided; he prescribed an infusion of pure chinchona, and, in case thefever should increase again during the night, a calming potion. As hetook his departure, he said to the sister:—
“She is doing better; if good luck willed that the mayor shouldactually arrive to-morrow with the child, who knows? there are crisesso astounding; great joy has been known to arrest maladies; I know wellthat this is an organic disease, and in an advanced state, but allthose things are such mysteries: we may be able to save her.”




CHAPTER VII—THE TRAVELLER ON HIS ARRIVAL TAKES PRECAUTIONS FORDEPARTURE

It was nearly eight o’clock in the evening when the cart, which we lefton the road, entered the porte-cochère of the Hotel de la Poste inArras; the man whom we have been following up to this moment alightedfrom it, responded with an abstracted air to the attentions of thepeople of the inn, sent back the extra horse, and with his own handsled the little white horse to the stable; then he opened the door of abilliard-room which was situated on the ground floor, sat down there,and leaned his elbows on a table; he had taken fourteen hours for thejourney which he had counted on making in six; he did himself thejustice to acknowledge that it was not his fault, but at bottom, he wasnot sorry.
The landlady of the hotel entered.
“Does Monsieur wish a bed? Does Monsieur require supper?”

He made a sign of the head in the negative.
“The stableman says that Monsieur’s horse is extremely fatigued.”

Here he broke his silence.
“Will not the horse be in a condition to set out again to-morrowmorning?”

“Oh, Monsieur! he must rest for two days at least.”

He inquired:—
“Is not the posting-station located here?”

“Yes, sir.”

The hostess conducted him to the office; he showed his passport, andinquired whether there was any way of returning that same night to M.sur M. by the mail-wagon; the seat beside the post-boy chanced to bevacant; he engaged it and paid for it. “Monsieur,” said the clerk, “donot fail to be here ready to start at precisely one o’clock in themorning.”

This done, he left the hotel and began to wander about the town.
He was not acquainted with Arras; the streets were dark, and he walkedon at random; but he seemed bent upon not asking the way of thepassers-by. He crossed the little river Crinchon, and found himself ina labyrinth of narrow alleys where he lost his way. A citizen waspassing along with a lantern. After some hesitation, he decided toapply to this man, not without having first glanced behind and in frontof him, as though he feared lest some one should hear the questionwhich he was about to put.
“Monsieur,” said he, “where is the court-house, if you please.”

“You do not belong in town, sir?” replied the bourgeois, who was anoldish man; “well, follow me. I happen to be going in the direction ofthe court-house, that is to say, in the direction of the hotel of theprefecture; for the court-house is undergoing repairs just at thismoment, and the courts are holding their sittings provisionally in theprefecture.”

“Is it there that the Assizes are held?” he asked.
“Certainly, sir; you see, the prefecture of to-day was the bishop’spalace before the Revolution. M. de Conzié, who was bishop in ’82,built a grand hall there. It is in this grand hall that the court isheld.”

On the way, the bourgeois said to him:—
“If Monsieur desires to witness a case, it is rather late. The sittingsgenerally close at six o’clock.”

When they arrived on the grand square, however, the man pointed out tohim four long windows all lighted up, in the front of a vast and gloomybuilding.
“Upon my word, sir, you are in luck; you have arrived in season. Do yousee those four windows? That is the Court of Assizes. There is lightthere, so they are not through. The matter must have been greatlyprotracted, and they are holding an evening session. Do you take aninterest in this affair? Is it a criminal case? Are you a witness?”

He replied:—
“I have not come on any business; I only wish to speak to one of thelawyers.”

“That is different,” said the bourgeois. “Stop, sir; here is the doorwhere the sentry stands. You have only to ascend the grand staircase.”

He conformed to the bourgeois’s directions, and a few minutes later hewas in a hall containing many people, and where groups, intermingledwith lawyers in their gowns, were whispering together here and there.
It is always a heart-breaking thing to see these congregations of menrobed in black, murmuring together in low voices, on the threshold ofthe halls of justice. It is rare that charity and pity are the outcomeof these words. Condemnations pronounced in advance are more likely tobe the result. All these groups seem to the passing and thoughtfulobserver so many sombre hives where buzzing spirits construct inconcert all sorts of dark edifices.
This spacious hall, illuminated by a single lamp, was the old hall ofthe episcopal palace, and served as the large hall of the palace ofjustice. A double-leaved door, which was closed at that moment,separated it from the large apartment where the court was sitting.
The obscurity was such that he did not fear to accost the first lawyerwhom he met.
“What stage have they reached, sir?” he asked.
“It is finished,” said the lawyer.
“Finished!”

This word was repeated in such accents that the lawyer turned round.
“Excuse me sir; perhaps you are a relative?”

“No; I know no one here. Has judgment been pronounced?”

“Of course. Nothing else was possible.”

“To penal servitude?”

“For life.”

He continued, in a voice so weak that it was barely audible:—
“Then his identity was established?”

“What identity?” replied the lawyer. “There was no identity to beestablished. The matter was very simple. The woman had murdered herchild; the infanticide was proved; the jury threw out the question ofpremeditation, and she was condemned for life.”

“So it was a woman?” said he.
“Why, certainly. The Limosin woman. Of what are you speaking?”

“Nothing. But since it is all over, how comes it that the hall is stilllighted?”

“For another case, which was begun about two hours ago.”

“What other case?”

“Oh! this one is a clear case also. It is about a sort of blackguard; aman arrested for a second offence; a convict who has been guilty oftheft. I don’t know his name exactly. There’s a bandit’s phiz for you!I’d send him to the galleys on the strength of his face alone.”

“Is there any way of getting into the court-room, sir?” said he.
“I really think that there is not. There is a great crowd. However, thehearing has been suspended. Some people have gone out, and when thehearing is resumed, you might make an effort.”

“Where is the entrance?”

“Through yonder large door.”

The lawyer left him. In the course of a few moments he had experienced,almost simultaneously, almost intermingled with each other, allpossible emotions. The words of this indifferent spectator had, inturn, pierced his heart like needles of ice and like blades of fire.When he saw that nothing was settled, he breathed freely once more; buthe could not have told whether what he felt was pain or pleasure.
He drew near to many groups and listened to what they were saying. Thedocket of the session was very heavy; the president had appointed forthe same day two short and simple cases. They had begun with theinfanticide, and now they had reached the convict, the old offender,the “return horse.” This man had stolen apples, but that did not appearto be entirely proved; what had been proved was, that he had alreadybeen in the galleys at Toulon. It was that which lent a bad aspect tohis case. However, the man’s examination and the depositions of thewitnesses had been completed, but the lawyer’s plea, and the speech ofthe public prosecutor were still to come; it could not be finishedbefore midnight. The man would probably be condemned; theattorney-general was very clever, and never _missed_ his culprits; hewas a brilliant fellow who wrote verses.
An usher stood at the door communicating with the hall of the Assizes.He inquired of this usher:—
“Will the door be opened soon, sir?”

“It will not be opened at all,” replied the usher.
“What! It will not be opened when the hearing is resumed? Is not thehearing suspended?”

“The hearing has just been begun again,” replied the usher, “but thedoor will not be opened again.”

“Why?”

“Because the hall is full.”

“What! There is not room for one more?”

“Not another one. The door is closed. No one can enter now.”

The usher added after a pause: “There are, to tell the truth, two orthree extra places behind Monsieur le Président, but Monsieur lePrésident only admits public functionaries to them.”

So saying, the usher turned his back.
He retired with bowed head, traversed the antechamber, and slowlydescended the stairs, as though hesitating at every step. It isprobable that he was holding counsel with himself. The violent conflictwhich had been going on within him since the preceding evening was notyet ended; and every moment he encountered some new phase of it. Onreaching the landing-place, he leaned his back against the balustersand folded his arms. All at once he opened his coat, drew out hispocket-book, took from it a pencil, tore out a leaf, and upon that leafhe wrote rapidly, by the light of the street lantern, this line: _M.Madeleine, Mayor of M. sur M._; then he ascended the stairs once morewith great strides, made his way through the crowd, walked straight upto the usher, handed him the paper, and said in an authoritativemanner:—
“Take this to Monsieur le Président.”

The usher took the paper, cast a glance upon it, and obeyed.



CHAPTER VIII—AN ENTRANCE BY FAVOR

Although he did not suspect the fact, the mayor of M. sur M. enjoyed asort of celebrity. For the space of seven years his reputation forvirtue had filled the whole of Bas Boulonnais; it had eventually passedthe confines of a small district and had been spread abroad through twoor three neighboring departments. Besides the service which he hadrendered to the chief town by resuscitating the black jet industry,there was not one out of the hundred and forty communes of thearrondissement of M. sur M. which was not indebted to him for somebenefit. He had even at need contrived to aid and multiply theindustries of other arrondissements. It was thus that he had, whenoccasion offered, supported with his credit and his funds the linenfactory at Boulogne, the flax-spinning industry at Frévent, and thehydraulic manufacture of cloth at Boubers-sur-Canche. Everywhere thename of M. Madeleine was pronounced with veneration. Arras and Douaienvied the happy little town of M. sur M. its mayor.
The Councillor of the Royal Court of Douai, who was presiding over thissession of the Assizes at Arras, was acquainted, in common with therest of the world, with this name which was so profoundly anduniversally honored. When the usher, discreetly opening the door whichconnected the council-chamber with the court-room, bent over the backof the President’s armchair and handed him the paper on which wasinscribed the line which we have just perused, adding: “The gentlemandesires to be present at the trial,” the President, with a quick anddeferential movement, seized a pen and wrote a few words at the bottomof the paper and returned it to the usher, saying, “Admit him.”

The unhappy man whose history we are relating had remained near thedoor of the hall, in the same place and the same attitude in which theusher had left him. In the midst of his reverie he heard some onesaying to him, “Will Monsieur do me the honor to follow me?” It was thesame usher who had turned his back upon him but a moment previously,and who was now bowing to the earth before him. At the same time, theusher handed him the paper. He unfolded it, and as he chanced to benear the light, he could read it.
“The President of the Court of Assizes presents his respects to M.Madeleine.”

He crushed the paper in his hand as though those words contained forhim a strange and bitter aftertaste.
He followed the usher.
A few minutes later he found himself alone in a sort of wainscotedcabinet of severe aspect, lighted by two wax candles, placed upon atable with a green cloth. The last words of the usher who had justquitted him still rang in his ears: “Monsieur, you are now in thecouncil-chamber; you have only to turn the copper handle of yonderdoor, and you will find yourself in the court-room, behind thePresident’s chair.” These words were mingled in his thoughts with avague memory of narrow corridors and dark staircases which he hadrecently traversed.
The usher had left him alone. The supreme moment had arrived. He soughtto collect his faculties, but could not. It is chiefly at the momentwhen there is the greatest need for attaching them to the painfulrealities of life, that the threads of thought snap within the brain.He was in the very place where the judges deliberated and condemned.With stupid tranquillity he surveyed this peaceful and terribleapartment, where so many lives had been broken, which was soon to ringwith his name, and which his fate was at that moment traversing. Hestared at the wall, then he looked at himself, wondering that it shouldbe that chamber and that it should be he.
He had eaten nothing for four and twenty hours; he was worn out by thejolts of the cart, but he was not conscious of it. It seemed to himthat he felt nothing.
He approached a black frame which was suspended on the wall, and whichcontained, under glass, an ancient autograph letter of Jean NicolasPache, mayor of Paris and minister, and dated, through an error, nodoubt, the _9th of June_, of the year II., and in which Pache forwardedto the commune the list of ministers and deputies held in arrest bythem. Any spectator who had chanced to see him at that moment, and whohad watched him, would have imagined, doubtless, that this letterstruck him as very curious, for he did not take his eyes from it, andhe read it two or three times. He read it without paying any attentionto it, and unconsciously. He was thinking of Fantine and Cosette.
As he dreamed, he turned round, and his eyes fell upon the brass knobof the door which separated him from the Court of Assizes. He hadalmost forgotten that door. His glance, calm at first, paused there,remained fixed on that brass handle, then grew terrified, and little bylittle became impregnated with fear. Beads of perspiration burst forthamong his hair and trickled down upon his temples.
At a certain moment he made that indescribable gesture of a sort ofauthority mingled with rebellion, which is intended to convey, andwhich does so well convey, _“Pardieu! who compels me to this?”_ Then hewheeled briskly round, caught sight of the door through which he hadentered in front of him, went to it, opened it, and passed out. He wasno longer in that chamber; he was outside in a corridor, a long, narrowcorridor, broken by steps and gratings, making all sorts of angles,lighted here and there by lanterns similar to the night taper ofinvalids, the corridor through which he had approached. He breathed, helistened; not a sound in front, not a sound behind him, and he fled asthough pursued.
When he had turned many angles in this corridor, he still listened. Thesame silence reigned, and there was the same darkness around him. Hewas out of breath; he staggered; he leaned against the wall. The stonewas cold; the perspiration lay ice-cold on his brow; he straightenedhimself up with a shiver.
Then, there alone in the darkness, trembling with cold and withsomething else, too, perchance, he meditated.
He had meditated all night long; he had meditated all the day: he heardwithin him but one voice, which said, “Alas!”

A quarter of an hour passed thus. At length he bowed his head, sighedwith agony, dropped his arms, and retraced his steps. He walked slowly,and as though crushed. It seemed as though some one had overtaken himin his flight and was leading him back.
He re-entered the council-chamber. The first thing he caught sight ofwas the knob of the door. This knob, which was round and of polishedbrass, shone like a terrible star for him. He gazed at it as a lambmight gaze into the eye of a tiger.
He could not take his eyes from it. From time to time he advanced astep and approached the door.
Had he listened, he would have heard the sound of the adjoining halllike a sort of confused murmur; but he did not listen, and he did nothear.
Suddenly, without himself knowing how it happened, he found himselfnear the door; he grasped the knob convulsively; the door opened.
He was in the court-room.



CHAPTER IX—A PLACE WHERE CONVICTIONS ARE IN PROCESS OF FORMATION

He advanced a pace, closed the door mechanically behind him, andremained standing, contemplating what he saw.
It was a vast and badly lighted apartment, now full of uproar, now fullof silence, where all the apparatus of a criminal case, with its pettyand mournful gravity in the midst of the throng, was in process ofdevelopment.
At the one end of the hall, the one where he was, were judges, withabstracted air, in threadbare robes, who were gnawing their nails orclosing their eyelids; at the other end, a ragged crowd; lawyers in allsorts of attitudes; soldiers with hard but honest faces; ancient,spotted woodwork, a dirty ceiling, tables covered with serge that wasyellow rather than green; doors blackened by handmarks; tap-room lampswhich emitted more smoke than light, suspended from nails in thewainscot; on the tables candles in brass candlesticks; darkness,ugliness, sadness; and from all this there was disengaged an austereand august impression, for one there felt that grand human thing whichis called the law, and that grand divine thing which is called justice.
No one in all that throng paid any attention to him; all glances weredirected towards a single point, a wooden bench placed against a smalldoor, in the stretch of wall on the President’s left; on this bench,illuminated by several candles, sat a man between two gendarmes.
This man was _the_ man.
He did not seek him; he saw him; his eyes went thither naturally, asthough they had known beforehand where that figure was.
He thought he was looking at himself, grown old; not absolutely thesame in face, of course, but exactly similar in attitude and aspect,with his bristling hair, with that wild and uneasy eye, with thatblouse, just as it was on the day when he entered D——, full of hatred,concealing his soul in that hideous mass of frightful thoughts which hehad spent nineteen years in collecting on the floor of the prison.
He said to himself with a shudder, “Good God! shall I become like thatagain?”

This creature seemed to be at least sixty; there was somethingindescribably coarse, stupid, and frightened about him.
At the sound made by the opening door, people had drawn aside to makeway for him; the President had turned his head, and, understanding thatthe personage who had just entered was the mayor of M. sur M., he hadbowed to him; the attorney-general, who had seen M. Madeleine at M. surM., whither the duties of his office had called him more than once,recognized him and saluted him also: he had hardly perceived it; he wasthe victim of a sort of hallucination; he was watching.
Judges, clerks, gendarmes, a throng of cruelly curious heads, all thesehe had already beheld once, in days gone by, twenty-seven years before;he had encountered those fatal things once more; there they were; theymoved; they existed; it was no longer an effort of his memory, a mirageof his thought; they were real gendarmes and real judges, a real crowd,and real men of flesh and blood: it was all over; he beheld themonstrous aspects of his past reappear and live once more around him,with all that there is formidable in reality.
All this was yawning before him.
He was horrified by it; he shut his eyes, and exclaimed in the deepestrecesses of his soul, “Never!”

And by a tragic play of destiny which made all his ideas tremble, andrendered him nearly mad, it was another self of his that was there! allcalled that man who was being tried Jean Valjean.
Under his very eyes, unheard-of vision, he had a sort of representationof the most horrible moment of his life, enacted by his spectre.
Everything was there; the apparatus was the same, the hour of thenight, the faces of the judges, of soldiers, and of spectators; allwere the same, only above the President’s head there hung a crucifix,something which the courts had lacked at the time of his condemnation:God had been absent when he had been judged.
There was a chair behind him; he dropped into it, terrified at thethought that he might be seen; when he was seated, he took advantage ofa pile of cardboard boxes, which stood on the judge’s desk, to concealhis face from the whole room; he could now see without being seen; hehad fully regained consciousness of the reality of things; gradually herecovered; he attained that phase of composure where it is possible tolisten.
M. Bamatabois was one of the jurors.
He looked for Javert, but did not see him; the seat of the witnesseswas hidden from him by the clerk’s table, and then, as we have justsaid, the hall was sparely lighted.
At the moment of this entrance, the defendant’s lawyer had justfinished his plea.
The attention of all was excited to the highest pitch; the affair hadlasted for three hours: for three hours that crowd had been watching astrange man, a miserable specimen of humanity, either profoundly stupidor profoundly subtle, gradually bending beneath the weight of aterrible likeness. This man, as the reader already knows, was avagabond who had been found in a field carrying a branch laden withripe apples, broken in the orchard of a neighbor, called the Pierronorchard. Who was this man? an examination had been made; witnesses hadbeen heard, and they were unanimous; light had abounded throughout theentire debate; the accusation said: “We have in our grasp not only amarauder, a stealer of fruit; we have here, in our hands, a bandit, anold offender who has broken his ban, an ex-convict, a miscreant of themost dangerous description, a malefactor named Jean Valjean, whomjustice has long been in search of, and who, eight years ago, onemerging from the galleys at Toulon, committed a highway robbery,accompanied by violence, on the person of a child, a Savoyard namedLittle Gervais; a crime provided for by article 383 of the Penal Code,the right to try him for which we reserve hereafter, when his identityshall have been judicially established. He has just committed a freshtheft; it is a case of a second offence; condemn him for the freshdeed; later on he will be judged for the old crime.” In the face ofthis accusation, in the face of the unanimity of the witnesses, theaccused appeared to be astonished more than anything else; he madesigns and gestures which were meant to convey No, or else he stared atthe ceiling: he spoke with difficulty, replied with embarrassment, buthis whole person, from head to foot, was a denial; he was an idiot inthe presence of all these minds ranged in order of battle around him,and like a stranger in the midst of this society which was seizing fastupon him; nevertheless, it was a question of the most menacing futurefor him; the likeness increased every moment, and the entire crowdsurveyed, with more anxiety than he did himself, that sentencefreighted with calamity, which descended ever closer over his head;there was even a glimpse of a possibility afforded; besides thegalleys, a possible death penalty, in case his identity wereestablished, and the affair of Little Gervais were to end thereafter incondemnation. Who was this man? what was the nature of his apathy? wasit imbecility or craft? Did he understand too well, or did he notunderstand at all? these were questions which divided the crowd, andseemed to divide the jury; there was something both terrible andpuzzling in this case: the drama was not only melancholy; it was alsoobscure.
The counsel for the defence had spoken tolerably well, in thatprovincial tongue which has long constituted the eloquence of the bar,and which was formerly employed by all advocates, at Paris as well asat Romorantin or at Montbrison, and which to-day, having becomeclassic, is no longer spoken except by the official orators ofmagistracy, to whom it is suited on account of its grave sonorousnessand its majestic stride; a tongue in which a husband is called _aconsort_, and a woman _a spouse_; Paris, _the centre of art andcivilization_; the king, _the monarch_; Monseigneur the Bishop, _asainted pontiff_; the district-attorney, _the eloquent interpreter ofpublic prosecution_; the arguments, _the accents which we have justlistened to_; the age of Louis XIV., _the grand age_; a theatre, _thetemple of Melpomene_; the reigning family, _the august blood of ourkings_; a concert, _a musical solemnity_; the General Commandant of theprovince, _the illustrious warrior, who, etc._; the pupils in theseminary, _these tender levities_; errors imputed to newspapers, _theimposture which distills its venom through the columns of thoseorgans_; etc. The lawyer had, accordingly, begun with an explanation asto the theft of the apples,—an awkward matter couched in fine style;but Bénigne Bossuet himself was obliged to allude to a chicken in themidst of a funeral oration, and he extricated himself from thesituation in stately fashion. The lawyer established the fact that thetheft of the apples had not been circumstantially proved. His client,whom he, in his character of counsel, persisted in callingChampmathieu, had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking thatbranch by any one. He had been taken with that branch (which the lawyerpreferred to call a _bough_) in his possession; but he said that he hadfound it broken off and lying on the ground, and had picked it up.Where was there any proof to the contrary? No doubt that branch hadbeen broken off and concealed after the scaling of the wall, thenthrown away by the alarmed marauder; there was no doubt that there hadbeen a thief in the case. But what proof was there that that thief hadbeen Champmathieu? One thing only. His character as an ex-convict. Thelawyer did not deny that that character appeared to be, unhappily, wellattested; the accused had resided at Faverolles; the accused hadexercised the calling of a tree-pruner there; the name of Champmathieumight well have had its origin in Jean Mathieu; all that was true,—inshort, four witnesses recognize Champmathieu, positively and withouthesitation, as that convict, Jean Valjean; to these signs, to thistestimony, the counsel could oppose nothing but the denial of hisclient, the denial of an interested party; but supposing that he wasthe convict Jean Valjean, did that prove that he was the thief of theapples? that was a presumption at the most, not a proof. The prisoner,it was true, and his counsel, “in good faith,” was obliged to admit it,had adopted “a bad system of defence.” He obstinately deniedeverything, the theft and his character of convict. An admission uponthis last point would certainly have been better, and would have wonfor him the indulgence of his judges; the counsel had advised him to dothis; but the accused had obstinately refused, thinking, no doubt, thathe would save everything by admitting nothing. It was an error; butought not the paucity of this intelligence to be taken intoconsideration? This man was visibly stupid. Long-continued wretchednessin the galleys, long misery outside the galleys, had brutalized him,etc. He defended himself badly; was that a reason for condemning him?As for the affair with Little Gervais, the counsel need not discuss it;it did not enter into the case. The lawyer wound up by beseeching thejury and the court, if the identity of Jean Valjean appeared to them tobe evident, to apply to him the police penalties which are provided fora criminal who has broken his ban, and not the frightful chastisementwhich descends upon the convict guilty of a second offence.
The district-attorney answered the counsel for the defence. He wasviolent and florid, as district-attorneys usually are.
He congratulated the counsel for the defence on his “loyalty,” andskilfully took advantage of this loyalty. He reached the accusedthrough all the concessions made by his lawyer. The advocate had seemedto admit that the prisoner was Jean Valjean. He took note of this. Sothis man was Jean Valjean. This point had been conceded to theaccusation and could no longer be disputed. Here, by means of a cleverautonomasia which went back to the sources and causes of crime, thedistrict-attorney thundered against the immorality of the romanticschool, then dawning under the name of _the Satanic school_, which hadbeen bestowed upon it by the critics of the _Quotidienne_ and the_Oriflamme_; he attributed, not without some probability, to theinfluence of this perverse literature the crime of Champmathieu, orrather, to speak more correctly, of Jean Valjean. Having exhaustedthese considerations, he passed on to Jean Valjean himself. Who wasthis Jean Valjean? Description of Jean Valjean: a monster spewed forth,etc. The model for this sort of description is contained in the tale ofThéramène, which is not useful to tragedy, but which every day rendersgreat services to judicial eloquence. The audience and the jury“shuddered.” The description finished, the district-attorney resumedwith an oratorical turn calculated to raise the enthusiasm of thejournal of the prefecture to the highest pitch on the following day:And it is such a man, etc., etc., etc., vagabond, beggar, without meansof existence, etc., etc., inured by his past life to culpable deeds,and but little reformed by his sojourn in the galleys, as was proved bythe crime committed against Little Gervais, etc., etc.; it is such aman, caught upon the highway in the very act of theft, a few paces froma wall that had been scaled, still holding in his hand the objectstolen, who denies the crime, the theft, the climbing the wall; denieseverything; denies even his own identity! In addition to a hundredother proofs, to which we will not recur, four witnesses recognizehim—Javert, the upright inspector of police; Javert, and three of hisformer companions in infamy, the convicts Brevet, Chenildieu, andCochepaille. What does he offer in opposition to this overwhelmingunanimity? His denial. What obduracy! You will do justice, gentlemen ofthe jury, etc., etc. While the district-attorney was speaking, theaccused listened to him open-mouthed, with a sort of amazement in whichsome admiration was assuredly blended. He was evidently surprised thata man could talk like that. From time to time, at those “energetic”moments of the prosecutor’s speech, when eloquence which cannot containitself overflows in a flood of withering epithets and envelops theaccused like a storm, he moved his head slowly from right to left andfrom left to right in the sort of mute and melancholy protest withwhich he had contented himself since the beginning of the argument. Twoor three times the spectators who were nearest to him heard him say ina low voice, “That is what comes of not having asked M. Baloup.” Thedistrict-attorney directed the attention of the jury to this stupidattitude, evidently deliberate, which denoted not imbecility, butcraft, skill, a habit of deceiving justice, and which set forth in allits nakedness the “profound perversity” of this man. He ended by makinghis reserves on the affair of Little Gervais and demanding a severesentence.
At that time, as the reader will remember, it was penal servitude forlife.
The counsel for the defence rose, began by complimenting Monsieurl’Avocat-General on his “admirable speech,” then replied as best hecould; but he weakened; the ground was evidently slipping away fromunder his feet.



CHAPTER X—THE SYSTEM OF DENIALS

The moment for closing the debate had arrived. The President had theaccused stand up, and addressed to him the customary question, “Haveyou anything to add to your defence?”

The man did not appear to understand, as he stood there, twisting inhis hands a terrible cap which he had.
The President repeated the question.
This time the man heard it. He seemed to understand. He made a motionlike a man who is just waking up, cast his eyes about him, stared atthe audience, the gendarmes, his counsel, the jury, the court, laid hismonstrous fist on the rim of woodwork in front of his bench, tookanother look, and all at once, fixing his glance upon thedistrict-attorney, he began to speak. It was like an eruption. Itseemed, from the manner in which the words escaped from hismouth,—incoherent, impetuous, pell-mell, tumbling over each other,—asthough they were all pressing forward to issue forth at once. He said:—
“This is what I have to say. That I have been a wheelwright in Paris,and that it was with Monsieur Baloup. It is a hard trade. In thewheelwright’s trade one works always in the open air, in courtyards,under sheds when the masters are good, never in closed workshops,because space is required, you see. In winter one gets so cold that onebeats one’s arms together to warm one’s self; but the masters don’tlike it; they say it wastes time. Handling iron when there is icebetween the paving-stones is hard work. That wears a man out quickly.One is old while he is still quite young in that trade. At forty a manis done for. I was fifty-three. I was in a bad state. And then, workmenare so mean! When a man is no longer young, they call him nothing butan old bird, old beast! I was not earning more than thirty sous a day.They paid me as little as possible. The masters took advantage of myage—and then I had my daughter, who was a laundress at the river. Sheearned a little also. It sufficed for us two. She had trouble, also;all day long up to her waist in a tub, in rain, in snow. When the windcuts your face, when it freezes, it is all the same; you must stillwash. There are people who have not much linen, and wait until late; ifyou do not wash, you lose your custom. The planks are badly joined, andwater drops on you from everywhere; you have your petticoats all dampabove and below. That penetrates. She has also worked at the laundry ofthe Enfants-Rouges, where the water comes through faucets. You are notin the tub there; you wash at the faucet in front of you, and rinse ina basin behind you. As it is enclosed, you are not so cold; but thereis that hot steam, which is terrible, and which ruins your eyes. Shecame home at seven o’clock in the evening, and went to bed at once, shewas so tired. Her husband beat her. She is dead. We have not been veryhappy. She was a good girl, who did not go to the ball, and who wasvery peaceable. I remember one Shrove-Tuesday when she went to bed ateight o’clock. There, I am telling the truth; you have only to ask. Ah,yes! how stupid I am! Paris is a gulf. Who knows Father Champmathieuthere? But M. Baloup does, I tell you. Go see at M. Baloup’s; and afterall, I don’t know what is wanted of me.”

The man ceased speaking, and remained standing. He had said thesethings in a loud, rapid, hoarse voice, with a sort of irritated andsavage ingenuousness. Once he paused to salute some one in the crowd.The sort of affirmations which he seemed to fling out before him atrandom came like hiccoughs, and to each he added the gesture of awood-cutter who is splitting wood. When he had finished, the audienceburst into a laugh. He stared at the public, and, perceiving that theywere laughing, and not understanding why, he began to laugh himself.
It was inauspicious.
The President, an attentive and benevolent man, raised his voice.
He reminded “the gentlemen of the jury” that “the sieur Baloup,formerly a master-wheelwright, with whom the accused stated that he hadserved, had been summoned in vain. He had become bankrupt, and was notto be found.” Then turning to the accused, he enjoined him to listen towhat he was about to say, and added: “You are in a position wherereflection is necessary. The gravest presumptions rest upon you, andmay induce vital results. Prisoner, in your own interests, I summon youfor the last time to explain yourself clearly on two points. In thefirst place, did you or did you not climb the wall of the Pierronorchard, break the branch, and steal the apples; that is to say, committhe crime of breaking in and theft? In the second place, are you thedischarged convict, Jean Valjean—yes or no?”

The prisoner shook his head with a capable air, like a man who hasthoroughly understood, and who knows what answer he is going to make.He opened his mouth, turned towards the President, and said:—
“In the first place—”

Then he stared at his cap, stared at the ceiling, and held his peace.
“Prisoner,” said the district-attorney, in a severe voice; “payattention. You are not answering anything that has been asked of you.Your embarrassment condemns you. It is evident that your name is notChampmathieu; that you are the convict, Jean Valjean, concealed firstunder the name of Jean Mathieu, which was the name of his mother; thatyou went to Auvergne; that you were born at Faverolles, where you werea pruner of trees. It is evident that you have been guilty of entering,and of the theft of ripe apples from the Pierron orchard. The gentlemenof the jury will form their own opinion.”


  Enlarge
Father Champmathieu on Trial

The prisoner had finally resumed his seat; he arose abruptly when thedistrict-attorney had finished, and exclaimed:—
“You are very wicked; that you are! This what I wanted to say; I couldnot find words for it at first. I have stolen nothing. I am a man whodoes not have something to eat every day. I was coming from Ailly; Iwas walking through the country after a shower, which had made thewhole country yellow: even the ponds were overflowed, and nothingsprang from the sand any more but the little blades of grass at thewayside. I found a broken branch with apples on the ground; I picked upthe branch without knowing that it would get me into trouble. I havebeen in prison, and they have been dragging me about for the last threemonths; more than that I cannot say; people talk against me, they tellme, ‘Answer!’ The gendarme, who is a good fellow, nudges my elbow, andsays to me in a low voice, ‘Come, answer!’ I don’t know how to explain;I have no education; I am a poor man; that is where they wrong me,because they do not see this. I have not stolen; I picked up from theground things that were lying there. You say, Jean Valjean, JeanMathieu! I don’t know those persons; they are villagers. I worked forM. Baloup, Boulevard de l’Hôpital; my name is Champmathieu. You arevery clever to tell me where I was born; I don’t know myself: it’s noteverybody who has a house in which to come into the world; that wouldbe too convenient. I think that my father and mother were people whostrolled along the highways; I know nothing different. When I was achild, they called me _young fellow_; now they call me _old Fellow_;those are my baptismal names; take that as you like. I have been inAuvergne; I have been at Faverolles. Pardi. Well! can’t a man have beenin Auvergne, or at Faverolles, without having been in the galleys? Itell you that I have not stolen, and that I am Father Champmathieu; Ihave been with M. Baloup; I have had a settled residence. You worry mewith your nonsense, there! Why is everybody pursuing me so furiously?”

The district-attorney had remained standing; he addressed thePresident:—
“Monsieur le Président, in view of the confused but exceedingly cleverdenials of the prisoner, who would like to pass himself off as anidiot, but who will not succeed in so doing,—we shall attend tothat,—we demand that it shall please you and that it shall please thecourt to summon once more into this place the convicts Brevet,Cochepaille, and Chenildieu, and Police-Inspector Javert, and questionthem for the last time as to the identity of the prisoner with theconvict Jean Valjean.”

“I would remind the district-attorney,” said the President, “thatPolice-Inspector Javert, recalled by his duties to the capital of aneighboring arrondissement, left the court-room and the town as soon ashe had made his deposition; we have accorded him permission, with theconsent of the district-attorney and of the counsel for the prisoner.”

“That is true, Mr. President,” responded the district-attorney. “In theabsence of sieur Javert, I think it my duty to remind the gentlemen ofthe jury of what he said here a few hours ago. Javert is an estimableman, who does honor by his rigorous and strict probity to inferior butimportant functions. These are the terms of his deposition: ‘I do noteven stand in need of circumstantial proofs and moral presumptions togive the lie to the prisoner’s denial. I recognize him perfectly. Thename of this man is not Champmathieu; he is an ex-convict named JeanValjean, and is very vicious and much to be feared. It is only withextreme regret that he was released at the expiration of his term. Heunderwent nineteen years of penal servitude for theft. He made five orsix attempts to escape. Besides the theft from Little Gervais, and fromthe Pierron orchard, I suspect him of a theft committed in the house ofHis Grace the late Bishop of D—— I often saw him at the time when I wasadjutant of the galley-guard at the prison in Toulon. I repeat that Irecognize him perfectly.’”

This extremely precise statement appeared to produce a vivid impressionon the public and on the jury. The district-attorney concluded byinsisting, that in default of Javert, the three witnesses Brevet,Chenildieu, and Cochepaille should be heard once more and solemnlyinterrogated.
The President transmitted the order to an usher, and, a moment later,the door of the witnesses’ room opened. The usher, accompanied by agendarme ready to lend him armed assistance, introduced the convictBrevet. The audience was in suspense; and all breasts heaved as thoughthey had contained but one soul.
The ex-convict Brevet wore the black and gray waistcoat of the centralprisons. Brevet was a person sixty years of age, who had a sort ofbusiness man’s face, and the air of a rascal. The two sometimes gotogether. In prison, whither fresh misdeeds had led him, he had becomesomething in the nature of a turnkey. He was a man of whom hissuperiors said, “He tries to make himself of use.” The chaplains boregood testimony as to his religious habits. It must not be forgottenthat this passed under the Restoration.
“Brevet,” said the President, “you have undergone an ignominioussentence, and you cannot take an oath.”

Brevet dropped his eyes.
“Nevertheless,” continued the President, “even in the man whom the lawhas degraded, there may remain, when the divine mercy permits it, asentiment of honor and of equity. It is to this sentiment that I appealat this decisive hour. If it still exists in you,—and I hope itdoes,—reflect before replying to me: consider on the one hand, thisman, whom a word from you may ruin; on the other hand, justice, which aword from you may enlighten. The instant is solemn; there is still timeto retract if you think you have been mistaken. Rise, prisoner. Brevet,take a good look at the accused, recall your souvenirs, and tell us onyour soul and conscience, if you persist in recognizing this man asyour former companion in the galleys, Jean Valjean?”

Brevet looked at the prisoner, then turned towards the court.
“Yes, Mr. President, I was the first to recognize him, and I stick toit; that man is Jean Valjean, who entered at Toulon in 1796, and leftin 1815. I left a year later. He has the air of a brute now; but itmust be because age has brutalized him; he was sly at the galleys: Irecognize him positively.”

“Take your seat,” said the President. “Prisoner, remain standing.”

Chenildieu was brought in, a prisoner for life, as was indicated by hisred cassock and his green cap. He was serving out his sentence at thegalleys of Toulon, whence he had been brought for this case. He was asmall man of about fifty, brisk, wrinkled, frail, yellow, brazen-faced,feverish, who had a sort of sickly feebleness about all his limbs andhis whole person, and an immense force in his glance. His companions inthe galleys had nicknamed him _I-deny-God_ (_Je-nie Dieu_, Chenildieu).
The President addressed him in nearly the same words which he had usedto Brevet. At the moment when he reminded him of his infamy whichdeprived him of the right to take an oath, Chenildieu raised his headand looked the crowd in the face. The President invited him toreflection, and asked him as he had asked Brevet, if he persisted inrecognition of the prisoner.
Chenildieu burst out laughing.
“Pardieu, as if I didn’t recognize him! We were attached to the samechain for five years. So you are sulking, old fellow?”

“Go take your seat,” said the President.
The usher brought in Cochepaille. He was another convict for life, whohad come from the galleys, and was dressed in red, like Chenildieu, wasa peasant from Lourdes, and a half-bear of the Pyrenees. He had guardedthe flocks among the mountains, and from a shepherd he had slipped intoa brigand. Cochepaille was no less savage and seemed even more stupidthan the prisoner. He was one of those wretched men whom nature hassketched out for wild beasts, and on whom society puts the finishingtouches as convicts in the galleys.
The President tried to touch him with some grave and pathetic words,and asked him, as he had asked the other two, if he persisted, withouthesitation or trouble, in recognizing the man who was standing beforehim.
“He is Jean Valjean,” said Cochepaille. “He was even calledJean-the-Screw, because he was so strong.”

Each of these affirmations from these three men, evidently sincere andin good faith, had raised in the audience a murmur of bad augury forthe prisoner,—a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time thata fresh declaration was added to the proceeding.
The prisoner had listened to them, with that astounded face which was,according to the accusation, his principal means of defence; at thefirst, the gendarmes, his neighbors, had heard him mutter between histeeth: “Ah, well, he’s a nice one!” after the second, he said, a littlelouder, with an air that was almost that of satisfaction, “Good!” atthe third, he cried, “Famous!”

The President addressed him:—
“Have you heard, prisoner? What have you to say?”

He replied:—
“I say, ‘Famous!’”

An uproar broke out among the audience, and was communicated to thejury; it was evident that the man was lost.
“Ushers,” said the President, “enforce silence! I am going to sum upthe arguments.”

At that moment there was a movement just beside the President; a voicewas heard crying:—
“Brevet! Chenildieu! Cochepaille! look here!”

All who heard that voice were chilled, so lamentable and terrible wasit; all eyes were turned to the point whence it had proceeded. A man,placed among the privileged spectators who were seated behind thecourt, had just risen, had pushed open the half-door which separatedthe tribunal from the audience, and was standing in the middle of thehall; the President, the district-attorney, M. Bamatabois, twentypersons, recognized him, and exclaimed in concert:—
“M. Madeleine!”




CHAPTER XI—CHAMPMATHIEU MORE AND MORE ASTONISHED

It was he, in fact. The clerk’s lamp illumined his countenance. He heldhis hat in his hand; there was no disorder in his clothing; his coatwas carefully buttoned; he was very pale, and he trembled slightly; hishair, which had still been gray on his arrival in Arras, was nowentirely white: it had turned white during the hour he had sat there.
All heads were raised: the sensation was indescribable; there was amomentary hesitation in the audience, the voice had been soheart-rending; the man who stood there appeared so calm that they didnot understand at first. They asked themselves whether he had indeeduttered that cry; they could not believe that that tranquil man hadbeen the one to give that terrible outcry.
This indecision only lasted a few seconds. Even before the Presidentand the district-attorney could utter a word, before the ushers and thegendarmes could make a gesture, the man whom all still called, at thatmoment, M. Madeleine, had advanced towards the witnesses Cochepaille,Brevet, and Chenildieu.
“Do you not recognize me?” said he.
All three remained speechless, and indicated by a sign of the head thatthey did not know him. Cochepaille, who was intimidated, made amilitary salute. M. Madeleine turned towards the jury and the court,and said in a gentle voice:—
“Gentlemen of the jury, order the prisoner to be released! Mr.President, have me arrested. He is not the man whom you are in searchof; it is I: I am Jean Valjean.”

Not a mouth breathed; the first commotion of astonishment had beenfollowed by a silence like that of the grave; those within the hallexperienced that sort of religious terror which seizes the masses whensomething grand has been done.
In the meantime, the face of the President was stamped with sympathyand sadness; he had exchanged a rapid sign with the district-attorneyand a few low-toned words with the assistant judges; he addressed thepublic, and asked in accents which all understood:—
“Is there a physician present?”

The district-attorney took the word:—
“Gentlemen of the jury, the very strange and unexpected incident whichdisturbs the audience inspires us, like yourselves, only with asentiment which it is unnecessary for us to express. You all know, byreputation at least, the honorable M. Madeleine, mayor of M. sur M.; ifthere is a physician in the audience, we join the President inrequesting him to attend to M. Madeleine, and to conduct him to hishome.”

M. Madeleine did not allow the district-attorney to finish; heinterrupted him in accents full of suavity and authority. These are thewords which he uttered; here they are literally, as they were writtendown, immediately after the trial by one of the witnesses to thisscene, and as they now ring in the ears of those who heard them nearlyforty years ago:—
“I thank you, Mr. District-Attorney, but I am not mad; you shall see;you were on the point of committing a great error; release this man! Iam fulfilling a duty; I am that miserable criminal. I am the only onehere who sees the matter clearly, and I am telling you the truth. God,who is on high, looks down on what I am doing at this moment, and thatsuffices. You can take me, for here I am: but I have done my best; Iconcealed myself under another name; I have become rich; I have becomea mayor; I have tried to re-enter the ranks of the honest. It seemsthat that is not to be done. In short, there are many things which Icannot tell. I will not narrate the story of my life to you; you willhear it one of these days. I robbed Monseigneur the Bishop, it is true;it is true that I robbed Little Gervais; they were right in telling youthat Jean Valjean was a very vicious wretch. Perhaps it was notaltogether his fault. Listen, honorable judges! a man who has been sogreatly humbled as I have has neither any remonstrances to make toProvidence, nor any advice to give to society; but, you see, the infamyfrom which I have tried to escape is an injurious thing; the galleysmake the convict what he is; reflect upon that, if you please. Beforegoing to the galleys, I was a poor peasant, with very littleintelligence, a sort of idiot; the galleys wrought a change in me. Iwas stupid; I became vicious: I was a block of wood; I became afirebrand. Later on, indulgence and kindness saved me, as severity hadruined me. But, pardon me, you cannot understand what I am saying. Youwill find at my house, among the ashes in the fireplace, the forty-soupiece which I stole, seven years ago, from Little Gervais. I havenothing farther to add; take me. Good God! the district-attorney shakeshis head; you say, ‘M. Madeleine has gone mad!’ you do not believe me!that is distressing. Do not, at least, condemn this man! What! thesemen do not recognize me! I wish Javert were here; he would recognizeme.”

Nothing can reproduce the sombre and kindly melancholy of tone whichaccompanied these words.
He turned to the three convicts, and said:—
“Well, I recognize you; do you remember, Brevet?”

He paused, hesitated for an instant, and said:—
“Do you remember the knitted suspenders with a checked pattern whichyou wore in the galleys?”

Brevet gave a start of surprise, and surveyed him from head to footwith a frightened air. He continued:—
“Chenildieu, you who conferred on yourself the name of ‘Jenie-Dieu,’your whole right shoulder bears a deep burn, because you one day laidyour shoulder against the chafing-dish full of coals, in order toefface the three letters T. F. P., which are still visible,nevertheless; answer, is this true?”

“It is true,” said Chenildieu.
He addressed himself to Cochepaille:—
“Cochepaille, you have, near the bend in your left arm, a date stampedin blue letters with burnt powder; the date is that of the landing ofthe Emperor at Cannes, March 1, 1815; pull up your sleeve!”

Cochepaille pushed up his sleeve; all eyes were focused on him and onhis bare arm.
A gendarme held a light close to it; there was the date.
The unhappy man turned to the spectators and the judges with a smilewhich still rends the hearts of all who saw it whenever they think ofit. It was a smile of triumph; it was also a smile of despair.
“You see plainly,” he said, “that I am Jean Valjean.”

In that chamber there were no longer either judges, accusers, norgendarmes; there was nothing but staring eyes and sympathizing hearts.No one recalled any longer the part that each might be called upon toplay; the district-attorney forgot he was there for the purpose ofprosecuting, the President that he was there to preside, the counselfor the defence that he was there to defend. It was a strikingcircumstance that no question was put, that no authority intervened.The peculiarity of sublime spectacles is, that they capture all soulsand turn witnesses into spectators. No one, probably, could haveexplained what he felt; no one, probably, said to himself that he waswitnessing the splendid outburst of a grand light: all felt themselvesinwardly dazzled.
It was evident that they had Jean Valjean before their eyes. That wasclear. The appearance of this man had sufficed to suffuse with lightthat matter which had been so obscure but a moment previously, withoutany further explanation: the whole crowd, as by a sort of electricrevelation, understood instantly and at a single glance the simple andmagnificent history of a man who was delivering himself up so thatanother man might not be condemned in his stead. The details, thehesitations, little possible oppositions, were swallowed up in thatvast and luminous fact.
It was an impression which vanished speedily, but which wasirresistible at the moment.
“I do not wish to disturb the court further,” resumed Jean Valjean. “Ishall withdraw, since you do not arrest me. I have many things to do.The district-attorney knows who I am; he knows whither I am going; hecan have me arrested when he likes.”

He directed his steps towards the door. Not a voice was raised, not anarm extended to hinder him. All stood aside. At that moment there wasabout him that divine something which causes multitudes to stand asideand make way for a man. He traversed the crowd slowly. It was neverknown who opened the door, but it is certain that he found the dooropen when he reached it. On arriving there he turned round and said:—
“I am at your command, Mr. District-Attorney.”

Then he addressed the audience:—
“All of you, all who are present—consider me worthy of pity, do younot? Good God! When I think of what I was on the point of doing, Iconsider that I am to be envied. Nevertheless, I should have preferrednot to have had this occur.”

He withdrew, and the door closed behind him as it had opened, for thosewho do certain sovereign things are always sure of being served by someone in the crowd.
Less than an hour after this, the verdict of the jury freed the saidChampmathieu from all accusations; and Champmathieu, being at oncereleased, went off in a state of stupefaction, thinking that all menwere fools, and comprehending nothing of this vision.



BOOK EIGHTH—A COUNTER-BLOW



CHAPTER I—IN WHAT MIRROR M. MADELEINE CONTEMPLATES HIS HAIR

The day had begun to dawn. Fantine had passed a sleepless and feverishnight, filled with happy visions; at daybreak she fell asleep. SisterSimplice, who had been watching with her, availed herself of thisslumber to go and prepare a new potion of chinchona. The worthy sisterhad been in the laboratory of the infirmary but a few moments, bendingover her drugs and phials, and scrutinizing things very closely, onaccount of the dimness which the half-light of dawn spreads over allobjects. Suddenly she raised her head and uttered a faint shriek. M.Madeleine stood before her; he had just entered silently.
“Is it you, Mr. Mayor?” she exclaimed.
He replied in a low voice:—
“How is that poor woman?”

“Not so bad just now; but we have been very uneasy.”

She explained to him what had passed: that Fantine had been very illthe day before, and that she was better now, because she thought thatthe mayor had gone to Montfermeil to get her child. The sister darednot question the mayor; but she perceived plainly from his air that hehad not come from there.
“All that is good,” said he; “you were right not to undeceive her.”

“Yes,” responded the sister; “but now, Mr. Mayor, she will see you andwill not see her child. What shall we say to her?”

He reflected for a moment.
“God will inspire us,” said he.
“But we cannot tell a lie,” murmured the sister, half aloud.
It was broad daylight in the room. The light fell full on M.Madeleine’s face. The sister chanced to raise her eyes to it.
“Good God, sir!” she exclaimed; “what has happened to you? Your hair isperfectly white!”

“White!” said he.
Sister Simplice had no mirror. She rummaged in a drawer, and pulled outthe little glass which the doctor of the infirmary used to see whethera patient was dead and whether he no longer breathed. M. Madeleine tookthe mirror, looked at his hair, and said:—
“Well!”

He uttered the word indifferently, and as though his mind were onsomething else.
The sister felt chilled by something strange of which she caught aglimpse in all this.
He inquired:—
“Can I see her?”

“Is not Monsieur le Maire going to have her child brought back to her?”said the sister, hardly venturing to put the question.
“Of course; but it will take two or three days at least.”

“If she were not to see Monsieur le Maire until that time,” went on thesister, timidly, “she would not know that Monsieur le Maire hadreturned, and it would be easy to inspire her with patience; and whenthe child arrived, she would naturally think Monsieur le Maire had justcome with the child. We should not have to enact a lie.”

M. Madeleine seemed to reflect for a few moments; then he said with hiscalm gravity:—
“No, sister, I must see her. I may, perhaps, be in haste.”

The nun did not appear to notice this word “perhaps,” whichcommunicated an obscure and singular sense to the words of the mayor’sspeech. She replied, lowering her eyes and her voice respectfully:—
“In that case, she is asleep; but Monsieur le Maire may enter.”

He made some remarks about a door which shut badly, and the noise ofwhich might awaken the sick woman; then he entered Fantine’s chamber,approached the bed and drew aside the curtains. She was asleep. Herbreath issued from her breast with that tragic sound which is peculiarto those maladies, and which breaks the hearts of mothers when they arewatching through the night beside their sleeping child who is condemnedto death. But this painful respiration hardly troubled a sort ofineffable serenity which overspread her countenance, and whichtransfigured her in her sleep. Her pallor had become whiteness; hercheeks were crimson; her long golden lashes, the only beauty of heryouth and her virginity which remained to her, palpitated, though theyremained closed and drooping. Her whole person was trembling with anindescribable unfolding of wings, all ready to open wide and bear heraway, which could be felt as they rustled, though they could not beseen. To see her thus, one would never have dreamed that she was aninvalid whose life was almost despaired of. She resembled rathersomething on the point of soaring away than something on the point ofdying.
The branch trembles when a hand approaches it to pluck a flower, andseems to both withdraw and to offer itself at one and the same time.The human body has something of this tremor when the instant arrives inwhich the mysterious fingers of Death are about to pluck the soul.
M. Madeleine remained for some time motionless beside that bed, gazingin turn upon the sick woman and the crucifix, as he had done two monthsbefore, on the day when he had come for the first time to see her inthat asylum. They were both still there in the same attitude—shesleeping, he praying; only now, after the lapse of two months, her hairwas gray and his was white.
The sister had not entered with him. He stood beside the bed, with hisfinger on his lips, as though there were some one in the chamber whomhe must enjoin to silence.
She opened her eyes, saw him, and said quietly, with a smile:—
“And Cosette?”




CHAPTER II—FANTINE HAPPY

She made no movement of either surprise or of joy; she was joy itself.That simple question, “And Cosette?” was put with so profound a faith,with so much certainty, with such a complete absence of disquiet and ofdoubt, that he found not a word of reply. She continued:—
“I knew that you were there. I was asleep, but I saw you. I have seenyou for a long, long time. I have been following you with my eyes allnight long. You were in a glory, and you had around you all sorts ofcelestial forms.”

He raised his glance to the crucifix.
“But,” she resumed, “tell me where Cosette is. Why did not you placeher on my bed against the moment of my waking?”

He made some mechanical reply which he was never afterwards able torecall.
Fortunately, the doctor had been warned, and he now made hisappearance. He came to the aid of M. Madeleine.
“Calm yourself, my child,” said the doctor; “your child is here.”

Fantine’s eyes beamed and filled her whole face with light. She claspedher hands with an expression which contained all that is possible toprayer in the way of violence and tenderness.
“Oh!” she exclaimed, “bring her to me!”

Touching illusion of a mother! Cosette was, for her, still the littlechild who is carried.
“Not yet,” said the doctor, “not just now. You still have some fever.The sight of your child would agitate you and do you harm. You must becured first.”

She interrupted him impetuously:—
“But I am cured! Oh, I tell you that I am cured! What an ass thatdoctor is! The idea! I want to see my child!”

“You see,” said the doctor, “how excited you become. So long as you arein this state I shall oppose your having your child. It is not enoughto see her; it is necessary that you should live for her. When you arereasonable, I will bring her to you myself.”

The poor mother bowed her head.
“I beg your pardon, doctor, I really beg your pardon. Formerly I shouldnever have spoken as I have just done; so many misfortunes havehappened to me, that I sometimes do not know what I am saying. Iunderstand you; you fear the emotion. I will wait as long as you like,but I swear to you that it would not have harmed me to see my daughter.I have been seeing her; I have not taken my eyes from her sinceyesterday evening. Do you know? If she were brought to me now, I shouldtalk to her very gently. That is all. Is it not quite natural that Ishould desire to see my daughter, who has been brought to me expresslyfrom Montfermeil? I am not angry. I know well that I am about to behappy. All night long I have seen white things, and persons who smiledat me. When Monsieur le Docteur pleases, he shall bring me Cosette. Ihave no longer any fever; I am well. I am perfectly conscious thatthere is nothing the matter with me any more; but I am going to behaveas though I were ill, and not stir, to please these ladies here. Whenit is seen that I am very calm, they will say, ‘She must have herchild.’”

M. Madeleine was sitting on a chair beside the bed. She turned towardshim; she was making a visible effort to be calm and “very good,” as sheexpressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy, inorder that, seeing her so peaceable, they might make no difficultyabout bringing Cosette to her. But while she controlled herself shecould not refrain from questioning M. Madeleine.
“Did you have a pleasant trip, Monsieur le Maire? Oh! how good you wereto go and get her for me! Only tell me how she is. Did she stand thejourney well? Alas! she will not recognize me. She must have forgottenme by this time, poor darling! Children have no memories. They are likebirds. A child sees one thing to-day and another thing to-morrow, andthinks of nothing any longer. And did she have white linen? Did thoseThénardiers keep her clean? How have they fed her? Oh! if you only knewhow I have suffered, putting such questions as that to myself duringall the time of my wretchedness. Now, it is all past. I am happy. Oh,how I should like to see her! Do you think her pretty, Monsieur leMaire? Is not my daughter beautiful? You must have been very cold inthat diligence! Could she not be brought for just one little instant?She might be taken away directly afterwards. Tell me; you are themaster; it could be so if you chose!”

He took her hand. “Cosette is beautiful,” he said, “Cosette is well.You shall see her soon; but calm yourself; you are talking with toomuch vivacity, and you are throwing your arms out from under theclothes, and that makes you cough.”

In fact, fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word.
Fantine did not murmur; she feared that she had injured by her toopassionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous ofinspiring, and she began to talk of indifferent things.
“Montfermeil is quite pretty, is it not? People go there on pleasureparties in summer. Are the Thénardiers prosperous? There are not manytravellers in their parts. That inn of theirs is a sort of acook-shop.”

M. Madeleine was still holding her hand, and gazing at her withanxiety; it was evident that he had come to tell her things beforewhich his mind now hesitated. The doctor, having finished his visit,retired. Sister Simplice remained alone with them.
But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed:—
“I hear her! mon Dieu, I hear her!”

She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her, held her breath,and began to listen with rapture.
There was a child playing in the yard—the child of the portress or ofsome work-woman. It was one of those accidents which are alwaysoccurring, and which seem to form a part of the mysteriousstage-setting of mournful scenes. The child—a little girl—was going andcoming, running to warm herself, laughing, singing at the top of hervoice. Alas! in what are the plays of children not intermingled. It wasthis little girl whom Fantine heard singing.
“Oh!” she resumed, “it is my Cosette! I recognize her voice.”

The child retreated as it had come; the voice died away. Fantinelistened for a while longer, then her face clouded over, and M.Madeleine heard her say, in a low voice: “How wicked that doctor is notto allow me to see my daughter! That man has an evil countenance, thathe has.”

But the smiling background of her thoughts came to the front again. Shecontinued to talk to herself, with her head resting on the pillow: “Howhappy we are going to be! We shall have a little garden the very firstthing; M. Madeleine has promised it to me. My daughter will play in thegarden. She must know her letters by this time. I will make her spell.She will run over the grass after butterflies. I will watch her. Thenshe will take her first communion. Ah! when will she take her firstcommunion?”

She began to reckon on her fingers.
“One, two, three, four—she is seven years old. In five years she willhave a white veil, and openwork stockings; she will look like a littlewoman. O my good sister, you do not know how foolish I become when Ithink of my daughter’s first communion!”

She began to laugh.
He had released Fantine’s hand. He listened to her words as one listensto the sighing of the breeze, with his eyes on the ground, his mindabsorbed in reflection which had no bottom. All at once she ceasedspeaking, and this caused him to raise his head mechanically. Fantinehad become terrible.
She no longer spoke, she no longer breathed; she had raised herself toa sitting posture, her thin shoulder emerged from her chemise; herface, which had been radiant but a moment before, was ghastly, and sheseemed to have fixed her eyes, rendered large with terror, on somethingalarming at the other extremity of the room.
“Good God!” he exclaimed; “what ails you, Fantine?”

She made no reply; she did not remove her eyes from the object whichshe seemed to see. She removed one hand from his arm, and with theother made him a sign to look behind him.
He turned, and beheld Javert.



CHAPTER III—JAVERT SATISFIED

This is what had taken place.
The half-hour after midnight had just struck when M. Madeleine quittedthe Hall of Assizes in Arras. He regained his inn just in time to setout again by the mail-wagon, in which he had engaged his place. Alittle before six o’clock in the morning he had arrived at M. sur M.,and his first care had been to post a letter to M. Laffitte, then toenter the infirmary and see Fantine.
However, he had hardly quitted the audience hall of the Court ofAssizes, when the district-attorney, recovering from his first shock,had taken the word to deplore the mad deed of the honorable mayor of M.sur M., to declare that his convictions had not been in the leastmodified by that curious incident, which would be explained thereafter,and to demand, in the meantime, the condemnation of that Champmathieu,who was evidently the real Jean Valjean. The district-attorney’spersistence was visibly at variance with the sentiments of every one,of the public, of the court, and of the jury. The counsel for thedefence had some difficulty in refuting this harangue and inestablishing that, in consequence of the revelations of M. Madeleine,that is to say, of the real Jean Valjean, the aspect of the matter hadbeen thoroughly altered, and that the jury had before their eyes nowonly an innocent man. Thence the lawyer had drawn some epiphonemas, notvery fresh, unfortunately, upon judicial errors, etc., etc.; thePresident, in his summing up, had joined the counsel for the defence,and in a few minutes the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case.
Nevertheless, the district-attorney was bent on having a Jean Valjean;and as he had no longer Champmathieu, he took Madeleine.
Immediately after Champmathieu had been set at liberty, thedistrict-attorney shut himself up with the President. They conferred“as to the necessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M.”This phrase, in which there was a great deal of _of_, is thedistrict-attorney’s, written with his own hand, on the minutes of hisreport to the attorney-general. His first emotion having passed off,the President did not offer many objections. Justice must, after all,take its course. And then, when all was said, although the Presidentwas a kindly and a tolerably intelligent man, he was, at the same time,a devoted and almost an ardent royalist, and he had been shocked tohear the Mayor of M. sur M. say the _Emperor_, and not _Bonaparte_,when alluding to the landing at Cannes.
The order for his arrest was accordingly despatched. Thedistrict-attorney forwarded it to M. sur M. by a special messenger, atfull speed, and entrusted its execution to Police Inspector Javert.
The reader knows that Javert had returned to M. sur M. immediatelyafter having given his deposition.
Javert was just getting out of bed when the messenger handed him theorder of arrest and the command to produce the prisoner.
The messenger himself was a very clever member of the police, who, intwo words, informed Javert of what had taken place at Arras. The orderof arrest, signed by the district-attorney, was couched in these words:“Inspector Javert will apprehend the body of the Sieur Madeleine, mayorof M. sur M., who, in this day’s session of the court, was recognizedas the liberated convict, Jean Valjean.”

Any one who did not know Javert, and who had chanced to see him at themoment when he penetrated the antechamber of the infirmary, could havedivined nothing of what had taken place, and would have thought his airthe most ordinary in the world. He was cool, calm, grave, his gray hairwas perfectly smooth upon his temples, and he had just mounted thestairs with his habitual deliberation. Any one who was thoroughlyacquainted with him, and who had examined him attentively at themoment, would have shuddered. The buckle of his leather stock was underhis left ear instead of at the nape of his neck. This betrayed unwontedagitation.
Javert was a complete character, who never had a wrinkle in his duty orin his uniform; methodical with malefactors, rigid with the buttons ofhis coat.
That he should have set the buckle of his stock awry, it wasindispensable that there should have taken place in him one of thoseemotions which may be designated as internal earthquakes.
He had come in a simple way, had made a requisition on the neighboringpost for a corporal and four soldiers, had left the soldiers in thecourtyard, had had Fantine’s room pointed out to him by the portress,who was utterly unsuspicious, accustomed as she was to seeing armed meninquiring for the mayor.
On arriving at Fantine’s chamber, Javert turned the handle, pushed thedoor open with the gentleness of a sick-nurse or a police spy, andentered.
Properly speaking, he did not enter. He stood erect in the half-opendoor, his hat on his head and his left hand thrust into his coat, whichwas buttoned up to the chin. In the bend of his elbow the leaden headof his enormous cane, which was hidden behind him, could be seen.
Thus he remained for nearly a minute, without his presence beingperceived. All at once Fantine raised her eyes, saw him, and made M.Madeleine turn round.
The instant that Madeleine’s glance encountered Javert’s glance,Javert, without stirring, without moving from his post, withoutapproaching him, became terrible. No human sentiment can be as terribleas joy.
It was the visage of a demon who has just found his damned soul.
The satisfaction of at last getting hold of Jean Valjean caused allthat was in his soul to appear in his countenance. The depths havingbeen stirred up, mounted to the surface. The humiliation of having, insome slight degree, lost the scent, and of having indulged, for a fewmoments, in an error with regard to Champmathieu, was effaced by prideat having so well and accurately divined in the first place, and ofhaving for so long cherished a just instinct. Javert’s content shoneforth in his sovereign attitude. The deformity of triumph overspreadthat narrow brow. All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfiedface can afford were there.
Javert was in heaven at that moment. Without putting the thing clearlyto himself, but with a confused intuition of the necessity of hispresence and of his success, he, Javert, personified justice, light,and truth in their celestial function of crushing out evil. Behind himand around him, at an infinite distance, he had authority, reason, thecase judged, the legal conscience, the public prosecution, all thestars; he was protecting order, he was causing the law to yield up itsthunders, he was avenging society, he was lending a helping hand to theabsolute, he was standing erect in the midst of a glory. There existedin his victory a remnant of defiance and of combat. Erect, haughty,brilliant, he flaunted abroad in open day the superhuman bestiality ofa ferocious archangel. The terrible shadow of the action which he wasaccomplishing caused the vague flash of the social sword to be visiblein his clenched fist; happy and indignant, he held his heel upon crime,vice, rebellion, perdition, hell; he was radiant, he exterminated, hesmiled, and there was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous SaintMichael.
Javert, though frightful, had nothing ignoble about him.
Probity, sincerity, candor, conviction, the sense of duty, are thingswhich may become hideous when wrongly directed; but which, even whenhideous, remain grand: their majesty, the majesty peculiar to the humanconscience, clings to them in the midst of horror; they are virtueswhich have one vice,—error. The honest, pitiless joy of a fanatic inthe full flood of his atrocity preserves a certain lugubriouslyvenerable radiance. Without himself suspecting the fact, Javert in hisformidable happiness was to be pitied, as is every ignorant man whotriumphs. Nothing could be so poignant and so terrible as this face,wherein was displayed all that may be designated as the evil of thegood.



CHAPTER IV—AUTHORITY REASSERTS ITS RIGHTS

Fantine had not seen Javert since the day on which the mayor had tornher from the man. Her ailing brain comprehended nothing, but the onlything which she did not doubt was that he had come to get her. Shecould not endure that terrible face; she felt her life quitting her;she hid her face in both hands, and shrieked in her anguish:—
“Monsieur Madeleine, save me!”

Jean Valjean—we shall henceforth not speak of him otherwise—had risen.He said to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices:—
“Be at ease; it is not for you that he is come.”

Then he addressed Javert, and said:—
“I know what you want.”

Javert replied:—
“Be quick about it!”

There lay in the inflection of voice which accompanied these wordssomething indescribably fierce and frenzied. Javert did not say, “Bequick about it!” he said “Bequiabouit.”

No orthography can do justice to the accent with which it was uttered:it was no longer a human word: it was a roar.
He did not proceed according to his custom, he did not enter into thematter, he exhibited no warrant of arrest. In his eyes, Jean Valjeanwas a sort of mysterious combatant, who was not to be laid hands upon,a wrestler in the dark whom he had had in his grasp for the last fiveyears, without being able to throw him. This arrest was not abeginning, but an end. He confined himself to saying, “Be quick aboutit!”

As he spoke thus, he did not advance a single step; he hurled at JeanValjean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook, and withwhich he was accustomed to draw wretches violently to him.
It was this glance which Fantine had felt penetrating to the verymarrow of her bones two months previously.
At Javert’s exclamation, Fantine opened her eyes once more. But themayor was there; what had she to fear?
Javert advanced to the middle of the room, and cried:—
“See here now! Art thou coming?”

The unhappy woman glanced about her. No one was present excepting thenun and the mayor. To whom could that abject use of “thou” beaddressed? To her only. She shuddered.
Then she beheld a most unprecedented thing, a thing so unprecedentedthat nothing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackestdeliriums of fever.
She beheld Javert, the police spy, seize the mayor by the collar; shesaw the mayor bow his head. It seemed to her that the world was comingto an end.
Javert had, in fact, grasped Jean Valjean by the collar.
“Monsieur le Maire!” shrieked Fantine.
Javert burst out laughing with that frightful laugh which displayed allhis gums.
“There is no longer any Monsieur le Maire here!”

Jean Valjean made no attempt to disengage the hand which grasped thecollar of his coat. He said:—
“Javert—”

Javert interrupted him: “Call me Mr. Inspector.”

“Monsieur,” said Jean Valjean, “I should like to say a word to you inprivate.”

“Aloud! Say it aloud!” replied Javert; “people are in the habit oftalking aloud to me.”

Jean Valjean went on in a lower tone:—
“I have a request to make of you—”

“I tell you to speak loud.”

“But you alone should hear it—”

“What difference does that make to me? I shall not listen.”

Jean Valjean turned towards him and said very rapidly and in a very lowvoice:—
“Grant me three days’ grace! three days in which to go and fetch thechild of this unhappy woman. I will pay whatever is necessary. Youshall accompany me if you choose.”

“You are making sport of me!” cried Javert. “Come now, I did not thinkyou such a fool! You ask me to give you three days in which to runaway! You say that it is for the purpose of fetching that creature’schild! Ah! Ah! That’s good! That’s really capital!”

Fantine was seized with a fit of trembling.
“My child!” she cried, “to go and fetch my child! She is not here,then! Answer me, sister; where is Cosette? I want my child! MonsieurMadeleine! Monsieur le Maire!”

Javert stamped his foot.
“And now there’s the other one! Will you hold your tongue, you hussy?It’s a pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates, and wherewomen of the town are cared for like countesses! Ah! But we are goingto change all that; it is high time!”

He stared intently at Fantine, and added, once more taking into hisgrasp Jean Valjean’s cravat, shirt and collar:—
“I tell you that there is no Monsieur Madeleine and that there is noMonsieur le Maire. There is a thief, a brigand, a convict named JeanValjean! And I have him in my grasp! That’s what there is!”

Fantine raised herself in bed with a bound, supporting herself on herstiffened arms and on both hands: she gazed at Jean Valjean, she gazedat Javert, she gazed at the nun, she opened her mouth as though tospeak; a rattle proceeded from the depths of her throat, her teethchattered; she stretched out her arms in her agony, opening her handsconvulsively, and fumbling about her like a drowning person; thensuddenly fell back on her pillow.
Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on herbreast, with gaping mouth and staring, sightless eyes.
She was dead.
Jean Valjean laid his hand upon the detaining hand of Javert, andopened it as he would have opened the hand of a baby; then he said toJavert:—
“You have murdered that woman.”

“Let’s have an end of this!” shouted Javert, in a fury; “I am not hereto listen to argument. Let us economize all that; the guard is below;march on instantly, or you’ll get the thumb-screws!”

In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead, which was in adecidedly decrepit state, and which served the sisters as a camp-bedwhen they were watching with the sick. Jean Valjean stepped up to thisbed, in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece, which was already in adilapidated condition, an easy matter to muscles like his, grasped theprincipal rod like a bludgeon, and glanced at Javert. Javert retreatedtowards the door. Jean Valjean, armed with his bar of iron, walkedslowly up to Fantine’s couch. When he arrived there he turned and saidto Javert, in a voice that was barely audible:—
“I advise you not to disturb me at this moment.”

One thing is certain, and that is, that Javert trembled.
It did occur to him to summon the guard, but Jean Valjean might availhimself of that moment to effect his escape; so he remained, graspedhis cane by the small end, and leaned against the door-post, withoutremoving his eyes from Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean rested his elbow on the knob at the head of the bed, andhis brow on his hand, and began to contemplate the motionless body ofFantine, which lay extended there. He remained thus, mute, absorbed,evidently with no further thought of anything connected with this life.Upon his face and in his attitude there was nothing but inexpressiblepity. After a few moments of this meditation he bent towards Fantine,and spoke to her in a low voice.
What did he say to her? What could this man, who was reproved, say tothat woman, who was dead? What words were those? No one on earth heardthem. Did the dead woman hear them? There are some touching illusionswhich are, perhaps, sublime realities. The point as to which thereexists no doubt is, that Sister Simplice, the sole witness of theincident, often said that at the moment that Jean Valjean whispered inFantine’s ear, she distinctly beheld an ineffable smile dawn on thosepale lips, and in those dim eyes, filled with the amazement of thetomb.
Jean Valjean took Fantine’s head in both his hands, and arranged it onthe pillow as a mother might have done for her child; then he tied thestring of her chemise, and smoothed her hair back under her cap. Thatdone, he closed her eyes.
Fantine’s face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment.
Death, that signifies entrance into the great light.
Fantine’s hand was hanging over the side of the bed. Jean Valjean kneltdown before that hand, lifted it gently, and kissed it.
Then he rose, and turned to Javert.
“Now,” said he, “I am at your disposal.”




CHAPTER V—A SUITABLE TOMB

Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison.
The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation, or rather, anextraordinary commotion in M. sur M. We are sorry that we cannotconceal the fact, that at the single word, “He was a convict,” nearlyevery one deserted him. In less than two hours all the good that he haddone had been forgotten, and he was nothing but a “convict from thegalleys.” It is just to add that the details of what had taken place atArras were not yet known. All day long conversations like the followingwere to be heard in all quarters of the town:—
“You don’t know? He was a liberated convict!” “Who?” “The mayor.” “Bah!M. Madeleine?” “Yes.” “Really?” “His name was not Madeleine at all; hehad a frightful name, Béjean, Bojean, Boujean.” “Ah! Good God!” “He hasbeen arrested.” “Arrested!” “In prison, in the city prison, whilewaiting to be transferred.” “Until he is transferred!” “He is to betransferred!” “Where is he to be taken?” “He will be tried at theAssizes for a highway robbery which he committed long ago.” “Well! Isuspected as much. That man was too good, too perfect, too affected. Herefused the cross; he bestowed sous on all the little scamps he cameacross. I always thought there was some evil history back of all that.”

The “drawing-rooms” particularly abounded in remarks of this nature.
One old lady, a subscriber to the _Drapeau Blanc_, made the followingremark, the depth of which it is impossible to fathom:—
“I am not sorry. It will be a lesson to the Bonapartists!”

It was thus that the phantom which had been called M. Madeleinevanished from M. sur M. Only three or four persons in all the townremained faithful to his memory. The old portress who had served himwas among the number.
On the evening of that day the worthy old woman was sitting in herlodge, still in a thorough fright, and absorbed in sad reflections. Thefactory had been closed all day, the carriage gate was bolted, thestreet was deserted. There was no one in the house but the two nuns,Sister Perpétue and Sister Simplice, who were watching beside the bodyof Fantine.
Towards the hour when M. Madeleine was accustomed to return home, thegood portress rose mechanically, took from a drawer the key of M.Madeleine’s chamber, and the flat candlestick which he used everyevening to go up to his quarters; then she hung the key on the nailwhence he was accustomed to take it, and set the candlestick on oneside, as though she was expecting him. Then she sat down again on herchair, and became absorbed in thought once more. The poor, good oldwoman had done all this without being conscious of it.
It was only at the expiration of two hours that she roused herself fromher reverie, and exclaimed, “Hold! My good God Jesus! And I hung hiskey on the nail!”

At that moment the small window in the lodge opened, a hand passedthrough, seized the key and the candlestick, and lighted the taper atthe candle which was burning there.
The portress raised her eyes, and stood there with gaping mouth, and ashriek which she confined to her throat.
She knew that hand, that arm, the sleeve of that coat.
It was M. Madeleine.
It was several seconds before she could speak; she had a _seizure_, asshe said herself, when she related the adventure afterwards.
“Good God, Monsieur le Maire,” she cried at last, “I thought you were—”

She stopped; the conclusion of her sentence would have been lacking inrespect towards the beginning. Jean Valjean was still Monsieur le Maireto her.
He finished her thought.
“In prison,” said he. “I was there; I broke a bar of one of thewindows; I let myself drop from the top of a roof, and here I am. I amgoing up to my room; go and find Sister Simplice for me. She is withthat poor woman, no doubt.”

The old woman obeyed in all haste.
He gave her no orders; he was quite sure that she would guard himbetter than he should guard himself.
No one ever found out how he had managed to get into the courtyardwithout opening the big gates. He had, and always carried about him, apass-key which opened a little side-door; but he must have beensearched, and his latch-key must have been taken from him. This pointwas never explained.
He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber. On arriving at thetop, he left his candle on the top step of his stairs, opened his doorwith very little noise, went and closed his window and his shutters byfeeling, then returned for his candle and re-entered his room.
It was a useful precaution; it will be recollected that his windowcould be seen from the street.
He cast a glance about him, at his table, at his chair, at his bedwhich had not been disturbed for three days. No trace of the disorderof the night before last remained. The portress had “done up” his room;only she had picked out of the ashes and placed neatly on the table thetwo iron ends of the cudgel and the forty-sou piece which had beenblackened by the fire.
He took a sheet of paper, on which he wrote: “These are the two tips ofmy iron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais,which I mentioned at the Court of Assizes,” and he arranged this pieceof paper, the bits of iron, and the coin in such a way that they werethe first things to be seen on entering the room. From a cupboard hepulled out one of his old shirts, which he tore in pieces. In thestrips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two silver candlesticks.He betrayed neither haste nor agitation; and while he was wrapping upthe Bishop’s candlesticks, he nibbled at a piece of black bread. It wasprobably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight.
This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the roomwhen the authorities made an examination later on.
There came two taps at the door.
“Come in,” said he.
It was Sister Simplice.
She was pale; her eyes were red; the candle which she carried trembledin her hand. The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is, thathowever polished or cool we may be, they wring human nature from ourvery bowels, and force it to reappear on the surface. The emotions ofthat day had turned the nun into a woman once more. She had wept, andshe was trembling.
Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper, which hehanded to the nun, saying, “Sister, you will give this to Monsieur leCuré.”

The paper was not folded. She cast a glance upon it.
“You can read it,” said he.
She read:—
“I beg Monsieur le Curé to keep an eye on all that I leave behind me.He will be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial, and ofthe funeral of the woman who died yesterday. The rest is for the poor.”

The sister tried to speak, but she only managed to stammer a fewinarticulate sounds. She succeeded in saying, however:—
“Does not Monsieur le Maire desire to take a last look at that poor,unhappy woman?”

“No,” said he; “I am pursued; it would only end in their arresting mein that room, and that would disturb her.”

He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on thestaircase. They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps, and the oldportress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones:—
“My good sir, I swear to you by the good God, that not a soul hasentered this house all day, nor all the evening, and that I have noteven left the door.”

A man responded:—
“But there is a light in that room, nevertheless.”

They recognized Javert’s voice.
The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the cornerof the wall on the right. Jean Valjean blew out the light and placedhimself in this angle. Sister Simplice fell on her knees near thetable.
The door opened.
Javert entered.
The whispers of many men and the protestations of the portress wereaudible in the corridor.
The nun did not raise her eyes. She was praying.
The candle was on the chimney-piece, and gave but very little light.
Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement.
It will be remembered that the fundamental point in Javert, hiselement, the very air he breathed, was veneration for all authority.This was impregnable, and admitted of neither objection norrestriction. In his eyes, of course, the ecclesiastical authority wasthe chief of all; he was religious, superficial and correct on thispoint as on all others. In his eyes, a priest was a mind, who nevermakes a mistake; a nun was a creature who never sins; they were soulswalled in from this world, with a single door which never opened exceptto allow the truth to pass through.
On perceiving the sister, his first movement was to retire.
But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled himimperiously in the opposite direction. His second movement was toremain and to venture on at least one question.
This was Sister Simplice, who had never told a lie in her life. Javertknew it, and held her in special veneration in consequence.
“Sister,” said he, “are you alone in this room?”

A terrible moment ensued, during which the poor portress felt as thoughshe should faint.
The sister raised her eyes and answered:—
“Yes.”

“Then,” resumed Javert, “you will excuse me if I persist; it is myduty; you have not seen a certain person—a man—this evening? He hasescaped; we are in search of him—that Jean Valjean; you have not seenhim?”

The sister replied:—
“No.”

She lied. She had lied twice in succession, one after the other,without hesitation, promptly, as a person does when sacrificingherself.
“Pardon me,” said Javert, and he retired with a deep bow.
O sainted maid! you left this world many years ago; you have rejoinedyour sisters, the virgins, and your brothers, the angels, in the light;may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise!
The sister’s affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he didnot even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just beenextinguished, and which was still smoking on the table.
An hour later, a man, marching amid trees and mists, was rapidlydeparting from M. sur M. in the direction of Paris. That man was JeanValjean. It has been established by the testimony of two or threecarters who met him, that he was carrying a bundle; that he was dressedin a blouse. Where had he obtained that blouse? No one ever found out.But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of the factory a few daysbefore, leaving behind him nothing but his blouse. Perhaps that was theone.
One last word about Fantine.
We all have a mother,—the earth. Fantine was given back to that mother.
The curé thought that he was doing right, and perhaps he really was, inreserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left forthe poor. Who was concerned, after all? A convict and a woman of thetown. That is why he had a very simple funeral for Fantine, and reducedit to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper’s grave.
So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongsto anybody and everybody, and where the poor are lost. Fortunately, Godknows where to find the soul again. Fantine was laid in the shade,among the first bones that came to hand; she was subjected to thepromiscuousness of ashes. She was thrown into the public grave. Hergrave resembled her bed.
[THE END OF VOLUME I “FANTINE”] Enlarge
Frontispiece Volume Two  2frontispiece


  Enlarge
Titlepage Volume Two  2titlepage



VOLUME II—COSETTE



BOOK FIRST—WATERLOO



CHAPTER I—WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES

Last year (1861), on a beautiful May morning, a traveller, the personwho is telling this story, was coming from Nivelles, and directing hiscourse towards La Hulpe. He was on foot. He was pursuing a broad pavedroad, which undulated between two rows of trees, over the hills whichsucceed each other, raise the road and let it fall again, and producesomething in the nature of enormous waves.
He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac. In the west he perceivedthe slate-roofed tower of Braine-l’Alleud, which has the form of areversed vase. He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence; and atthe angle of the crossroad, by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbetbearing the inscription _Ancient Barrier No. 4_, a public house,bearing on its front this sign: _At the Four Winds_ (Aux Quatre Vents)._Échabeau, Private Café_.
A quarter of a league further on, he arrived at the bottom of a littlevalley, where there is water which passes beneath an arch made throughthe embankment of the road. The clump of sparsely planted but verygreen trees, which fills the valley on one side of the road, isdispersed over the meadows on the other, and disappears gracefully andas in order in the direction of Braine-l’Alleud.
On the right, close to the road, was an inn, with a four-wheeled cartat the door, a large bundle of hop-poles, a plough, a heap of driedbrushwood near a flourishing hedge, lime smoking in a square hole, anda ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions. Ayoung girl was weeding in a field, where a huge yellow poster, probablyof some outside spectacle, such as a parish festival, was fluttering inthe wind. At one corner of the inn, beside a pool in which a flotillaof ducks was navigating, a badly paved path plunged into the bushes.The wayfarer struck into this.
After traversing a hundred paces, skirting a wall of the fifteenthcentury, surmounted by a pointed gable, with bricks set in contrast, hefound himself before a large door of arched stone, with a rectilinearimpost, in the sombre style of Louis XIV., flanked by two flatmedallions. A severe façade rose above this door; a wall, perpendicularto the façade, almost touched the door, and flanked it with an abruptright angle. In the meadow before the door lay three harrows, throughwhich, in disorder, grew all the flowers of May. The door was closed.The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an oldrusty knocker.
The sun was charming; the branches had that soft shivering of May,which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind. Abrave little bird, probably a lover, was carolling in a distractedmanner in a large tree.
The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation,resembling the hollow of a sphere, in the stone on the left, at thefoot of the pier of the door.
At this moment the leaves of the door parted, and a peasant womanemerged.
She saw the wayfarer, and perceived what he was looking at.
“It was a French cannon-ball which made that,” she said to him. And sheadded:—
“That which you see there, higher up in the door, near a nail, is thehole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg. The bullet did not piercethe wood.”

“What is the name of this place?” inquired the wayfarer.
“Hougomont,” said the peasant woman.
The traveller straightened himself up. He walked on a few paces, andwent off to look over the tops of the hedges. On the horizon throughthe trees, he perceived a sort of little elevation, and on thiselevation something which at that distance resembled a lion.
He was on the battle-field of Waterloo.



CHAPTER II—HOUGOMONT

Hougomont,—this was a funereal spot, the beginning of the obstacle, thefirst resistance, which that great wood-cutter of Europe, calledNapoleon, encountered at Waterloo, the first knot under the blows ofhis axe.
It was a château; it is no longer anything but a farm. For theantiquary, Hougomont is _Hugomons_. This manor was built by Hugo, Sireof Somerel, the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey ofVilliers.
The traveller pushed open the door, elbowed an ancient calash under theporch, and entered the courtyard.
The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of thesixteenth century, which here simulates an arcade, everything elsehaving fallen prostrate around it. A monumental aspect often has itsbirth in ruin. In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door, ofthe time of Henry IV., permitting a glimpse of the trees of an orchard;beside this door, a manure-hole, some pickaxes, some shovels, somecarts, an old well, with its flagstone and its iron reel, a chickenjumping, and a turkey spreading its tail, a chapel surmounted by asmall bell-tower, a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier againstthe wall of the chapel—behold the court, the conquest of which was oneof Napoleon’s dreams. This corner of earth, could he but have seizedit, would, perhaps, have given him the world likewise. Chickens arescattering its dust abroad with their beaks. A growl is audible; it isa huge dog, who shows his teeth and replaces the English.
The English behaved admirably there. Cooke’s four companies of guardsthere held out for seven hours against the fury of an army.
Hougomont viewed on the map, as a geometrical plan, comprisingbuildings and enclosures, presents a sort of irregular rectangle, oneangle of which is nicked out. It is this angle which contains thesouthern door, guarded by this wall, which commands it only a gun’slength away. Hougomont has two doors,—the southern door, that of thechâteau; and the northern door, belonging to the farm. Napoleon senthis brother Jérôme against Hougomont; the divisions of Foy,Guilleminot, and Bachelu hurled themselves against it; nearly theentire corps of Reille was employed against it, and miscarried;Kellermann’s balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall.Bauduin’s brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on thenorth, and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect thebeginning of a breach on the south, but without taking it.
The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south. A bit of thenorth door, broken by the French, hangs suspended to the wall. Itconsists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams, on which the scarsof the attack are visible.
The northern door, which was beaten in by the French, and which has hada piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall,stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock; it is cut squarely inthe wall, built of stone below, of brick above which closes in thecourtyard on the north. It is a simple door for carts, such as exist inall farms, with the two large leaves made of rustic planks: beyond liethe meadows. The dispute over this entrance was furious. For a longtime, all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible on thedoor-posts. It was there that Bauduin was killed.
The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard; its horror isvisible there; the confusion of the fray was petrified there; it livesand it dies there; it was only yesterday. The walls are in the deathagony, the stones fall; the breaches cry aloud; the holes are wounds;the drooping, quivering trees seem to be making an effort to flee.
This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day. Buildingswhich have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles.
The English barricaded themselves there; the French made their way in,but could not stand their ground. Beside the chapel, one wing of thechâteau, the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont, risesin a crumbling state,—disembowelled, one might say. The château servedfor a dungeon, the chapel for a block-house. There men exterminatedeach other. The French, fired on from every point,—from behind thewalls, from the summits of the garrets, from the depths of the cellars,through all the casements, through all the air-holes, through everycrack in the stones,—fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men; thereply to the grape-shot was a conflagration.
In the ruined wing, through windows garnished with bars of iron, thedismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible; theEnglish guards were in ambush in these rooms; the spiral of thestaircase, cracked from the ground floor to the very roof, appears likethe inside of a broken shell. The staircase has two stories; theEnglish, besieged on the staircase, and massed on its upper steps, hadcut off the lower steps. These consisted of large slabs of blue stone,which form a heap among the nettles. Half a score of steps still clingto the wall; on the first is cut the figure of a trident. Theseinaccessible steps are solid in their niches. All the rest resembles ajaw which has been denuded of its teeth. There are two old trees there:one is dead; the other is wounded at its base, and is clothed withverdure in April. Since 1815 it has taken to growing through thestaircase.
A massacre took place in the chapel. The interior, which has recoveredits calm, is singular. The mass has not been said there since thecarnage. Nevertheless, the altar has been left there—an altar ofunpolished wood, placed against a background of roughhewn stone. Fourwhitewashed walls, a door opposite the altar, two small arched windows;over the door a large wooden crucifix, below the crucifix a squareair-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay; on the ground, in one corner,an old window-frame with the glass all broken to pieces—such is thechapel. Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of SaintAnne, of the fifteenth century; the head of the infant Jesus has beencarried off by a large ball. The French, who were masters of the chapelfor a moment, and were then dislodged, set fire to it. The flamesfilled this building; it was a perfect furnace; the door was burned,the floor was burned, the wooden Christ was not burned. The fire preyedupon his feet, of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen;then it stopped,—a miracle, according to the assertion of the people ofthe neighborhood. The infant Jesus, decapitated, was less fortunatethan the Christ.
The walls are covered with inscriptions. Near the feet of Christ thisname is to be read: _Henquinez_. Then these others: _Conde de Rio MaiorMarques y Marquesa de Almagro (Habana)_. There are French names withexclamation points,—a sign of wrath. The wall was freshly whitewashedin 1849. The nations insulted each other there.
It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up whichheld an axe in its hand; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros.
On emerging from the chapel, a well is visible on the left. There aretwo in this courtyard. One inquires, Why is there no bucket and pulleyto this? It is because water is no longer drawn there. Why is water notdrawn there? Because it is full of skeletons.
The last person who drew water from the well was named Guillaume vanKylsom. He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont, and was gardenerthere. On the 18th of June, 1815, his family fled and concealedthemselves in the woods.
The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered theseunfortunate people who had been scattered abroad, for many days andnights. There are at this day certain traces recognizable, such as oldboles of burned trees, which mark the site of these poor bivouacstrembling in the depths of the thickets.
Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont, “to guard the château,” andconcealed himself in the cellar. The English discovered him there. Theytore him from his hiding-place, and the combatants forced thisfrightened man to serve them, by administering blows with the flats oftheir swords. They were thirsty; this Guillaume brought them water. Itwas from this well that he drew it. Many drank there their lastdraught. This well where drank so many of the dead was destined to dieitself.
After the engagement, they were in haste to bury the dead bodies. Deathhas a fashion of harassing victory, and she causes the pest to followglory. The typhus is a concomitant of triumph. This well was deep, andit was turned into a sepulchre. Three hundred dead bodies were castinto it. With too much haste perhaps. Were they all dead? Legend saysthey were not. It seems that on the night succeeding the interment,feeble voices were heard calling from the well.
This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard. Three walls, partstone, part brick, and simulating a small, square tower, and foldedlike the leaves of a screen, surround it on all sides. The fourth sideis open. It is there that the water was drawn. The wall at the bottomhas a sort of shapeless loophole, possibly the hole made by a shell.This little tower had a platform, of which only the beams remain. Theiron supports of the well on the right form a cross. On leaning over,the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with aheaped-up mass of shadows. The base of the walls all about the well isconcealed in a growth of nettles.
This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms thetable for all wells in Belgium. The slab has here been replaced by across-beam, against which lean five or six shapeless fragments ofknotty and petrified wood which resemble huge bones. There is no longereither pail, chain, or pulley; but there is still the stone basin whichserved the overflow. The rain-water collects there, and from time totime a bird of the neighboring forests comes thither to drink, and thenflies away. One house in this ruin, the farmhouse, is still inhabited.The door of this house opens on the courtyard. Upon this door, beside apretty Gothic lock-plate, there is an iron handle with trefoils placedslanting. At the moment when the Hanoverian lieutenant, Wilda, graspedthis handle in order to take refuge in the farm, a French sapper hewedoff his hand with an axe.
The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume vanKylsom, the old gardener, dead long since. A woman with gray hair saidto us: “I was there. I was three years old. My sister, who was older,was terrified and wept. They carried us off to the woods. I went therein my mother’s arms. We glued our ears to the earth to hear. I imitatedthe cannon, and went _boum! boum!_”

A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard, sowe were told. The orchard is terrible.
It is in three parts; one might almost say, in three acts. The firstpart is a garden, the second is an orchard, the third is a wood. Thesethree parts have a common enclosure: on the side of the entrance, thebuildings of the château and the farm; on the left, a hedge; on theright, a wall; and at the end, a wall. The wall on the right is ofbrick, the wall at the bottom is of stone. One enters the garden first.It slopes downwards, is planted with gooseberry bushes, choked with awild growth of vegetation, and terminated by a monumental terrace ofcut stone, with balustrade with a double curve.
It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which preceded LeNôtre; to-day it is ruins and briars. The pilasters are surmounted byglobes which resemble cannon-balls of stone. Forty-three balusters canstill be counted on their sockets; the rest lie prostrate in the grass.Almost all bear scratches of bullets. One broken baluster is placed onthe pediment like a fractured leg.
It was in this garden, further down than the orchard, that sixlight-infantry men of the 1st, having made their way thither, and beingunable to escape, hunted down and caught like bears in their dens,accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies, one of which wasarmed with carbines. The Hanoverians lined this balustrade and firedfrom above. The infantry men, replying from below, six against twohundred, intrepid and with no shelter save the currant-bushes, took aquarter of an hour to die.
One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard,properly speaking. There, within the limits of those few squarefathoms, fifteen hundred men fell in less than an hour. The wall seemsready to renew the combat. Thirty-eight loopholes, pierced by theEnglish at irregular heights, are there still. In front of the sixthare placed two English tombs of granite. There are loopholes only inthe south wall, as the principal attack came from that quarter. Thewall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge; the French came up,thinking that they had to deal only with a hedge, crossed it, and foundthe wall both an obstacle and an ambuscade, with the English guardsbehind it, the thirty-eight loopholes firing at once a shower ofgrape-shot and balls, and Soye’s brigade was broken against it. ThusWaterloo began.
Nevertheless, the orchard was taken. As they had no ladders, the Frenchscaled it with their nails. They fought hand to hand amid the trees.All this grass has been soaked in blood. A battalion of Nassau, sevenhundred strong, was overwhelmed there. The outside of the wall, againstwhich Kellermann’s two batteries were trained, is gnawed by grape-shot.
This orchard is sentient, like others, in the month of May. It has itsbuttercups and its daisies; the grass is tall there; the cart-horsesbrowse there; cords of hair, on which linen is drying, traverse thespaces between the trees and force the passer-by to bend his head; onewalks over this uncultivated land, and one’s foot dives intomole-holes. In the middle of the grass one observes an uprootedtree-bole which lies there all verdant. Major Blackmann leaned againstit to die. Beneath a great tree in the neighborhood fell the Germangeneral, Duplat, descended from a French family which fled on therevocation of the Edict of Nantes. An aged and falling apple-tree leansfar over to one side, its wound dressed with a bandage of straw and ofclayey loam. Nearly all the apple-trees are falling with age. There isnot one which has not had its bullet or its biscayan.6 The skeletons ofdead trees abound in this orchard. Crows fly through their branches,and at the end of it is a wood full of violets.
Bauduin killed, Foy wounded, conflagration, massacre, carnage, arivulet formed of English blood, French blood, German blood mingled infury, a well crammed with corpses, the regiment of Nassau and theregiment of Brunswick destroyed, Duplat killed, Blackmann killed, theEnglish Guards mutilated, twenty French battalions, besides the fortyfrom Reille’s corps, decimated, three thousand men in that hovel ofHougomont alone cut down, slashed to pieces, shot, burned, with theirthroats cut,—and all this so that a peasant can say to-day to thetraveller: _Monsieur, give me three francs, and if you like, I willexplain to you the affair of Waterloo!_



CHAPTER III—THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE, 1815

Let us turn back,—that is one of the story-teller’s rights,—and putourselves once more in the year 1815, and even a little earlier thanthe epoch when the action narrated in the first part of this book tookplace.
If it had not rained in the night between the 17th and the 18th ofJune, 1815, the fate of Europe would have been different. A few dropsof water, more or less, decided the downfall of Napoleon. All thatProvidence required in order to make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz wasa little more rain, and a cloud traversing the sky out of seasonsufficed to make a world crumble.
The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleveno’clock, and that gave Blücher time to come up. Why? Because the groundwas wet. The artillery had to wait until it became a little firmerbefore they could manœuvre.
Napoleon was an artillery officer, and felt the effects of this. Thefoundation of this wonderful captain was the man who, in the report tothe Directory on Aboukir, said: _Such a one of our balls killed sixmen_. All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles. The key tohis victory was to make the artillery converge on one point. He treatedthe strategy of the hostile general like a citadel, and made a breachin it. He overwhelmed the weak point with grape-shot; he joined anddissolved battles with cannon. There was something of the sharpshooterin his genius. To beat in squares, to pulverize regiments, to breaklines, to crush and disperse masses,—for him everything lay in this, tostrike, strike, strike incessantly,—and he intrusted this task to thecannon-ball. A redoubtable method, and one which, united with genius,rendered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for thespace of fifteen years.
On the 18th of June, 1815, he relied all the more on his artillery,because he had numbers on his side. Wellington had only one hundred andfifty-nine mouths of fire; Napoleon had two hundred and forty.
Suppose the soil dry, and the artillery capable of moving, the actionwould have begun at six o’clock in the morning. The battle would havebeen won and ended at two o’clock, three hours before the change offortune in favor of the Prussians. What amount of blame attaches toNapoleon for the loss of this battle? Is the shipwreck due to thepilot?
Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated thisepoch by an inward diminution of force? Had the twenty years of warworn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard, the soul as well as thebody? Did the veteran make himself disastrously felt in the leader? Ina word, was this genius, as many historians of note have thought,suffering from an eclipse? Did he go into a frenzy in order to disguisehis weakened powers from himself? Did he begin to waver under thedelusion of a breath of adventure? Had he become—a grave matter in ageneral—unconscious of peril? Is there an age, in this class ofmaterial great men, who may be called the giants of action, when geniusgrows short-sighted? Old age has no hold on the geniuses of the ideal;for the Dantes and Michael Angelos to grow old is to grow in greatness;is it to grow less for the Hannibals and the Bonapartes? Had Napoleonlost the direct sense of victory? Had he reached the point where hecould no longer recognize the reef, could no longer divine the snare,no longer discern the crumbling brink of abysses? Had he lost his powerof scenting out catastrophes? He who had in former days known all theroads to triumph, and who, from the summit of his chariot of lightning,pointed them out with a sovereign finger, had he now reached that stateof sinister amazement when he could lead his tumultuous legionsharnessed to it, to the precipice? Was he seized at the age offorty-six with a supreme madness? Was that titanic charioteer ofdestiny no longer anything more than an immense dare-devil?
We do not think so.
His plan of battle was, by the confession of all, a masterpiece. To gostraight to the centre of the Allies’ line, to make a breach in theenemy, to cut them in two, to drive the British half back on Hal, andthe Prussian half on Tongres, to make two shattered fragments ofWellington and Blücher, to carry Mont-Saint-Jean, to seize Brussels, tohurl the German into the Rhine, and the Englishman into the sea. Allthis was contained in that battle, according to Napoleon. Afterwardspeople would see.
Of course, we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle ofWaterloo; one of the scenes of the foundation of the story which we arerelating is connected with this battle, but this history is not oursubject; this history, moreover, has been finished, and finished in amasterly manner, from one point of view by Napoleon, and from anotherpoint of view by a whole pleiad of historians.7
As for us, we leave the historians at loggerheads; we are but a distantwitness, a passer-by on the plain, a seeker bending over that soil allmade of human flesh, taking appearances for realities, perchance; wehave no right to oppose, in the name of science, a collection of factswhich contain illusions, no doubt; we possess neither military practicenor strategic ability which authorize a system; in our opinion, a chainof accidents dominated the two leaders at Waterloo; and when it becomesa question of destiny, that mysterious culprit, we judge like thatingenious judge, the populace.



CHAPTER IV—A

Those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of Waterloohave only to place, mentally, on the ground, a capital A. The left limbof the A is the road to Nivelles, the right limb is the road toGenappe, the tie of the A is the hollow road to Ohain fromBraine-l’Alleud. The top of the A is Mont-Saint-Jean, where Wellingtonis; the lower left tip is Hougomont, where Reille is stationed withJérôme Bonaparte; the right tip is the Belle-Alliance, where Napoleonwas. At the centre of this chord is the precise point where the finalword of the battle was pronounced. It was there that the lion has beenplaced, the involuntary symbol of the supreme heroism of the ImperialGuard.
The triangle included in the top of the A, between the two limbs andthe tie, is the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean. The dispute over thisplateau constituted the whole battle. The wings of the two armiesextended to the right and left of the two roads to Genappe andNivelles; d’Erlon facing Picton, Reille facing Hill.
Behind the tip of the A, behind the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean, is theforest of Soignes.
As for the plain itself, let the reader picture to himself a vastundulating sweep of ground; each rise commands the next rise, and allthe undulations mount towards Mont-Saint-Jean, and there end in theforest.
Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers. It is aquestion of seizing the opponent round the waist. The one seeks to tripup the other. They clutch at everything: a bush is a point of support;an angle of the wall offers them a rest to the shoulder; for the lackof a hovel under whose cover they can draw up, a regiment yields itsground; an unevenness in the ground, a chance turn in the landscape, across-path encountered at the right moment, a grove, a ravine, can staythe heel of that colossus which is called an army, and prevent itsretreat. He who quits the field is beaten; hence the necessitydevolving on the responsible leader, of examining the mostinsignificant clump of trees, and of studying deeply the slightestrelief in the ground.
The two generals had attentively studied the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean,now called the plain of Waterloo. In the preceding year, Wellington,with the sagacity of foresight, had examined it as the possible seat ofa great battle. Upon this spot, and for this duel, on the 18th of June,Wellington had the good post, Napoleon the bad post. The English armywas stationed above, the French army below.
It is almost superfluous here to sketch the appearance of Napoleon onhorseback, glass in hand, upon the heights of Rossomme, at daybreak, onJune 18, 1815. All the world has seen him before we can show him. Thatcalm profile under the little three-cornered hat of the school ofBrienne, that green uniform, the white revers concealing the star ofthe Legion of Honor, his great coat hiding his epaulets, the corner ofred ribbon peeping from beneath his vest, his leather trousers, thewhite horse with the saddle-cloth of purple velvet bearing on thecorners crowned N’s and eagles, Hessian boots over silk stockings,silver spurs, the sword of Marengo,—that whole figure of the last ofthe Cæsars is present to all imaginations, saluted with acclamations bysome, severely regarded by others.
That figure stood for a long time wholly in the light; this arose froma certain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes, andwhich always veils the truth for a longer or shorter time; but to-dayhistory and daylight have arrived.
That light called history is pitiless; it possesses this peculiar anddivine quality, that, pure light as it is, and precisely because it iswholly light, it often casts a shadow in places where people hadhitherto beheld rays; from the same man it constructs two differentphantoms, and the one attacks the other and executes justice on it, andthe shadows of the despot contend with the brilliancy of the leader.Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive judgments of nations.Babylon violated lessens Alexander, Rome enchained lessens Cæsar,Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus, tyranny follows the tyrant. It is amisfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which bears hisform.



CHAPTER V—THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES

Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle; abeginning which was troubled, uncertain, hesitating, menacing to botharmies, but still more so for the English than for the French.
It had rained all night, the earth had been cut up by the downpour, thewater had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain as ifin casks; at some points the gear of the artillery carriages was buriedup to the axles, the circingles of the horses were dripping with liquidmud. If the wheat and rye trampled down by this cohort of transports onthe march had not filled in the ruts and strewn a litter beneath thewheels, all movement, particularly in the valleys, in the direction ofPapelotte would have been impossible.
The affair began late. Napoleon, as we have already explained, was inthe habit of keeping all his artillery well in hand, like a pistol,aiming it now at one point, now at another, of the battle; and it hadbeen his wish to wait until the horse batteries could move and gallopfreely. In order to do that it was necessary that the sun should comeout and dry the soil. But the sun did not make its appearance. It wasno longer the rendezvous of Austerlitz. When the first cannon wasfired, the English general, Colville, looked at his watch, and notedthat it was thirty-five minutes past eleven.
The action was begun furiously, with more fury, perhaps, than theEmperor would have wished, by the left wing of the French resting onHougomont. At the same time Napoleon attacked the centre by hurlingQuiot’s brigade on La Haie-Sainte, and Ney pushed forward the rightwing of the French against the left wing of the English, which restedon Papelotte.
The attack on Hougomont was something of a feint; the plan was to drawWellington thither, and to make him swerve to the left. This plan wouldhave succeeded if the four companies of the English guards and thebrave Belgians of Perponcher’s division had not held the positionsolidly, and Wellington, instead of massing his troops there, couldconfine himself to despatching thither, as reinforcements, only fourmore companies of guards and one battalion from Brunswick.
The attack of the right wing of the French on Papelotte was calculated,in fact, to overthrow the English left, to cut off the road toBrussels, to bar the passage against possible Prussians, to forceMont-Saint-Jean, to turn Wellington back on Hougomont, thence onBraine-l’Alleud, thence on Hal; nothing easier. With the exception of afew incidents this attack succeeded. Papelotte was taken; LaHaie-Sainte was carried.
A detail to be noted. There was in the English infantry, particularlyin Kempt’s brigade, a great many raw recruits. These young soldierswere valiant in the presence of our redoubtable infantry; theirinexperience extricated them intrepidly from the dilemma; theyperformed particularly excellent service as skirmishers: the soldierskirmisher, left somewhat to himself, becomes, so to speak, his owngeneral. These recruits displayed some of the French ingenuity andfury. This novice of an infantry had dash. This displeased Wellington.
After the taking of La Haie-Sainte the battle wavered.
There is in this day an obscure interval, from midday to four o’clock;the middle portion of this battle is almost indistinct, andparticipates in the sombreness of the hand-to-hand conflict. Twilightreigns over it. We perceive vast fluctuations in that fog, a dizzymirage, paraphernalia of war almost unknown to-day, pendant colbacks,floating sabre-taches, cross-belts, cartridge-boxes for grenades,hussar dolmans, red boots with a thousand wrinkles, heavy shakosgarlanded with torsades, the almost black infantry of Brunswick mingledwith the scarlet infantry of England, the English soldiers with great,white circular pads on the slopes of their shoulders for epaulets, theHanoverian light-horse with their oblong casques of leather, with brasshands and red horse-tails, the Scotch with their bare knees and plaids,the great white gaiters of our grenadiers; pictures, not strategiclines—what Salvator Rosa requires, not what is suited to the needs ofGribeauval.
A certain amount of tempest is always mingled with a battle. _Quidobscurum, quid divinum_. Each historian traces, to some extent, theparticular feature which pleases him amid this pell-mell. Whatever maybe the combinations of the generals, the shock of armed masses has anincalculable ebb. During the action the plans of the two leaders enterinto each other and become mutually thrown out of shape. Such a pointof the field of battle devours more combatants than such another, justas more or less spongy soils soak up more or less quickly the waterwhich is poured on them. It becomes necessary to pour out more soldiersthan one would like; a series of expenditures which are the unforeseen.The line of battle waves and undulates like a thread, the trails ofblood gush illogically, the fronts of the armies waver, the regimentsform capes and gulfs as they enter and withdraw; all these reefs arecontinually moving in front of each other. Where the infantry stood theartillery arrives, the cavalry rushes in where the artillery was, thebattalions are like smoke. There was something there; seek it. It hasdisappeared; the open spots change place, the sombre folds advance andretreat, a sort of wind from the sepulchre pushes forward, hurls back,distends, and disperses these tragic multitudes. What is a fray? anoscillation? The immobility of a mathematical plan expresses a minute,not a day. In order to depict a battle, there is required one of thosepowerful painters who have chaos in their brushes. Rembrandt is betterthan Vandermeulen; Vandermeulen, exact at noon, lies at three o’clock.Geometry is deceptive; the hurricane alone is trustworthy. That is whatconfers on Folard the right to contradict Polybius. Let us add, thatthere is a certain instant when the battle degenerates into a combat,becomes specialized, and disperses into innumerable detailed feats,which, to borrow the expression of Napoleon himself, “belong rather tothe biography of the regiments than to the history of the army.” Thehistorian has, in this case, the evident right to sum up the whole. Hecannot do more than seize the principal outlines of the struggle, andit is not given to any one narrator, however conscientious he may be,to fix, absolutely, the form of that horrible cloud which is called abattle.
This, which is true of all great armed encounters, is particularlyapplicable to Waterloo.
Nevertheless, at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came to apoint.



CHAPTER VI—FOUR O’CLOCK IN THE AFTERNOON

Towards four o’clock the condition of the English army was serious. ThePrince of Orange was in command of the centre, Hill of the right wing,Picton of the left wing. The Prince of Orange, desperate and intrepid,shouted to the Hollando-Belgians: “Nassau! Brunswick! Never retreat!”Hill, having been weakened, had come up to the support of Wellington;Picton was dead. At the very moment when the English had captured fromthe French the flag of the 105th of the line, the French had killed theEnglish general, Picton, with a bullet through the head. The battlehad, for Wellington, two bases of action, Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte;Hougomont still held out, but was on fire; La Haie-Sainte was taken. Ofthe German battalion which defended it, only forty-two men survived;all the officers, except five, were either dead or captured. Threethousand combatants had been massacred in that barn. A sergeant of theEnglish Guards, the foremost boxer in England, reputed invulnerable byhis companions, had been killed there by a little French drummer-boy.Baring had been dislodged, Alten put to the sword. Many flags had beenlost, one from Alten’s division, and one from the battalion ofLunenburg, carried by a prince of the house of Deux-Ponts. The ScotchGrays no longer existed; Ponsonby’s great dragoons had been hacked topieces. That valiant cavalry had bent beneath the lancers of Bro andbeneath the cuirassiers of Travers; out of twelve hundred horses, sixhundred remained; out of three lieutenant-colonels, two lay on theearth,—Hamilton wounded, Mater slain. Ponsonby had fallen, riddled byseven lance-thrusts. Gordon was dead. Marsh was dead. Two divisions,the fifth and the sixth, had been annihilated.
Hougomont injured, La Haie-Sainte taken, there now existed but onerallying-point, the centre. That point still held firm. Wellingtonreinforced it. He summoned thither Hill, who was at Merle-Braine; hesummoned Chassé, who was at Braine-l’Alleud.
The centre of the English army, rather concave, very dense, and verycompact, was strongly posted. It occupied the plateau ofMont-Saint-Jean, having behind it the village, and in front of it theslope, which was tolerably steep then. It rested on that stout stonedwelling which at that time belonged to the domain of Nivelles, andwhich marks the intersection of the roads—a pile of the sixteenthcentury, and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from it withoutinjuring it. All about the plateau the English had cut the hedges hereand there, made embrasures in the hawthorn-trees, thrust the throat ofa cannon between two branches, embattled the shrubs. There artillerywas ambushed in the brushwood. This punic labor, incontestablyauthorized by war, which permits traps, was so well done, that Haxo,who had been despatched by the Emperor at nine o’clock in the morningto reconnoitre the enemy’s batteries, had discovered nothing of it, andhad returned and reported to Napoleon that there were no obstaclesexcept the two barricades which barred the road to Nivelles and toGenappe. It was at the season when the grain is tall; on the edge ofthe plateau a battalion of Kempt’s brigade, the 95th, armed withcarabines, was concealed in the tall wheat.
Thus assured and buttressed, the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army waswell posted. The peril of this position lay in the forest of Soignes,then adjoining the field of battle, and intersected by the ponds ofGroenendael and Boitsfort. An army could not retreat thither withoutdissolving; the regiments would have broken up immediately there. Theartillery would have been lost among the morasses. The retreat,according to many a man versed in the art,—though it is disputed byothers,—would have been a disorganized flight.
To this centre, Wellington added one of Chassé‘s brigades taken fromthe right wing, and one of Wincke’s brigades taken from the left wing,plus Clinton’s division. To his English, to the regiments of Halkett,to the brigades of Mitchell, to the guards of Maitland, he gave asreinforcements and aids, the infantry of Brunswick, Nassau’scontingent, Kielmansegg’s Hanoverians, and Ompteda’s Germans. Thisplaced twenty-six battalions under his hand. _The right wing_, asCharras says, _was thrown back on the centre_. An enormous battery wasmasked by sacks of earth at the spot where there now stands what iscalled the “Museum of Waterloo.” Besides this, Wellington had, behind arise in the ground, Somerset’s Dragoon Guards, fourteen hundred horsestrong. It was the remaining half of the justly celebrated Englishcavalry. Ponsonby destroyed, Somerset remained.
The battery, which, if completed, would have been almost a redoubt, wasranged behind a very low garden wall, backed up with a coating of bagsof sand and a large slope of earth. This work was not finished; therehad been no time to make a palisade for it.
Wellington, uneasy but impassive, was on horseback, and there remainedthe whole day in the same attitude, a little in advance of the old millof Mont-Saint-Jean, which is still in existence, beneath an elm, whichan Englishman, an enthusiastic vandal, purchased later on for twohundred francs, cut down, and carried off. Wellington was coldlyheroic. The bullets rained about him. His aide-de-camp, Gordon, fell athis side. Lord Hill, pointing to a shell which had burst, said to him:“My lord, what are your orders in case you are killed?” “To do likeme,” replied Wellington. To Clinton he said laconically, “To hold thisspot to the last man.” The day was evidently turning out ill.Wellington shouted to his old companions of Talavera, of Vittoria, ofSalamanca: “Boys, can retreat be thought of? Think of old England!”

Towards four o’clock, the English line drew back. Suddenly nothing wasvisible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery and thesharpshooters; the rest had disappeared: the regiments, dislodged bythe shells and the French bullets, retreated into the bottom, nowintersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean; aretrograde movement took place, the English front hid itself,Wellington drew back. “The beginning of retreat!” cried Napoleon.



CHAPTER VII—NAPOLEON IN A GOOD HUMOR

The Emperor, though ill and discommoded on horseback by a localtrouble, had never been in a better humor than on that day. Hisimpenetrability had been smiling ever since the morning. On the 18th ofJune, that profound soul masked by marble beamed blindly. The man whohad been gloomy at Austerlitz was gay at Waterloo. The greatestfavorites of destiny make mistakes. Our joys are composed of shadow.The supreme smile is God’s alone.
_Ridet Cæsar, Pompeius flebit_, said the legionaries of the FulminatrixLegion. Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion, but it iscertain that Cæsar laughed. While exploring on horseback at one o’clockon the preceding night, in storm and rain, in company with Bertrand,the communes in the neighborhood of Rossomme, satisfied at the sight ofthe long line of the English camp-fires illuminating the whole horizonfrom Frischemont to Braine-l’Alleud, it had seemed to him that fate, towhom he had assigned a day on the field of Waterloo, was exact to theappointment; he stopped his horse, and remained for some timemotionless, gazing at the lightning and listening to the thunder; andthis fatalist was heard to cast into the darkness this mysterioussaying, “We are in accord.” Napoleon was mistaken. They were no longerin accord.
He took not a moment for sleep; every instant of that night was markedby a joy for him. He traversed the line of the principal outposts,halting here and there to talk to the sentinels. At half-past two, nearthe wood of Hougomont, he heard the tread of a column on the march; hethought at the moment that it was a retreat on the part of Wellington.He said: “It is the rear-guard of the English getting under way for thepurpose of decamping. I will take prisoners the six thousand Englishwho have just arrived at Ostend.” He conversed expansively; he regainedthe animation which he had shown at his landing on the first of March,when he pointed out to the Grand-Marshal the enthusiastic peasant ofthe Gulf Juan, and cried, “Well, Bertrand, here is a reinforcementalready!” On the night of the 17th to the 18th of June he ralliedWellington. “That little Englishman needs a lesson,” said Napoleon. Therain redoubled in violence; the thunder rolled while the Emperor wasspeaking.
At half-past three o’clock in the morning, he lost one illusion;officers who had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him thatthe enemy was not making any movement. Nothing was stirring; not abivouac-fire had been extinguished; the English army was asleep. Thesilence on earth was profound; the only noise was in the heavens. Atfour o’clock, a peasant was brought in to him by the scouts; thispeasant had served as guide to a brigade of English cavalry, probablyVivian’s brigade, which was on its way to take up a position in thevillage of Ohain, at the extreme left. At five o’clock, two Belgiandeserters reported to him that they had just quitted their regiment,and that the English army was ready for battle. “So much the better!”exclaimed Napoleon. “I prefer to overthrow them rather than to drivethem back.”

In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms anangle with the Plancenoit road, had a kitchen table and a peasant’schair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme, seated himself, with atruss of straw for a carpet, and spread out on the table the chart ofthe battle-field, saying to Soult as he did so, “A prettychecker-board.”

In consequence of the rains during the night, the transports ofprovisions, embedded in the soft roads, had not been able to arrive bymorning; the soldiers had had no sleep; they were wet and fasting. Thisdid not prevent Napoleon from exclaiming cheerfully to Ney, “We haveninety chances out of a hundred.” At eight o’clock the Emperor’sbreakfast was brought to him. He invited many generals to it. Duringbreakfast, it was said that Wellington had been to a ball two nightsbefore, in Brussels, at the Duchess of Richmond’s; and Soult, a roughman of war, with a face of an archbishop, said, “The ball takes placeto-day.” The Emperor jested with Ney, who said, “Wellington will not beso simple as to wait for Your Majesty.” That was his way, however. “Hewas fond of jesting,” says Fleury de Chaboulon. “A merry humor was atthe foundation of his character,” says Gourgaud. “He abounded inpleasantries, which were more peculiar than witty,” says BenjaminConstant. These gayeties of a giant are worthy of insistence. It was hewho called his grenadiers “his grumblers”; he pinched their ears; hepulled their moustaches. “The Emperor did nothing but play pranks onus,” is the remark of one of them. During the mysterious trip from theisland of Elba to France, on the 27th of February, on the open sea, theFrench brig of war, _Le Zéphyr_, having encountered the brig_L’Inconstant_, on which Napoleon was concealed, and having asked thenews of Napoleon from _L’Inconstant_, the Emperor, who still wore inhis hat the white and amaranthine cockade sown with bees, which he hadadopted at the isle of Elba, laughingly seized the speaking-trumpet,and answered for himself, “The Emperor is well.” A man who laughs likethat is on familiar terms with events. Napoleon indulged in many fitsof this laughter during the breakfast at Waterloo. After breakfast hemeditated for a quarter of an hour; then two generals seated themselveson the truss of straw, pen in hand and their paper on their knees, andthe Emperor dictated to them the order of battle.
At nine o’clock, at the instant when the French army, ranged inechelons and set in motion in five columns, had deployed—the divisionsin two lines, the artillery between the brigades, the music at theirhead; as they beat the march, with rolls on the drums and the blasts oftrumpets, mighty, vast, joyous, a sea of casques, of sabres, and ofbayonets on the horizon, the Emperor was touched, and twice exclaimed,“Magnificent! Magnificent!”

Between nine o’clock and half-past ten the whole army, incredible as itmay appear, had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines,forming, to repeat the Emperor’s expression, “the figure of six V’s.” Afew moments after the formation of the battle-array, in the midst ofthat profound silence, like that which heralds the beginning of astorm, which precedes engagements, the Emperor tapped Haxo on theshoulder, as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders, detachedby his orders from the corps of Erlon, Reille, and Lobau, and destinedto begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean, which was situated atthe intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads, and said tohim, “There are four and twenty handsome maids, General.”

Sure of the issue, he encouraged with a smile, as they passed beforehim, the company of sappers of the first corps, which he had appointedto barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried.All this serenity had been traversed by but a single word of haughtypity; perceiving on his left, at a spot where there now stands a largetomb, those admirable Scotch Grays, with their superb horses, massingthemselves, he said, “It is a pity.”

Then he mounted his horse, advanced beyond Rossomme, and selected forhis post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right ofthe road from Genappe to Brussels, which was his second station duringthe battle. The third station, the one adopted at seven o’clock in theevening, between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte, is formidable;it is a rather elevated knoll, which still exists, and behind which theguard was massed on a slope of the plain. Around this knoll the ballsrebounded from the pavements of the road, up to Napoleon himself. As atBrienne, he had over his head the shriek of the bullets and of theheavy artillery. Mouldy cannon-balls, old sword-blades, and shapelessprojectiles, eaten up with rust, were picked up at the spot where hishorse’s feet stood. _Scabra rubigine_. A few years ago, a shell ofsixty pounds, still charged, and with its fuse broken off level withthe bomb, was unearthed. It was at this last post that the Emperor saidto his guide, Lacoste, a hostile and terrified peasant, who wasattached to the saddle of a hussar, and who turned round at everydischarge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon: “Fool, it isshameful! You’ll get yourself killed with a ball in the back.” He whowrites these lines has himself found, in the friable soil of thisknoll, on turning over the sand, the remains of the neck of a bomb,disintegrated, by the oxidization of six and forty years, and oldfragments of iron which parted like elder-twigs between the fingers.
Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of theplains, where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington tookplace, are no longer what they were on June 18, 1815. By taking fromthis mournful field the wherewithal to make a monument to it, its realrelief has been taken away, and history, disconcerted, no longer findsher bearings there. It has been disfigured for the sake of glorifyingit. Wellington, when he beheld Waterloo once more, two years later,exclaimed, “They have altered my field of battle!” Where the greatpyramid of earth, surmounted by the lion, rises to-day, there was ahillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road, butwhich was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe.The elevation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height ofthe two knolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road fromGenappe to Brussels: one, the English tomb, is on the left; the other,the German tomb, is on the right. There is no French tomb. The whole ofthat plain is a sepulchre for France. Thanks to the thousands uponthousands of cartloads of earth employed in the hillock one hundred andfifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference, the plateau ofMont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy slope. On the day ofbattle, particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte, it was abrupt anddifficult of approach. The slope there is so steep that the Englishcannon could not see the farm, situated in the bottom of the valley,which was the centre of the combat. On the 18th of June, 1815, therains had still farther increased this acclivity, the mud complicatedthe problem of the ascent, and the men not only slipped back, but stuckfast in the mire. Along the crest of the plateau ran a sort of trenchwhose presence it was impossible for the distant observer to divine.
What was this trench? Let us explain. Braine-l’Alleud is a Belgianvillage; Ohain is another. These villages, both of them concealed incurves of the landscape, are connected by a road about a league and ahalf in length, which traverses the plain along its undulating level,and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow, whichmakes a ravine of this road in some places. In 1815, as at the presentday, this road cut the crest of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean betweenthe two highways from Genappe and Nivelles; only, it is now on a levelwith the plain; it was then a hollow way. Its two slopes have beenappropriated for the monumental hillock. This road was, and still is, atrench throughout the greater portion of its course; a hollow trench,sometimes a dozen feet in depth, and whose banks, being too steep,crumbled away here and there, particularly in winter, under drivingrains. Accidents happened here. The road was so narrow at theBraine-l’Alleud entrance that a passer-by was crushed by a cart, as isproved by a stone cross which stands near the cemetery, and which givesthe name of the dead, _Monsieur Bernard Debrye, Merchant of Brussels_,and the date of the accident, _February, 1637_.8 It was so deep on thetable-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant, Mathieu Nicaise, wascrushed there, in 1783, by a slide from the slope, as is stated onanother stone cross, the top of which has disappeared in the process ofclearing the ground, but whose overturned pedestal is still visible onthe grassy slope to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte andthe farm of Mont-Saint-Jean.
On the day of battle, this hollow road whose existence was in no wayindicated, bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean, a trench at thesummit of the escarpment, a rut concealed in the soil, was invisible;that is to say, terrible.



CHAPTER VIII—THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE

So, on the morning of Waterloo, Napoleon was content.
He was right; the plan of battle conceived by him was, as we have seen,really admirable.
The battle once begun, its very various changes,—the resistance ofHougomont; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte; the killing of Bauduin; thedisabling of Foy; the unexpected wall against which Soye’s brigade wasshattered; Guilleminot’s fatal heedlessness when he had neither petardnor powder sacks; the miring of the batteries; the fifteen unescortedpieces overwhelmed in a hollow way by Uxbridge; the small effect of thebombs falling in the English lines, and there embedding themselves inthe rain-soaked soil, and only succeeding in producing volcanoes ofmud, so that the canister was turned into a splash; the uselessness ofPiré‘s demonstration on Braine-l’Alleud; all that cavalry, fifteensquadrons, almost exterminated; the right wing of the English badlyalarmed, the left wing badly cut into; Ney’s strange mistake inmassing, instead of echelonning the four divisions of the first corps;men delivered over to grape-shot, arranged in ranks twenty-seven deepand with a frontage of two hundred; the frightful holes made in thesemasses by the cannon-balls; attacking columns disorganized; theside-battery suddenly unmasked on their flank; Bourgeois, Donzelot, andDurutte compromised; Quiot repulsed; Lieutenant Vieux, that Herculesgraduated at the Polytechnic School, wounded at the moment when he wasbeating in with an axe the door of La Haie-Sainte under the downrightfire of the English barricade which barred the angle of the road fromGenappe to Brussels; Marcognet’s division caught between the infantryand the cavalry, shot down at the very muzzle of the guns amid thegrain by Best and Pack, put to the sword by Ponsonby; his battery ofseven pieces spiked; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar holding and guarding, inspite of the Comte d’Erlon, both Frischemont and Smohain; the flag ofthe 105th taken, the flag of the 45th captured; that black Prussianhussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three hundred lightcavalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit; the alarming thingsthat had been said by prisoners; Grouchy’s delay; fifteen hundred menkilled in the orchard of Hougomont in less than an hour; eighteenhundred men overthrown in a still shorter time about LaHaie-Sainte,—all these stormy incidents passing like the clouds ofbattle before Napoleon, had hardly troubled his gaze and had notovershadowed that face of imperial certainty. Napoleon was accustomedto gaze steadily at war; he never added up the heart-rending details,cipher by cipher; ciphers mattered little to him, provided that theyfurnished the total—victory; he was not alarmed if the beginnings didgo astray, since he thought himself the master and the possessor at theend; he knew how to wait, supposing himself to be out of the question,and he treated destiny as his equal: he seemed to say to fate, Thouwilt not dare.
Composed half of light and half of shadow, Napoleon thought himselfprotected in good and tolerated in evil. He had, or thought that hehad, a connivance, one might almost say a complicity, of events in hisfavor, which was equivalent to the invulnerability of antiquity.
Nevertheless, when one has Bérésina, Leipzig, and Fontainebleau behindone, it seems as though one might distrust Waterloo. A mysterious frownbecomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens.
At the moment when Wellington retreated, Napoleon shuddered. Hesuddenly beheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared, and the vanof the English army disappear. It was rallying, but hiding itself. TheEmperor half rose in his stirrups. The lightning of victory flashedfrom his eyes.
Wellington, driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes anddestroyed—that was the definitive conquest of England by France; it wasCrécy, Poitiers, Malplaquet, and Ramillies avenged. The man of Marengowas wiping out Agincourt.
So the Emperor, meditating on this terrible turn of fortune, swept hisglass for the last time over all the points of the field of battle. Hisguard, standing behind him with grounded arms, watched him from belowwith a sort of religion. He pondered; he examined the slopes, noted thedeclivities, scrutinized the clumps of trees, the square of rye, thepath; he seemed to be counting each bush. He gazed with some intentnessat the English barricades of the two highways,—two large abatis oftrees, that on the road to Genappe above La Haie-Sainte, armed with twocannon, the only ones out of all the English artillery which commandedthe extremity of the field of battle, and that on the road to Nivelleswhere gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chassé‘s brigade. Near thisbarricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas, painted white,which stands at the angle of the crossroad near Braine-l’Alleud; hebent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste. The guide madea negative sign with his head, which was probably perfidious.
The Emperor straightened himself up and fell to thinking.
Wellington had drawn back.
All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him.
Napoleon turning round abruptly, despatched an express at full speed toParis to announce that the battle was won.
Napoleon was one of those geniuses from whom thunder darts.
He had just found his clap of thunder.
He gave orders to Milhaud’s cuirassiers to carry the table-land ofMont-Saint-Jean.



CHAPTER IX—THE UNEXPECTED

There were three thousand five hundred of them. They formed a front aquarter of a league in extent. They were giant men, on colossal horses.There were six and twenty squadrons of them; and they had behind themto support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes’s division,—the one hundred andsix picked gendarmes, the light cavalry of the Guard, eleven hundredand ninety-seven men, and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred andeighty lances. They wore casques without horse-tails, and cuirasses ofbeaten iron, with horse-pistols in their holsters, and longsabre-swords. That morning the whole army had admired them, when, atnine o’clock, with braying of trumpets and all the music playing “Letus watch o’er the Safety of the Empire,” they had come in a solidcolumn, with one of their batteries on their flank, another in theircentre, and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe andFrischemont, and taken up their position for battle in that powerfulsecond line, so cleverly arranged by Napoleon, which, having on itsextreme left Kellermann’s cuirassiers and on its extreme rightMilhaud’s cuirassiers, had, so to speak, two wings of iron.
Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor’s orders. Ney drew hissword and placed himself at their head. The enormous squadrons were setin motion.
Then a formidable spectacle was seen.
All their cavalry, with upraised swords, standards and trumpets flungto the breeze, formed in columns by divisions, descended, by asimultaneous movement and like one man, with the precision of a brazenbattering-ram which is effecting a breach, the hill of La BelleAlliance, plunged into the terrible depths in which so many men hadalready fallen, disappeared there in the smoke, then emerging from thatshadow, reappeared on the other side of the valley, still compact andin close ranks, mounting at a full trot, through a storm of grape-shotwhich burst upon them, the terrible muddy slope of the table-land ofMont-Saint-Jean. They ascended, grave, threatening, imperturbable; inthe intervals between the musketry and the artillery, their colossaltrampling was audible. Being two divisions, there were two columns ofthem; Wathier’s division held the right, Delort’s division was on theleft. It seemed as though two immense adders of steel were to be seencrawling towards the crest of the table-land. It traversed the battlelike a prodigy.
Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt ofthe Muskowa by the heavy cavalry; Murat was lacking here, but Ney wasagain present. It seemed as though that mass had become a monster andhad but one soul. Each column undulated and swelled like the ring of apolyp. They could be seen through a vast cloud of smoke which was renthere and there. A confusion of helmets, of cries, of sabres, a stormyheaving of the cruppers of horses amid the cannons and the flourish oftrumpets, a terrible and disciplined tumult; over all, the cuirasseslike the scales on the hydra.
These narrations seemed to belong to another age. Something parallel tothis vision appeared, no doubt, in the ancient Orphic epics, which toldof the centaurs, the old hippanthropes, those Titans with human headsand equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at a gallop, horrible,invulnerable, sublime—gods and beasts.
Odd numerical coincidence,—twenty-six battalions rode to meettwenty-six battalions. Behind the crest of the plateau, in the shadowof the masked battery, the English infantry, formed into thirteensquares, two battalions to the square, in two lines, with seven in thefirst line, six in the second, the stocks of their guns to theirshoulders, taking aim at that which was on the point of appearing,waited, calm, mute, motionless. They did not see the cuirassiers, andthe cuirassiers did not see them. They listened to the rise of thisflood of men. They heard the swelling noise of three thousand horse,the alternate and symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot, thejingling of the cuirasses, the clang of the sabres and a sort of grandand savage breathing. There ensued a most terrible silence; then, allat once, a long file of uplifted arms, brandishing sabres, appearedabove the crest, and casques, trumpets, and standards, and threethousand heads with gray moustaches, shouting, “Vive l’Empereur!” Allthis cavalry debouched on the plateau, and it was like the appearanceof an earthquake.
All at once, a tragic incident; on the English left, on our right, thehead of the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor. Onarriving at the culminating point of the crest, ungovernable, utterlygiven over to fury and their course of extermination of the squares andcannon, the cuirassiers had just caught sight of a trench,—a trenchbetween them and the English. It was the hollow road of Ohain.
It was a terrible moment. The ravine was there, unexpected, yawning,directly under the horses’ feet, two fathoms deep between its doubleslopes; the second file pushed the first into it, and the third pushedon the second; the horses reared and fell backward, landed on theirhaunches, slid down, all four feet in the air, crushing andoverwhelming the riders; and there being no means of retreat,—the wholecolumn being no longer anything more than a projectile,—the force whichhad been acquired to crush the English crushed the French; theinexorable ravine could only yield when filled; horses and ridersrolled there pell-mell, grinding each other, forming but one mass offlesh in this gulf: when this trench was full of living men, the restmarched over them and passed on. Almost a third of Dubois’s brigadefell into that abyss.
This began the loss of the battle.
A local tradition, which evidently exaggerates matters, says that twothousand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow roadof Ohain. This figure probably comprises all the other corpses whichwere flung into this ravine the day after the combat.
Let us note in passing that it was Dubois’s sorely tried brigade which,an hour previously, making a charge to one side, had captured the flagof the Lunenburg battalion.
Napoleon, before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud’scuirassiers, had scrutinized the ground, but had not been able to seethat hollow road, which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface ofthe plateau. Warned, nevertheless, and put on the alert by the littlewhite chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelleshighway, he had probably put a question as to the possibility of anobstacle, to the guide Lacoste. The guide had answered No. We mightalmost affirm that Napoleon’s catastrophe originated in that sign of apeasant’s head.
Other fatalities were destined to arise.
Was it possible that Napoleon should have won that battle? We answerNo. Why? Because of Wellington? Because of Blücher? No. Because of God.
Bonaparte victor at Waterloo; that does not come within the law of thenineteenth century. Another series of facts was in preparation, inwhich there was no longer any room for Napoleon. The ill will of eventshad declared itself long before.
It was time that this vast man should fall.
The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed thebalance. This individual alone counted for more than a universal group.These plethoras of all human vitality concentrated in a single head;the world mounting to the brain of one man,—this would be mortal tocivilization were it to last. The moment had arrived for theincorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan. Probably theprinciples and the elements, on which the regular gravitations of themoral, as of the material, world depend, had complained. Smoking blood,over-filled cemeteries, mothers in tears,—these are formidablepleaders. When the earth is suffering from too heavy a burden, thereare mysterious groanings of the shades, to which the abyss lends anear.
Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had beendecided on.
He embarrassed God.
Waterloo is not a battle; it is a change of front on the part of theUniverse.



CHAPTER X—THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN

The battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine.
Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank onthe cuirassiers. The intrepid General Delort made the military saluteto the English battery.
The whole of the flying artillery of the English had re-entered thesquares at a gallop. The cuirassiers had not had even the time for ahalt. The disaster of the hollow road had decimated, but notdiscouraged them. They belonged to that class of men who, whendiminished in number, increase in courage.
Wathier’s column alone had suffered in the disaster; Delort’s column,which Ney had deflected to the left, as though he had a presentiment ofan ambush, had arrived whole.
The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares.
At full speed, with bridles loose, swords in their teeth, pistols infist,—such was the attack.
There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man untilthe soldier is changed into a statue, and when all this flesh turnsinto granite. The English battalions, desperately assaulted, did notstir.
Then it was terrible.
All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once. A frenziedwhirl enveloped them. That cold infantry remained impassive. The firstrank knelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets, the secondranks shot them down; behind the second rank the cannoneers chargedtheir guns, the front of the square parted, permitted the passage of aneruption of grape-shot, and closed again. The cuirassiers replied bycrushing them. Their great horses reared, strode across the ranks,leaped over the bayonets and fell, gigantic, in the midst of these fourliving wells. The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these cuirassiers;the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares. Files of men disappeared,ground to dust under the horses. The bayonets plunged into the belliesof these centaurs; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probablynever been seen anywhere else. The squares, wasted by this mad cavalry,closed up their ranks without flinching. Inexhaustible in the matter ofgrape-shot, they created explosions in their assailants’ midst. Theform of this combat was monstrous. These squares were no longerbattalions, they were craters; those cuirassiers were no longercavalry, they were a tempest. Each square was a volcano attacked by acloud; lava contended with lightning.
The square on the extreme right, the most exposed of all, being in theair, was almost annihilated at the very first shock. lt was formed ofthe 75th regiment of Highlanders. The bagpipe-player in the centredropped his melancholy eyes, filled with the reflections of the forestsand the lakes, in profound inattention, while men were beingexterminated around him, and seated on a drum, with his pibroch underhis arm, played the Highland airs. These Scotchmen died thinking of BenLothian, as did the Greeks recalling Argos. The sword of a cuirassier,which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it, put an end tothe song by killing the singer.
The cuirassiers, relatively few in number, and still further diminishedby the catastrophe of the ravine, had almost the whole English armyagainst them, but they multiplied themselves so that each man of themwas equal to ten. Nevertheless, some Hanoverian battalions yielded.Wellington perceived it, and thought of his cavalry. Had Napoleon atthat same moment thought of his infantry, he would have won the battle.This forgetfulness was his great and fatal mistake.
All at once, the cuirassiers, who had been the assailants, foundthemselves assailed. The English cavalry was at their back. Before themtwo squares, behind them Somerset; Somerset meant fourteen hundreddragoons of the guard. On the right, Somerset had Dornberg with theGerman light-horse, and on his left, Trip with the Belgian carabineers;the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and in front, before and in therear, by infantry and cavalry, had to face all sides. What mattered itto them? They were a whirlwind. Their valor was somethingindescribable.
In addition to this, they had behind them the battery, which was stillthundering. It was necessary that it should be so, or they could neverhave been wounded in the back. One of their cuirasses, pierced on theshoulder by a ball from a biscayan,9 is in the collection of theWaterloo Museum.
For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed. It wasno longer a hand-to-hand conflict; it was a shadow, a fury, a dizzytransport of souls and courage, a hurricane of lightning swords. In aninstant the fourteen hundred dragoon guards numbered only eighthundred. Fuller, their lieutenant-colonel, fell dead. Ney rushed upwith the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes’s light-horse. The plateau ofMont-Saint-Jean was captured, recaptured, captured again. Thecuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry; or, to putit more exactly, the whole of that formidable rout collared each otherwithout releasing the other. The squares still held firm.
There were a dozen assaults. Ney had four horses killed under him. Halfthe cuirassiers remained on the plateau. This conflict lasted twohours.
The English army was profoundly shaken. There is no doubt that, hadthey not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of thehollow road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre anddecided the victory. This extraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton, whohad seen Talavera and Badajoz. Wellington, three-quarters vanquished,admired heroically. He said in an undertone, “Sublime!”

The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen, took orspiked sixty pieces of ordnance, and captured from the Englishregiments six flags, which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of theGuard bore to the Emperor, in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance.
Wellington’s situation had grown worse. This strange battle was like aduel between two raging, wounded men, each of whom, still fighting andstill resisting, is expending all his blood.
Which of the two will be the first to fall?
The conflict on the plateau continued.
What had become of the cuirassiers? No one could have told. One thingis certain, that on the day after the battle, a cuirassier and hishorse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles atMont-Saint-Jean, at the very point where the four roads from Nivelles,Genappe, La Hulpe, and Brussels meet and intersect each other. Thishorseman had pierced the English lines. One of the men who picked upthe body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean. His name is Dehaze. He waseighteen years old at that time.
Wellington felt that he was yielding. The crisis was at hand.
The cuirassiers had not succeeded, since the centre was not brokenthrough. As every one was in possession of the plateau, no one held it,and in fact it remained, to a great extent, with the English.Wellington held the village and the culminating plain; Ney had only thecrest and the slope. They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on bothsides.
But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable. The bleeding ofthat army was horrible. Kempt, on the left wing, demandedreinforcements. “There are none,” replied Wellington; “he must lethimself be killed!” Almost at that same moment, a singular coincidencewhich paints the exhaustion of the two armies, Ney demanded infantryfrom Napoleon, and Napoleon exclaimed, “Infantry! Where does he expectme to get it? Does he think I can make it?”

Nevertheless, the English army was in the worse case of the two. Thefurious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron andbreasts of steel had ground the infantry to nothing. A few menclustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment; such and such abattalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant; Alten’sdivision, already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte, was almostdestroyed; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze’s brigade strewed therye-fields all along the Nivelles road; hardly anything was left ofthose Dutch grenadiers, who, intermingled with Spaniards in our ranksin 1811, fought against Wellington; and who, in 1815, rallied to theEnglish standard, fought against Napoleon. The loss in officers wasconsiderable. Lord Uxbridge, who had his leg buried on the followingday, had his knee shattered. If, on the French side, in that tussle ofthe cuirassiers, Delort, l’Héritier, Colbert, Dnop, Travers, andBlancard were disabled, on the side of the English there was Altenwounded, Barne wounded, Delancey killed, Van Meeren killed, Omptedakilled, the whole of Wellington’s staff decimated, and England had theworse of it in that bloody scale. The second regiment of foot-guardshad lost five lieutenant-colonels, four captains, and three ensigns;the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200soldiers; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded, 18officers killed, 450 soldiers killed. The Hanoverian hussars ofCumberland, a whole regiment, with Colonel Hacke at its head, who wasdestined to be tried later on and cashiered, had turned bridle in thepresence of the fray, and had fled to the forest of Soignes, sowingdefeat all the way to Brussels. The transports, ammunition-wagons, thebaggage-wagons, the wagons filled with wounded, on perceiving that theFrench were gaining ground and approaching the forest, rushed headlongthither. The Dutch, mowed down by the French cavalry, cried, “Alarm!”From Vert-Coucou to Groenendael, for a distance of nearly two leaguesin the direction of Brussels, according to the testimony ofeye-witnesses who are still alive, the roads were encumbered withfugitives. This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Condé atMechlin, and Louis XVIII. at Ghent. With the exception of the feeblereserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm ofMont-Saint-Jean, and of Vivian’s and Vandeleur’s brigades, whichflanked the left wing, Wellington had no cavalry left. A number ofbatteries lay unhorsed. These facts are attested by Siborne; andPringle, exaggerating the disaster, goes so far as to say that theAnglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men. The Iron Dukeremained calm, but his lips blanched. Vincent, the Austriancommissioner, Alava, the Spanish commissioner, who were present at thebattle in the English staff, thought the Duke lost. At five o’clockWellington drew out his watch, and he was heard to murmur thesesinister words, “Blücher, or night!”

It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed onthe heights in the direction of Frischemont.
Here comes the change of face in this giant drama.



CHAPTER XI—A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON; A GOOD GUIDE TO BÜLOW

The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known. Grouchy hoped for,Blücher arriving. Death instead of life.
Fate has these turns; the throne of the world was expected; it wasSaint Helena that was seen.
If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bülow, Blücher’slieutenant, had advised him to debouch from the forest aboveFrischemont, instead of below Plancenoit, the form of the nineteenthcentury might, perhaps, have been different. Napoleon would have wonthe battle of Waterloo. By any other route than that below Plancenoit,the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable forartillery, and Bülow would not have arrived.
Now the Prussian general, Muffling, declares that one hour’s delay, andBlücher would not have found Wellington on his feet. “The battle waslost.”

It was time that Bülow should arrive, as will be seen. He had,moreover, been very much delayed. He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont,and had set out at daybreak; but the roads were impassable, and hisdivisions stuck fast in the mire. The ruts were up to the hubs of thecannons. Moreover, he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrowbridge of Wavre; the street leading to the bridge had been fired by theFrench, so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not pass betweentwo rows of burning houses, and had been obliged to wait until theconflagration was extinguished. It was midday before Bülow’s vanguardhad been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert.
Had the action been begun two hours earlier, it would have been over atfour o’clock, and Blücher would have fallen on the battle won byNapoleon. Such are these immense risks proportioned to an infinitewhich we cannot comprehend.
The Emperor had been the first, as early as midday, to descry with hisfield-glass, on the extreme horizon, something which had attracted hisattention. He had said, “I see yonder a cloud, which seems to me to betroops.” Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie, “Soult, what do you see inthe direction of Chapelle-Saint-Lambert?” The marshal, levelling hisglass, answered, “Four or five thousand men, Sire; evidently Grouchy.”But it remained motionless in the mist. All the glasses of the staffhad studied “the cloud” pointed out by the Emperor. Some said: “It istrees.” The truth is, that the cloud did not move. The Emperor detachedDomon’s division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter.
Bülow had not moved, in fact. His vanguard was very feeble, and couldaccomplish nothing. He was obliged to wait for the body of the armycorps, and he had received orders to concentrate his forces beforeentering into line; but at five o’clock, perceiving Wellington’s peril,Blücher ordered Bülow to attack, and uttered these remarkable words:“We must give air to the English army.”

A little later, the divisions of Losthin, Hiller, Hacke, and Rysseldeployed before Lobau’s corps, the cavalry of Prince William of Prussiadebouched from the forest of Paris, Plancenoit was in flames, and thePrussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard inreserve behind Napoleon.



CHAPTER XII—THE GUARD

Every one knows the rest,—the irruption of a third army; the battlebroken to pieces; eighty-six mouths of fire thundering simultaneously;Pirch the first coming up with Bülow; Zieten’s cavalry led by Blücherin person, the French driven back; Marcognet swept from the plateau ofOhain; Durutte dislodged from Papelotte; Donzelot and Quiot retreating;Lobau caught on the flank; a fresh battle precipitating itself on ourdismantled regiments at nightfall; the whole English line resuming theoffensive and thrust forward; the gigantic breach made in the Frencharmy; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding eachother; the extermination; disaster in front; disaster on the flank; theGuard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of allthings.
Conscious that they were about to die, they shouted, “Vive l’Empereur!”History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth inacclamations.
The sky had been overcast all day long. All of a sudden, at that verymoment,—it was eight o’clock in the evening—the clouds on the horizonparted, and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun topass through, athwart the elms on the Nivelles road. They had seen itrise at Austerlitz.
Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this finalcatastrophe. Friant, Michel, Roguet, Harlet, Mallet, Poret de Morvan,were there. When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard, withtheir large plaques bearing the eagle appeared, symmetrical, in line,tranquil, in the midst of that combat, the enemy felt a respect forFrance; they thought they beheld twenty victories entering the field ofbattle, with wings outspread, and those who were the conquerors,believing themselves to be vanquished, retreated; but Wellingtonshouted, “Up, Guards, and aim straight!” The red regiment of Englishguards, lying flat behind the hedges, sprang up, a cloud of grape-shotriddled the tricolored flag and whistled round our eagles; all hurledthemselves forwards, and the final carnage began. In the darkness, theImperial Guard felt the army losing ground around it, and in the vastshock of the rout it heard the desperate flight which had taken theplace of the “Vive l’Empereur!” and, with flight behind it, itcontinued to advance, more crushed, losing more men at every step thatit took. There were none who hesitated, no timid men in its ranks. Thesoldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general. Not a manwas missing in that suicide.
Ney, bewildered, great with all the grandeur of accepted death, offeredhimself to all blows in that tempest. He had his fifth horse killedunder him there. Perspiring, his eyes aflame, foaming at the mouth,with uniform unbuttoned, one of his epaulets half cut off by asword-stroke from a horseguard, his plaque with the great eagle dentedby a bullet; bleeding, bemired, magnificent, a broken sword in hishand, he said, “Come and see how a Marshal of France dies on the fieldof battle!” But in vain; he did not die. He was haggard and angry. AtDrouet d’Erlon he hurled this question, “Are you not going to getyourself killed?” In the midst of all that artillery engaged incrushing a handful of men, he shouted: “So there is nothing for me! Oh!I should like to have all these English bullets enter my bowels!”Unhappy man, thou wert reserved for French bullets!



CHAPTER XIII—THE CATASTROPHE

The rout behind the Guard was melancholy.
The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once,—Hougomont, LaHaie-Sainte, Papelotte, Plancenoit. The cry “Treachery!” was followedby a cry of “Save yourselves who can!” An army which is disbanding islike a thaw. All yields, splits, cracks, floats, rolls, falls, jostles,hastens, is precipitated. The disintegration is unprecedented. Neyborrows a horse, leaps upon it, and without hat, cravat, or sword,places himself across the Brussels road, stopping both English andFrench. He strives to detain the army, he recalls it to its duty, heinsults it, he clings to the rout. He is overwhelmed. The soldiers flyfrom him, shouting, “Long live Marshal Ney!” Two of Durutte’s regimentsgo and come in affright as though tossed back and forth between theswords of the Uhlans and the fusillade of the brigades of Kempt, Best,Pack, and Rylandt; the worst of hand-to-hand conflicts is the defeat;friends kill each other in order to escape; squadrons and battalionsbreak and disperse against each other, like the tremendous foam ofbattle. Lobau at one extremity, and Reille at the other, are drawn intothe tide. In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him ofhis Guard; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceablesquadrons. Quiot retreats before Vivian, Kellermann before Vandeleur,Lobau before Bülow, Morand before Pirch, Domon and Subervic beforePrince William of Prussia; Guyot, who led the Emperor’s squadrons tothe charge, falls beneath the feet of the English dragoons. Napoleongallops past the line of fugitives, harangues, urges, threatens,entreats them. All the mouths which in the morning had shouted, “Longlive the Emperor!” remain gaping; they hardly recognize him. ThePrussian cavalry, newly arrived, dashes forwards, flies, hews, slashes,kills, exterminates. Horses lash out, the cannons flee; the soldiers ofthe artillery-train unharness the caissons and use the horses to maketheir escape; transports overturned, with all four wheels in the air,clog the road and occasion massacres. Men are crushed, trampled down,others walk over the dead and the living. Arms are lost. A dizzymultitude fills the roads, the paths, the bridges, the plains, thehills, the valleys, the woods, encumbered by this invasion of fortythousand men. Shouts despair, knapsacks and guns flung among the rye,passages forced at the point of the sword, no more comrades, no moreofficers, no more generals, an inexpressible terror. Zieten puttingFrance to the sword at its leisure. Lions converted into goats. Suchwas the flight.
At Genappe, an effort was made to wheel about, to present a battlefront, to draw up in line. Lobau rallied three hundred men. Theentrance to the village was barricaded, but at the first volley ofPrussian canister, all took to flight again, and Lobau was taken. Thatvolley of grape-shot can be seen to-day imprinted on the ancient gableof a brick building on the right of the road at a few minutes’ distancebefore you enter Genappe. The Prussians threw themselves into Genappe,furious, no doubt, that they were not more entirely the conquerors. Thepursuit was stupendous. Blücher ordered extermination. Roguet had setthe lugubrious example of threatening with death any French grenadierwho should bring him a Prussian prisoner. Blücher outdid Roguet.Duhesme, the general of the Young Guard, hemmed in at the doorway of aninn at Genappe, surrendered his sword to a huzzar of death, who tookthe sword and slew the prisoner. The victory was completed by theassassination of the vanquished. Let us inflict punishment, since weare history: old Blücher disgraced himself. This ferocity put thefinishing touch to the disaster. The desperate route traversed Genappe,traversed Quatre-Bras, traversed Gosselies, traversed Frasnes,traversed Charleroi, traversed Thuin, and only halted at the frontier.Alas! and who, then, was fleeing in that manner? The Grand Army.
This vertigo, this terror, this downfall into ruin of the loftiestbravery which ever astounded history,—is that causeless? No. The shadowof an enormous right is projected athwart Waterloo. It is the day ofdestiny. The force which is mightier than man produced that day. Hencethe terrified wrinkle of those brows; hence all those great soulssurrendering their swords. Those who had conquered Europe have fallenprone on the earth, with nothing left to say nor to do, feeling thepresent shadow of a terrible presence. _Hoc erat in fatis_. That daythe perspective of the human race underwent a change. Waterloo is thehinge of the nineteenth century. The disappearance of the great man wasnecessary to the advent of the great century. Some one, a person towhom one replies not, took the responsibility on himself. The panic ofheroes can be explained. In the battle of Waterloo there is somethingmore than a cloud, there is something of the meteor. God has passed by.
At nightfall, in a meadow near Genappe, Bernard and Bertrand seized bythe skirt of his coat and detained a man, haggard, pensive, sinister,gloomy, who, dragged to that point by the current of the rout, had justdismounted, had passed the bridle of his horse over his arm, and withwild eye was returning alone to Waterloo. It was Napoleon, the immensesomnambulist of this dream which had crumbled, essaying once more toadvance.



CHAPTER XIV—THE LAST SQUARE

Several squares of the Guard, motionless amid this stream of thedefeat, as rocks in running water, held their own until night. Nightcame, death also; they awaited that double shadow, and, invincible,allowed themselves to be enveloped therein. Each regiment, isolatedfrom the rest, and having no bond with the army, now shattered in everypart, died alone. They had taken up position for this final action,some on the heights of Rossomme, others on the plain ofMont-Saint-Jean. There, abandoned, vanquished, terrible, those gloomysquares endured their death-throes in formidable fashion. Ulm, Wagram,Jena, Friedland, died with them.
At twilight, towards nine o’clock in the evening, one of them was leftat the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean. In that fatal valley, atthe foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended, nowinundated by the masses of the English, under the converging fires ofthe victorious hostile cavalry, under a frightful density ofprojectiles, this square fought on. It was commanded by an obscureofficer named Cambronne. At each discharge, the square diminished andreplied. It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade, continuallycontracting its four walls. The fugitives pausing breathless for amoment in the distance, listened in the darkness to that gloomy andever-decreasing thunder.
When this legion had been reduced to a handful, when nothing was leftof their flag but a rag, when their guns, the bullets all gone, were nolonger anything but clubs, when the heap of corpses was larger than thegroup of survivors, there reigned among the conquerors, around thosemen dying so sublimely, a sort of sacred terror, and the Englishartillery, taking breath, became silent. This furnished a sort ofrespite. These combatants had around them something in the nature of aswarm of spectres, silhouettes of men on horseback, the black profilesof cannon, the white sky viewed through wheels and gun-carriages, thecolossal death’s-head, which the heroes saw constantly through thesmoke, in the depths of the battle, advanced upon them and gazed atthem. Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces beingloaded; the matches all lighted, like the eyes of tigers at night,formed a circle round their heads; all the lintstocks of the Englishbatteries approached the cannons, and then, with emotion, holding thesupreme moment suspended above these men, an English general, Colvilleaccording to some, Maitland according to others, shouted to them,“Surrender, brave Frenchmen!” Cambronne replied, “——.”

{EDITOR’S COMMENTARY: Another edition of this book has the word“Merde!” in lieu of the —— above.}



CHAPTER XV—CAMBRONNE

If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended,one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what isperhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made. This would enjoinus from consigning something sublime to History.
At our own risk and peril, let us violate this injunction.
Now, then, among those giants there was one Titan,—Cambronne.
To make that reply and then perish, what could be grander? For beingwilling to die is the same as to die; and it was not this man’s faultif he survived after he was shot.
The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon, who was put toflight; nor Wellington, giving way at four o’clock, in despair at five;nor Blücher, who took no part in the engagement. The winner of Waterloowas Cambronne.
To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you isto conquer!
Thus to answer the Catastrophe, thus to speak to Fate, to give thispedestal to the future lion, to hurl such a challenge to the midnightrainstorm, to the treacherous wall of Hougomont, to the sunken road ofOhain, to Grouchy’s delay, to Blücher’s arrival, to be Irony itself inthe tomb, to act so as to stand upright though fallen, to drown in twosyllables the European coalition, to offer kings privies which theCæsars once knew, to make the lowest of words the most lofty byentwining with it the glory of France, insolently to end Waterloo withMardigras, to finish Leonidas with Rabellais, to set the crown on thisvictory by a word impossible to speak, to lose the field and preservehistory, to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage,—this isimmense!
It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl! It reaches thegrandeur of Æschylus!
Cambronne’s reply produces the effect of a violent break. ‘Tis like thebreaking of a heart under a weight of scorn. ‘Tis the overflow of agonybursting forth. Who conquered? Wellington? No! Had it not been forBlücher, he was lost. Was it Blücher? No! If Wellington had not begun,Blücher could not have finished. This Cambronne, this man spending hislast hour, this unknown soldier, this infinitesimal of war, realizesthat here is a falsehood, a falsehood in a catastrophe, and so doublyagonizing; and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because ofit, he is offered this mockery,—life! How could he restrain himself?Yonder are all the kings of Europe, the general’s flushed with victory,the Jupiter’s darting thunderbolts; they have a hundred thousandvictorious soldiers, and back of the hundred thousand a million; theircannon stand with yawning mouths, the match is lighted; they grind downunder their heels the Imperial guards, and the grand army; they havejust crushed Napoleon, and only Cambronne remains,—only this earthwormis left to protest. He will protest. Then he seeks for the appropriateword as one seeks for a sword. His mouth froths, and the froth is theword. In face of this mean and mighty victory, in face of this victorywhich counts none victorious, this desperate soldier stands erect. Hegrants its overwhelming immensity, but he establishes its triviality;and he does more than spit upon it. Borne down by numbers, by superiorforce, by brute matter, he finds in his soul an expression:_“Excrément!”_ We repeat it,—to use that word, to do thus, to inventsuch an expression, is to be the conqueror!
The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent onthat unknown man. Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rougetinvents the “Marseillaise,” under the visitation of a breath from onhigh. An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comessweeping over these men, and they shake, and one of them sings the songsupreme, and the other utters the frightful cry.
This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe inthe name of the Empire,—that would be a trifle: he hurls it at the pastin the name of the Revolution. It is heard, and Cambronne is recognizedas possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans. Danton seems to bespeaking! Kléber seems to be bellowing!
At that word from Cambronne, the English voice responded, “Fire!” Thebatteries flamed, the hill trembled, from all those brazen mouthsbelched a last terrible gush of grape-shot; a vast volume of smoke,vaguely white in the light of the rising moon, rolled out, and when thesmoke dispersed, there was no longer anything there. That formidableremnant had been annihilated; the Guard was dead. The four walls of theliving redoubt lay prone, and hardly was there discernible, here andthere, even a quiver in the bodies; it was thus that the Frenchlegions, greater than the Roman legions, expired on Mont-Saint-Jean, onthe soil watered with rain and blood, amid the gloomy grain, on thespot where nowadays Joseph, who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles,passes whistling, and cheerfully whipping up his horse at four o’clockin the morning.



CHAPTER XVI—QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE?

The battle of Waterloo is an enigma. It is as obscure to those who wonit as to those who lost it. For Napoleon it was a panic;10 Blücher seesnothing in it but fire; Wellington understands nothing in regard to it.Look at the reports. The bulletins are confused, the commentariesinvolved. Some stammer, others lisp. Jomini divides the battle ofWaterloo into four moments; Muffling cuts it up into three changes;Charras alone, though we hold another judgment than his on some points,seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of thatcatastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance. All theother historians suffer from being somewhat dazzled, and in thisdazzled state they fumble about. It was a day of lightning brilliancy;in fact, a crumbling of the military monarchy which, to the vaststupefaction of kings, drew all the kingdoms after it—the fall offorce, the defeat of war.
In this event, stamped with superhuman necessity, the part played bymen amounts to nothing.
If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blücher, do we thereby depriveEngland and Germany of anything? No. Neither that illustrious Englandnor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo. ThankHeaven, nations are great, independently of the lugubrious feats of thesword. Neither England, nor Germany, nor France is contained in ascabbard. At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords,above Blücher, Germany has Schiller; above Wellington, England hasByron. A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our century, and inthat aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance. They aremajestic because they think. The elevation of level which theycontribute to civilization is intrinsic with them; it proceeds fromthemselves and not from an accident. The aggrandizement which they havebrought to the nineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source. It isonly barbarous peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory. Thatis the temporary vanity of torrents swelled by a storm. Civilizedpeople, especially in our day, are neither elevated nor abased by thegood or bad fortune of a captain. Their specific gravity in the humanspecies results from something more than a combat. Their honor, thankGod! their dignity, their intelligence, their genius, are not numberswhich those gamblers, heroes and conquerors, can put in the lottery ofbattles. Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered. There isless glory and more liberty. The drum holds its peace; reason takes theword. It is a game in which he who loses wins. Let us, therefore, speakof Waterloo coldly from both sides. Let us render to chance that whichis due to chance, and to God that which is due to God. What isWaterloo? A victory? No. The winning number in the lottery.
The quine 11 won by Europe, paid by France.
It was not worthwhile to place a lion there.
Waterloo, moreover, is the strangest encounter in history. Napoleon andWellington. They are not enemies; they are opposites. Never did God,who is fond of antitheses, make a more striking contrast, a moreextraordinary comparison. On one side, precision, foresight, geometry,prudence, an assured retreat, reserves spared, with an obstinatecoolness, an imperturbable method, strategy, which takes advantage ofthe ground, tactics, which preserve the equilibrium of battalions,carnage, executed according to rule, war regulated, watch in hand,nothing voluntarily left to chance, the ancient classic courage,absolute regularity; on the other, intuition, divination, militaryoddity, superhuman instinct, a flaming glance, an indescribablesomething which gazes like an eagle, and which strikes like thelightning, a prodigious art in disdainful impetuosity, all themysteries of a profound soul, associated with destiny; the stream, theplain, the forest, the hill, summoned, and in a manner, forced to obey,the despot going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle;faith in a star mingled with strategic science, elevating butperturbing it. Wellington was the Barême of war; Napoleon was itsMichael Angelo; and on this occasion, genius was vanquished bycalculation. On both sides some one was awaited. It was the exactcalculator who succeeded. Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy; he did notcome. Wellington expected Blücher; he came.
Wellington is classic war taking its revenge. Bonaparte, at hisdawning, had encountered him in Italy, and beaten him superbly. The oldowl had fled before the young vulture. The old tactics had been notonly struck as by lightning, but disgraced. Who was that Corsican ofsix and twenty? What signified that splendid ignoramus, who, witheverything against him, nothing in his favor, without provisions,without ammunition, without cannon, without shoes, almost without anarmy, with a mere handful of men against masses, hurled himself onEurope combined, and absurdly won victories in the impossible? Whencehad issued that fulminating convict, who almost without taking breath,and with the same set of combatants in hand, pulverized, one after theother, the five armies of the emperor of Germany, upsetting Beaulieu onAlvinzi, Wurmser on Beaulieu, Mélas on Wurmser, Mack on Mélas? Who wasthis novice in war with the effrontery of a luminary? The academicalmilitary school excommunicated him, and as it lost its footing; hence,the implacable rancor of the old Cæsarism against the new; of theregular sword against the flaming sword; and of the exchequer againstgenius. On the 18th of June, 1815, that rancor had the last word, andbeneath Lodi, Montebello, Montenotte, Mantua, Arcola, it wrote:Waterloo. A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority.Destiny consented to this irony. In his decline, Napoleon foundWurmser, the younger, again in front of him.
In fact, to get Wurmser, it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington.
Waterloo is a battle of the first order, won by a captain of thesecond.
That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo, is England; theEnglish firmness, the English resolution, the English blood; the superbthing about England there, no offence to her, was herself. It was nother captain; it was her army.
Wellington, oddly ungrateful, declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst,that his army, the army which fought on the 18th of June, 1815, was a“detestable army.” What does that sombre intermingling of bones buriedbeneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that?
England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington. To makeWellington so great is to belittle England. Wellington is nothing but ahero like many another. Those Scotch Grays, those Horse Guards, thoseregiments of Maitland and of Mitchell, that infantry of Pack and Kempt,that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset, those Highlanders playing thepibroch under the shower of grape-shot, those battalions of Rylandt,those utterly raw recruits, who hardly knew how to handle a musketholding their own against Essling’s and Rivoli’s old troops,—that iswhat was grand. Wellington was tenacious; in that lay his merit, and weare not seeking to lessen it: but the least of his foot-soldiers and ofhis cavalry would have been as solid as he. The iron soldier is worthas much as the Iron Duke. As for us, all our glorification goes to theEnglish soldier, to the English army, to the English people. If trophythere be, it is to England that the trophy is due. The column ofWaterloo would be more just, if, instead of the figure of a man, itbore on high the statue of a people.
But this great England will be angry at what we are saying here. Shestill cherishes, after her own 1688 and our 1789, the feudal illusion.She believes in heredity and hierarchy. This people, surpassed by nonein power and glory, regards itself as a nation, and not as a people.And as a people, it willingly subordinates itself and takes a lord forits head. As a workman, it allows itself to be disdained; as a soldier,it allows itself to be flogged.
It will be remembered, that at the battle of Inkermann a sergeant whohad, it appears, saved the army, could not be mentioned by Lord Paglan,as the English military hierarchy does not permit any hero below thegrade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports.
That which we admire above all, in an encounter of the nature ofWaterloo, is the marvellous cleverness of chance. A nocturnal rain, thewall of Hougomont, the hollow road of Ohain, Grouchy deaf to thecannon, Napoleon’s guide deceiving him, Bülow’s guide enlighteninghim,—the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted.
On the whole, let us say it plainly, it was more of a massacre than ofa battle at Waterloo.
Of all pitched battles, Waterloo is the one which has the smallestfront for such a number of combatants. Napoleon three-quarters of aleague; Wellington, half a league; seventy-two thousand combatants oneach side. From this denseness the carnage arose.
The following calculation has been made, and the following proportionestablished: Loss of men: at Austerlitz, French, fourteen per cent;Russians, thirty per cent; Austrians, forty-four per cent. At Wagram,French, thirteen per cent; Austrians, fourteen. At the Moskowa, French,thirty-seven per cent; Russians, forty-four. At Bautzen, French,thirteen per cent; Russians and Prussians, fourteen. At Waterloo,French, fifty-six per cent; the Allies, thirty-one. Total for Waterloo,forty-one per cent; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants;sixty thousand dead.
To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth,the impassive support of man, and it resembles all plains.
At night, moreover, a sort of visionary mist arises from it; and if atraveller strolls there, if he listens, if he watches, if he dreamslike Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi, the hallucination of thecatastrophe takes possession of him. The frightful 18th of June livesagain; the false monumental hillock disappears, the lion vanishes inair, the battle-field resumes its reality, lines of infantry undulateover the plain, furious gallops traverse the horizon; the frighteneddreamer beholds the flash of sabres, the gleam of bayonets, the flareof bombs, the tremendous interchange of thunders; he hears, as it were,the death rattle in the depths of a tomb, the vague clamor of thebattle phantom; those shadows are grenadiers, those lights arecuirassiers; that skeleton Napoleon, that other skeleton is Wellington;all this no longer exists, and yet it clashes together and combatsstill; and the ravines are empurpled, and the trees quiver, and thereis fury even in the clouds and in the shadows; all those terribleheights, Hougomont, Mont-Saint-Jean, Frischemont, Papelotte,Plancenoit, appear confusedly crowned with whirlwinds of spectresengaged in exterminating each other.



CHAPTER XVII—IS WATERLOO TO BE CONSIDERED GOOD?

There exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hateWaterloo. We do not belong to it. To us, Waterloo is but the stupefieddate of liberty. That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg iscertainly unexpected.
If one places one’s self at the culminating point of view of thequestion, Waterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory. Itis Europe against France; it is Petersburg, Berlin, and Vienna againstParis; it is the _statu quo_ against the initiative; it is the 14th ofJuly, 1789, attacked through the 20th of March, 1815; it is themonarchies clearing the decks in opposition to the indomitable Frenchrioting. The final extinction of that vast people which had been ineruption for twenty-six years—such was the dream. The solidarity of theBrunswicks, the Nassaus, the Romanoffs, the Hohenzollerns, theHapsburgs with the Bourbons. Waterloo bears divine right on itscrupper. It is true, that the Empire having been despotic, the kingdomby the natural reaction of things, was forced to be liberal, and that aconstitutional order was the unwilling result of Waterloo, to the greatregret of the conquerors. It is because revolution cannot be reallyconquered, and that being providential and absolutely fatal, it isalways cropping up afresh: before Waterloo, in Bonaparte overthrowingthe old thrones; after Waterloo, in Louis XVIII. granting andconforming to the charter. Bonaparte places a postilion on the throneof Naples, and a sergeant on the throne of Sweden, employing inequalityto demonstrate equality; Louis XVIII. at Saint-Ouen countersigns thedeclaration of the rights of man. If you wish to gain an idea of whatrevolution is, call it Progress; and if you wish to acquire an idea ofthe nature of progress, call it To-morrow. To-morrow fulfils its workirresistibly, and it is already fulfilling it to-day. It always reachesits goal strangely. It employs Wellington to make of Foy, who was onlya soldier, an orator. Foy falls at Hougomont and rises again in thetribune. Thus does progress proceed. There is no such thing as a badtool for that workman. It does not become disconcerted, but adjusts toits divine work the man who has bestridden the Alps, and the good oldtottering invalid of Father Élysée. It makes use of the gouty man aswell as of the conqueror; of the conqueror without, of the gouty manwithin. Waterloo, by cutting short the demolition of European thronesby the sword, had no other effect than to cause the revolutionary workto be continued in another direction. The slashers have finished; itwas the turn of the thinkers. The century that Waterloo was intended toarrest has pursued its march. That sinister victory was vanquished byliberty.
In short, and incontestably, that which triumphed at Waterloo; thatwhich smiled in Wellington’s rear; that which brought him all themarshals’ staffs of Europe, including, it is said, the staff of amarshal of France; that which joyously trundled the barrows full ofbones to erect the knoll of the lion; that which triumphantly inscribedon that pedestal the date “_June_ 18, 1815”; that which encouragedBlücher, as he put the flying army to the sword; that which, from theheights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean, hovered over France as overits prey, was the counter-revolution. It was the counter-revolutionwhich murmured that infamous word “dismemberment.” On arriving inParis, it beheld the crater close at hand; it felt those ashes whichscorched its feet, and it changed its mind; it returned to the stammerof a charter.
Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo. Ofintentional liberty there is none. The counter-revolution wasinvoluntarily liberal, in the same manner as, by a correspondingphenomenon, Napoleon was involuntarily revolutionary. On the 18th ofJune, 1815, the mounted Robespierre was hurled from his saddle.



CHAPTER XVIII—A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT

End of the dictatorship. A whole European system crumbled away.
The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world asit expired. Again we behold the abyss, as in the days of thebarbarians; only the barbarism of 1815, which must be called by its petname of the counter-revolution, was not long breathed, soon fell topanting, and halted short. The Empire was bewept,—let us acknowledgethe fact,—and bewept by heroic eyes. If glory lies in the swordconverted into a sceptre, the Empire had been glory in person. It haddiffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can give—a sombrelight. We will say more; an obscure light. Compared to the truedaylight, it is night. This disappearance of night produces the effectof an eclipse.
Louis XVIII. re-entered Paris. The circling dances of the 8th of Julyeffaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March. The Corsican became theantithesis of the Bearnese. The flag on the dome of the Tuileries waswhite. The exile reigned. Hartwell’s pine table took its place in frontof the fleur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV. Bouvines and Fontenoywere mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding day,Austerlitz having become antiquated. The altar and the thronefraternized majestically. One of the most undisputed forms of thehealth of society in the nineteenth century was established overFrance, and over the continent. Europe adopted the white cockade.Trestaillon was celebrated. The device _non pluribus impar_ reappearedon the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks onthe Quai d’Orsay. Where there had been an Imperial Guard, there was nowa red house. The Arc du Carrousel, all laden with badly bornevictories, thrown out of its element among these novelties, a littleashamed, it may be, of Marengo and Arcola, extricated itself from itspredicament with the statue of the Duc d’Angoulême. The cemetery of theMadeleine, a terrible pauper’s grave in 1793, was covered with jasperand marble, since the bones of Louis XVI. and Marie Antoinette lay inthat dust.
In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth,recalling the fact that the Duc d’Enghien had perished in the verymonth when Napoleon was crowned. Pope Pius VII., who had performed thecoronation very near this death, tranquilly bestowed his blessing onthe fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation. At Schoenbrunn therewas a little shadow, aged four, whom it was seditious to call the Kingof Rome. And these things took place, and the kings resumed theirthrones, and the master of Europe was put in a cage, and the old regimebecame the new regime, and all the shadows and all the light of theearth changed place, because, on the afternoon of a certain summer’sday, a shepherd said to a Prussian in the forest, “Go this way, and notthat!”

This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April. Ancient unhealthy andpoisonous realities were covered with new appearances. A lie wedded1789; the right divine was masked under a charter; fictions becameconstitutional; prejudices, superstitions and mental reservations, withArticle 14 in the heart, were varnished over with liberalism. It wasthe serpent’s change of skin.
Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon. Under thisreign of splendid matter, the ideal had received the strange name ofideology! It is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the futureinto derision. The populace, however, that food for cannon which is sofond of the cannoneer, sought him with its glance. Where is he? What ishe doing? “Napoleon is dead,” said a passer-by to a veteran of Marengoand Waterloo. “He dead!” cried the soldier; “you don’t know him.”Imagination distrusted this man, even when overthrown. The depths ofEurope were full of darkness after Waterloo. Something enormousremained long empty through Napoleon’s disappearance.
The kings placed themselves in this void. Ancient Europe profited by itto undertake reforms. There was a Holy Alliance; _Belle-Alliance_,Beautiful Alliance, the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance.
In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed, thefeatures of a new France were sketched out. The future, which theEmperor had rallied, made its entry. On its brow it bore the star,Liberty. The glowing eyes of all young generations were turned on it.Singular fact! people were, at one and the same time, in love with thefuture, Liberty, and the past, Napoleon. Defeat had rendered thevanquished greater. Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than Napoleonerect. Those who had triumphed were alarmed. England had him guarded byHudson Lowe, and France had him watched by Montchenu. His folded armsbecame a source of uneasiness to thrones. Alexander called him “mysleeplessness.” This terror was the result of the quantity ofrevolution which was contained in him. That is what explains andexcuses Bonapartist liberalism. This phantom caused the old world totremble. The kings reigned, but ill at their ease, with the rock ofSaint Helena on the horizon.
While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood, thesixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo were quietlyrotting, and something of their peace was shed abroad over the world.The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815, and Europe calledthis the Restoration.
This is what Waterloo was.
But what matters it to the Infinite? all that tempest, all that cloud,that war, then that peace? All that darkness did not trouble for amoment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping fromone blade of grass to another equals the eagle soaring from belfry tobelfry on the towers of Notre Dame.



CHAPTER XIX—THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT

Let us return—it is a necessity in this book—to that fatalbattle-field.
On the 18th of June the moon was full. Its light favored Blücher’sferocious pursuit, betrayed the traces of the fugitives, delivered upthat disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry, and aided themassacre. Such tragic favors of the night do occur sometimes duringcatastrophes.
After the last cannon-shot had been fired, the plain of Mont-Saint-Jeanremained deserted.
The English occupied the encampment of the French; it is the usual signof victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished. They establishedtheir bivouac beyond Rossomme. The Prussians, let loose on theretreating rout, pushed forward. Wellington went to the village ofWaterloo to draw up his report to Lord Bathurst.
If ever the _sic vos non vobis_ was applicable, it certainly is to thatvillage of Waterloo. Waterloo took no part, and lay half a league fromthe scene of action. Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded, Hougomont wasburned, La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault, Papelotte was burned,Plancenoit was burned, La Belle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the twoconquerors; these names are hardly known, and Waterloo, which workednot in the battle, bears off all the honor.
We are not of the number of those who flatter war; when the occasionpresents itself, we tell the truth about it. War has frightful beautieswhich we have not concealed; it has also, we acknowledge, some hideousfeatures. One of the most surprising is the prompt stripping of thebodies of the dead after the victory. The dawn which follows a battlealways rises on naked corpses.
Who does this? Who thus soils the triumph? What hideous, furtive handis that which is slipped into the pocket of victory? What pickpocketsare they who ply their trade in the rear of glory? Somephilosophers—Voltaire among the number—affirm that it is preciselythose persons who have made the glory. It is the same men, they say;there is no relief corps; those who are erect pillage those who areprone on the earth. The hero of the day is the vampire of the night.One has assuredly the right, after all, to strip a corpse a bit whenone is the author of that corpse. For our own part, we do not think so;it seems to us impossible that the same hand should pluck laurels andpurloin the shoes from a dead man.
One thing is certain, which is, that generally after conquerors followthieves. But let us leave the soldier, especially the contemporarysoldier, out of the question.
Every army has a rear-guard, and it is that which must be blamed.Bat-like creatures, half brigands and lackeys; all the sorts ofvespertillos that that twilight called war engenders; wearers ofuniforms, who take no part in the fighting; pretended invalids;formidable limpers; interloping sutlers, trotting along in littlecarts, sometimes accompanied by their wives, and stealing things whichthey sell again; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers;soldiers’ servants; marauders; armies on the march in days gone by,—weare not speaking of the present,—dragged all this behind them, so thatin the special language they are called “stragglers.” No army, nonation, was responsible for those beings; they spoke Italian andfollowed the Germans, then spoke French and followed the English. Itwas by one of these wretches, a Spanish straggler who spoke French,that the Marquis of Fervacques, deceived by his Picard jargon, andtaking him for one of our own men, was traitorously slain and robbed onthe battle-field itself, in the course of the night which followed thevictory of Cerisoles. The rascal sprang from this marauding. Thedetestable maxim, _Live on the enemy!_ produced this leprosy, which astrict discipline alone could heal. There are reputations which aredeceptive; one does not always know why certain generals, great inother directions, have been so popular. Turenne was adored by hissoldiers because he tolerated pillage; evil permitted constitutes partof goodness. Turenne was so good that he allowed the Palatinate to bedelivered over to fire and blood. The marauders in the train of an armywere more or less in number, according as the chief was more or lesssevere. Hoche and Marceau had no stragglers; Wellington had few, and wedo him the justice to mention it.
Nevertheless, on the night from the 18th to the 19th of June, the deadwere robbed. Wellington was rigid; he gave orders that any one caughtin the act should be shot; but rapine is tenacious. The marauders stolein one corner of the battlefield while others were being shot inanother.
The moon was sinister over this plain.
Towards midnight, a man was prowling about, or rather, climbing in thedirection of the hollow road of Ohain. To all appearance he was one ofthose whom we have just described,—neither English nor French, neitherpeasant nor soldier, less a man than a ghoul attracted by the scent ofthe dead bodies having theft for his victory, and come to rifleWaterloo. He was clad in a blouse that was something like a great coat;he was uneasy and audacious; he walked forwards and gazed behind him.Who was this man? The night probably knew more of him than the day. Hehad no sack, but evidently he had large pockets under his coat. Fromtime to time he halted, scrutinized the plain around him as though tosee whether he were observed, bent over abruptly, disturbed somethingsilent and motionless on the ground, then rose and fled. His slidingmotion, his attitudes, his mysterious and rapid gestures, caused him toresemble those twilight larvæ which haunt ruins, and which ancientNorman legends call the Alleurs.
Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among themarshes.
A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have perceivedat some distance a sort of little sutler’s wagon with a fluted wickerhood, harnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass acrossits bit as it halted, hidden, as it were, behind the hovel whichadjoins the highway to Nivelles, at the angle of the road fromMont-Saint-Jean to Braine l’Alleud; and in the wagon, a sort of womanseated on coffers and packages. Perhaps there was some connectionbetween that wagon and that prowler.
The darkness was serene. Not a cloud in the zenith. What matters it ifthe earth be red! the moon remains white; these are the indifferencesof the sky. In the fields, branches of trees broken by grape-shot, butnot fallen, upheld by their bark, swayed gently in the breeze of night.A breath, almost a respiration, moved the shrubbery. Quivers whichresembled the departure of souls ran through the grass.
In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general roundsof the English camp were audible.
Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn, forming, one in thewest, the other in the east, two great flames which were joined by thecordon of bivouac fires of the English, like a necklace of rubies withtwo carbuncles at the extremities, as they extended in an immensesemicircle over the hills along the horizon.
We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain. The heart isterrified at the thought of what that death must have been to so manybrave men.
If there is anything terrible, if there exists a reality whichsurpasses dreams, it is this: to live, to see the sun; to be in fullpossession of virile force; to possess health and joy; to laughvaliantly; to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front ofone; to feel in one’s breast lungs which breathe, a heart which beats,a will which reasons; to speak, think, hope, love; to have a mother, tohave a wife, to have children; to have the light—and all at once, inthe space of a shout, in less than a minute, to sink into an abyss; tofall, to roll, to crush, to be crushed; to see ears of wheat, flowers,leaves, branches; not to be able to catch hold of anything; to feelone’s sword useless, men beneath one, horses on top of one; to strugglein vain, since one’s bones have been broken by some kick in thedarkness; to feel a heel which makes one’s eyes start from theirsockets; to bite horses’ shoes in one’s rage; to stifle, to yell, towrithe; to be beneath, and to say to one’s self, “But just a littlewhile ago I was a living man!”

There, where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle, allwas silence now. The edges of the hollow road were encumbered withhorses and riders, inextricably heaped up. Terrible entanglement! Therewas no longer any slope, for the corpses had levelled the road with theplain, and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel of barley. A heapof dead bodies in the upper part, a river of blood in the lowerpart—such was that road on the evening of the 18th of June, 1815. Theblood ran even to the Nivelles highway, and there overflowed in a largepool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way, at a spotwhich is still pointed out.
It will be remembered that it was at the opposite point, in thedirection of the Genappe road, that the destruction of the cuirassiershad taken place. The thickness of the layer of bodies was proportionedto the depth of the hollow road. Towards the middle, at the point whereit became level, where Delort’s division had passed, the layer ofcorpses was thinner.
The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader was goingin that direction. He was searching that vast tomb. He gazed about. Hepassed the dead in some sort of hideous review. He walked with his feetin the blood.
All at once he paused.
A few paces in front of him, in the hollow road, at the point where thepile of dead came to an end, an open hand, illumined by the moon,projected from beneath that heap of men. That hand had on its fingersomething sparkling, which was a ring of gold.
The man bent over, remained in a crouching attitude for a moment, andwhen he rose there was no longer a ring on the hand.
He did not precisely rise; he remained in a stooping and frightenedattitude, with his back turned to the heap of dead, scanning thehorizon on his knees, with the whole upper portion of his bodysupported on his two forefingers, which rested on the earth, and hishead peering above the edge of the hollow road. The jackal’s four pawssuit some actions.
Then coming to a decision, he rose to his feet.
At that moment, he gave a terrible start. He felt some one clutch himfrom behind.
He wheeled round; it was the open hand, which had closed, and hadseized the skirt of his coat.
An honest man would have been terrified; this man burst into a laugh.
“Come,” said he, “it’s only a dead body. I prefer a spook to agendarme.”

But the hand weakened and released him. Effort is quickly exhausted inthe grave.
“Well now,” said the prowler, “is that dead fellow alive? Let’s see.”

He bent down again, fumbled among the heap, pushed aside everythingthat was in his way, seized the hand, grasped the arm, freed the head,pulled out the body, and a few moments later he was dragging thelifeless, or at least the unconscious, man, through the shadows ofhollow road. He was a cuirassier, an officer, and even an officer ofconsiderable rank; a large gold epaulette peeped from beneath thecuirass; this officer no longer possessed a helmet. A furious sword-cuthad scarred his face, where nothing was discernible but blood.
However, he did not appear to have any broken limbs, and, by some happychance, if that word is permissible here, the dead had been vaultedabove him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed. Hiseyes were still closed.
On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor.
The prowler tore off this cross, which disappeared into one of thegulfs which he had beneath his great coat.
Then he felt of the officer’s fob, discovered a watch there, and tookpossession of it. Next he searched his waistcoat, found a purse andpocketed it.
When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administeringto this dying man, the officer opened his eyes.
“Thanks,” he said feebly.
The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him,the freshness of the night, the air which he could inhale freely, hadroused him from his lethargy.
The prowler made no reply. He raised his head. A sound of footsteps wasaudible in the plain; some patrol was probably approaching.
The officer murmured, for the death agony was still in his voice:—
“Who won the battle?”

“The English,” answered the prowler.
The officer went on:—
“Look in my pockets; you will find a watch and a purse. Take them.”

It was already done.
The prowler executed the required feint, and said:—
“There is nothing there.”

“I have been robbed,” said the officer; “I am sorry for that. Youshould have had them.”

The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct.
“Some one is coming,” said the prowler, with the movement of a man whois taking his departure.
The officer raised his arm feebly, and detained him.
“You have saved my life. Who are you?”

The prowler answered rapidly, and in a low voice:—
“Like yourself, I belonged to the French army. I must leave you. Ifthey were to catch me, they would shoot me. I have saved your life. Nowget out of the scrape yourself.”

“What is your rank?”

“Sergeant.”

“What is your name?”

“Thénardier.”

“I shall not forget that name,” said the officer; “and do you remembermine. My name is Pontmercy.”




BOOK SECOND—THE SHIP ORION



CHAPTER I—NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430

Jean Valjean had been recaptured.
The reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over the saddetails. We will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphspublished by the journals of that day, a few months after thesurprising events which had taken place at M. sur M.
These articles are rather summary. It must be remembered, that at thatepoch the _Gazette des Tribunaux_ was not yet in existence.
We borrow the first from the _Drapeau Blanc_. It bears the date of July25, 1823.
An arrondissement of the Pas de Calais has just been the theatre of anevent quite out of the ordinary course. A man, who was a stranger inthe Department, and who bore the name of M. Madeleine, had, thanks tothe new methods, resuscitated some years ago an ancient local industry,the manufacture of jet and of black glass trinkets. He had made hisfortune in the business, and that of the arrondissement as well, wewill admit. He had been appointed mayor, in recognition of hisservices. The police discovered that M. Madeleine was no other than anex-convict who had broken his ban, condemned in 1796 for theft, andnamed Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison. Itappears that previous to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawingfrom the hands of M. Laffitte, a sum of over half a million which hehad lodged there, and which he had, moreover, and by perfectlylegitimate means, acquired in his business. No one has been able todiscover where Jean Valjean has concealed this money since his returnto prison at Toulon.
The second article, which enters a little more into detail, is anextract from the _Journal de Paris_, of the same date.
A former convict, who had been liberated, named Jean Valjean, has justappeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var, under circumstancescalculated to attract attention. This wretch had succeeded in escapingthe vigilance of the police, he had changed his name, and had succeededin getting himself appointed mayor of one of our small northern towns;in this town he had established a considerable commerce. He has at lastbeen unmasked and arrested, thanks to the indefatigable zeal of thepublic prosecutor. He had for his concubine a woman of the town, whodied of a shock at the moment of his arrest. This scoundrel, who isendowed with Herculean strength, found means to escape; but three orfour days after his flight the police laid their hands on him oncemore, in Paris itself, at the very moment when he was entering one ofthose little vehicles which run between the capital and the village ofMontfermeil (Seine-et-Oise). He is said to have profited by thisinterval of three or four days of liberty, to withdraw a considerablesum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers. This sum has beenestimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs. If the indictment isto be trusted, he has hidden it in some place known to himself alone,and it has not been possible to lay hands on it. However that may be,the said Jean Valjean has just been brought before the Assizes of theDepartment of the Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied withviolence, about eight years ago, on the person of one of those honestchildren who, as the patriarch of Ferney has said, in immortal verse,
“. . . Arrive from Savoy every year,And who, with gentle hands, do clearThose long canals choked up with soot.”

This bandit refused to defend himself. It was proved by the skilful andeloquent representative of the public prosecutor, that the theft wascommitted in complicity with others, and that Jean Valjean was a memberof a band of robbers in the south. Jean Valjean was pronounced guiltyand was condemned to the death penalty in consequence. This criminalrefused to lodge an appeal. The king, in his inexhaustible clemency,has deigned to commute his penalty to that of penal servitude for life.Jean Valjean was immediately taken to the prison at Toulon.
The reader has not forgotten that Jean Valjean had religious habits atM. sur M. Some papers, among others the _Constitutional_, presentedthis commutation as a triumph of the priestly party.
Jean Valjean changed his number in the galleys. He was called 9,430.
However, and we will mention it at once in order that we may not beobliged to recur to the subject, the prosperity of M. sur M. vanishedwith M. Madeleine; all that he had foreseen during his night of feverand hesitation was realized; lacking him, there actually was _a soullacking_. After this fall, there took place at M. sur M. thategotistical division of great existences which have fallen, that fataldismemberment of flourishing things which is accomplished every day,obscurely, in the human community, and which history has noted onlyonce, because it occurred after the death of Alexander. Lieutenants arecrowned kings; superintendents improvise manufacturers out ofthemselves. Envious rivalries arose. M. Madeleine’s vast workshops wereshut; his buildings fell to ruin, his workmen were scattered. Some ofthem quitted the country, others abandoned the trade. Thenceforth,everything was done on a small scale, instead of on a grand scale; forlucre instead of the general good. There was no longer a centre;everywhere there was competition and animosity. M. Madeleine hadreigned over all and directed all. No sooner had he fallen, than eachpulled things to himself; the spirit of combat succeeded to the spiritof organization, bitterness to cordiality, hatred of one another to thebenevolence of the founder towards all; the threads which M. Madeleinehad set were tangled and broken, the methods were adulterated, theproducts were debased, confidence was killed; the market diminished,for lack of orders; salaries were reduced, the workshops stood still,bankruptcy arrived. And then there was nothing more for the poor. Allhad vanished.
The state itself perceived that some one had been crushed somewhere.Less than four years after the judgment of the Court of Assizesestablishing the identity of Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine, for thebenefit of the galleys, the cost of collecting taxes had doubled in thearrondissement of M. sur M.; and M. de Villèle called attention to thefact in the rostrum, in the month of February, 1827.



CHAPTER II—IN WHICH THE READER WILL PERUSE TWO VERSES, WHICH ARE OF THEDEVIL’S COMPOSITION, POSSIBLY

Before proceeding further, it will be to the purpose to narrate in somedetail, a singular occurrence which took place at about the same epoch,in Montfermeil, and which is not lacking in coincidence with certainconjectures of the indictment.
There exists in the region of Montfermeil a very ancient superstition,which is all the more curious and all the more precious, because apopular superstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe inSiberia. We are among those who respect everything which is in thenature of a rare plant. Here, then, is the superstition of Montfermeil:it is thought that the devil, from time immemorial, has selected theforest as a hiding-place for his treasures. Goodwives affirm that it isno rarity to encounter at nightfall, in secluded nooks of the forest, ablack man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper, wearing woodenshoes, clad in trousers and a blouse of linen, and recognizable by thefact, that, instead of a cap or hat, he has two immense horns on hishead. This ought, in fact, to render him recognizable. This man ishabitually engaged in digging a hole. There are three ways of profitingby such an encounter. The first is to approach the man and speak tohim. Then it is seen that the man is simply a peasant, that he appearsblack because it is nightfall; that he is not digging any holewhatever, but is cutting grass for his cows, and that what had beentaken for horns is nothing but a dung-fork which he is carrying on hisback, and whose teeth, thanks to the perspective of evening, seemed tospring from his head. The man returns home and dies within the week.The second way is to watch him, to wait until he has dug his hole,until he has filled it and has gone away; then to run with great speedto the trench, to open it once more and to seize the “treasure” whichthe black man has necessarily placed there. In this case one dieswithin the month. Finally, the last method is not to speak to the blackman, not to look at him, and to flee at the best speed of one’s legs.One then dies within the year.
As all three methods are attended with their special inconveniences,the second, which at all events, presents some advantages, among othersthat of possessing a treasure, if only for a month, is the one mostgenerally adopted. So bold men, who are tempted by every chance, havequite frequently, as we are assured, opened the holes excavated by theblack man, and tried to rob the devil. The success of the operationappears to be but moderate. At least, if the tradition is to bebelieved, and in particular the two enigmatical lines in barbarousLatin, which an evil Norman monk, a bit of a sorcerer, named Tryphonhas left on this subject. This Tryphon is buried at the Abbey ofSaint-Georges de Bocherville, near Rouen, and toads spawn on his grave.
Accordingly, enormous efforts are made. Such trenches are ordinarilyextremely deep; a man sweats, digs, toils all night—for it must be doneat night; he wets his shirt, burns out his candle, breaks his mattock,and when he arrives at the bottom of the hole, when he lays his hand onthe “treasure,” what does he find? What is the devil’s treasure? A sou,sometimes a crown-piece, a stone, a skeleton, a bleeding body,sometimes a spectre folded in four like a sheet of paper in aportfolio, sometimes nothing. This is what Tryphon’s verses seem toannounce to the indiscreet and curious:—
“Fodit, et in fossa thesauros condit opaca,As, nummas, lapides, cadaver, simulacra, nihilque.”

It seems that in our day there is sometimes found a powder-horn withbullets, sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn, which hasevidently served the devil. Tryphon does not record these two finds,since Tryphon lived in the twelfth century, and since the devil doesnot appear to have had the wit to invent powder before Roger Bacon’stime, and cards before the time of Charles VI.
Moreover, if one plays at cards, one is sure to lose all that onepossesses! and as for the powder in the horn, it possesses the propertyof making your gun burst in your face.
Now, a very short time after the epoch when it seemed to theprosecuting attorney that the liberated convict Jean Valjean during hisflight of several days had been prowling around Montfermeil, it wasremarked in that village that a certain old road-laborer, namedBoulatruelle, had “peculiar ways” in the forest. People thereaboutsthought they knew that this Boulatruelle had been in the galleys. Hewas subjected to certain police supervision, and, as he could find worknowhere, the administration employed him at reduced rates as aroad-mender on the crossroad from Gagny to Lagny.
This Boulatruelle was a man who was viewed with disfavor by theinhabitants of the district as too respectful, too humble, too promptin removing his cap to every one, and trembling and smiling in thepresence of the gendarmes,—probably affiliated to robber bands, theysaid; suspected of lying in ambush at verge of copses at nightfall. Theonly thing in his favor was that he was a drunkard.
This is what people thought they had noticed:—
Of late, Boulatruelle had taken to quitting his task of stone-breakingand care of the road at a very early hour, and to betaking himself tothe forest with his pickaxe. He was encountered towards evening in themost deserted clearings, in the wildest thickets; and he had theappearance of being in search of something, and sometimes he wasdigging holes. The goodwives who passed took him at first forBeelzebub; then they recognized Boulatruelle, and were not in the leastreassured thereby. These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle alively displeasure. It was evident that he sought to hide, and thatthere was some mystery in what he was doing.
It was said in the village: “It is clear that the devil has appeared.Boulatruelle has seen him, and is on the search. In sooth, he iscunning enough to pocket Lucifer’s hoard.”

The Voltairians added, “Will Boulatruelle catch the devil, or will thedevil catch Boulatruelle?” The old women made a great many signs of thecross.
In the meantime, Boulatruelle’s manœuvres in the forest ceased; and heresumed his regular occupation of roadmending; and people gossiped ofsomething else.
Some persons, however, were still curious, surmising that in all thisthere was probably no fabulous treasure of the legends, but some finewindfall of a more serious and palpable sort than the devil’sbank-bills, and that the road-mender had half discovered the secret.The most “puzzled” were the schoolmaster and Thénardier, the proprietorof the tavern, who was everybody’s friend, and had not disdained toally himself with Boulatruelle.
“He has been in the galleys,” said Thénardier. “Eh! Good God! no oneknows who has been there or will be there.”

One evening the schoolmaster affirmed that in former times the lawwould have instituted an inquiry as to what Boulatruelle did in theforest, and that the latter would have been forced to speak, and thathe would have been put to the torture in case of need, and thatBoulatruelle would not have resisted the water test, for example. “Letus put him to the wine test,” said Thénardier.
They made an effort, and got the old road-mender to drinking.Boulatruelle drank an enormous amount, but said very little. Hecombined with admirable art, and in masterly proportions, the thirst ofa gormandizer with the discretion of a judge. Nevertheless, by dint ofreturning to the charge and of comparing and putting together the fewobscure words which he did allow to escape him, this is what Thénardierand the schoolmaster imagined that they had made out:—
One morning, when Boulatruelle was on his way to his work, at daybreak,he had been surprised to see, at a nook of the forest in theunderbrush, a shovel and a pickaxe, _concealed, as one might say_.
However, he might have supposed that they were probably the shovel andpick of Father Six-Fours, the water-carrier, and would have thought nomore about it. But, on the evening of that day, he saw, without beingseen himself, as he was hidden by a large tree, “a person who did notbelong in those parts, and whom he, Boulatruelle, knew well,” directinghis steps towards the densest part of the wood. Translation byThénardier: _A comrade of the galleys_. Boulatruelle obstinatelyrefused to reveal his name. This person carried a package—somethingsquare, like a large box or a small trunk. Surprise on the part ofBoulatruelle. However, it was only after the expiration of seven oreight minutes that the idea of following that “person” had occurred tohim. But it was too late; the person was already in the thicket, nighthad descended, and Boulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him.Then he had adopted the course of watching for him at the edge of thewoods. “It was moonlight.” Two or three hours later, Boulatruelle hadseen this person emerge from the brushwood, carrying no longer thecoffer, but a shovel and pick. Boulatruelle had allowed the person topass, and had not dreamed of accosting him, because he said to himselfthat the other man was three times as strong as he was, and armed witha pickaxe, and that he would probably knock him over the head onrecognizing him, and on perceiving that he was recognized. Touchingeffusion of two old comrades on meeting again. But the shovel and pickhad served as a ray of light to Boulatruelle; he had hastened to thethicket in the morning, and had found neither shovel nor pick. Fromthis he had drawn the inference that this person, once in the forest,had dug a hole with his pick, buried the coffer, and reclosed the holewith his shovel. Now, the coffer was too small to contain a body;therefore it contained money. Hence his researches. Boulatruelle hadexplored, sounded, searched the entire forest and the thicket, and haddug wherever the earth appeared to him to have been recently turned up.In vain.
He had “ferreted out” nothing. No one in Montfermeil thought any moreabout it. There were only a few brave gossips, who said, “You may becertain that the mender on the Gagny road did not take all that troublefor nothing; he was sure that the devil had come.”




CHAPTER III—THE ANKLE-CHAIN MUST HAVE UNDERGONE A CERTAIN PREPARATORYMANIPULATION TO BE THUS BROKEN WITH A BLOW FROM A HAMMER

Towards the end of October, in that same year, 1823, the inhabitants ofToulon beheld the entry into their port, after heavy weather, and forthe purpose of repairing some damages, of the ship _Orion_, which wasemployed later at Brest as a school-ship, and which then formed a partof the Mediterranean squadron.
This vessel, battered as it was,—for the sea had handled itroughly,—produced a fine effect as it entered the roads. It flew somecolors which procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns,which it returned, shot for shot; total, twenty-two. It has beencalculated that what with salvos, royal and military politenesses,courteous exchanges of uproar, signals of etiquette, formalities ofroadsteads and citadels, sunrises and sunsets, saluted every day by allfortresses and all ships of war, openings and closings of ports, etc.,the civilized world, discharged all over the earth, in the course offour and twenty hours, one hundred and fifty thousand useless shots. Atsix francs the shot, that comes to nine hundred thousand francs a day,three hundred millions a year, which vanish in smoke. This is a meredetail. All this time the poor were dying of hunger.
The year 1823 was what the Restoration called “the epoch of the Spanishwar.”

This war contained many events in one, and a quantity of peculiarities.A grand family affair for the house of Bourbon; the branch of Francesuccoring and protecting the branch of Madrid, that is to say,performing an act devolving on the elder; an apparent return to ournational traditions, complicated by servitude and by subjection to thecabinets of the North; M. le Duc d’Angoulême, surnamed by the liberalsheets _the hero of Andujar_, compressing in a triumphal attitude thatwas somewhat contradicted by his peaceable air, the ancient and verypowerful terrorism of the Holy Office at variance with the chimericalterrorism of the liberals; the _sansculottes_ resuscitated, to thegreat terror of dowagers, under the name of _descamisados_; monarchyopposing an obstacle to progress described as anarchy; the theories of’89 roughly interrupted in the sap; a European halt, called to theFrench idea, which was making the tour of the world; beside the son ofFrance as generalissimo, the Prince de Carignan, afterwards CharlesAlbert, enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against people as avolunteer, with grenadier epaulets of red worsted; the soldiers of theEmpire setting out on a fresh campaign, but aged, saddened, after eightyears of repose, and under the white cockade; the tricolored standardwaved abroad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen, as the white standardhad been thirty years earlier at Coblentz; monks mingled with ourtroops; the spirit of liberty and of novelty brought to its senses bybayonets; principles slaughtered by cannonades; France undoing by herarms that which she had done by her mind; in addition to this, hostileleaders sold, soldiers hesitating, cities besieged by millions; nomilitary perils, and yet possible explosions, as in every mine which issurprised and invaded; but little bloodshed, little honor won, shamefor some, glory for no one. Such was this war, made by the princesdescended from Louis XIV., and conducted by generals who had been underNapoleon. Its sad fate was to recall neither the grand war nor grandpolitics.
Some feats of arms were serious; the taking of the Trocadéro, amongothers, was a fine military action; but after all, we repeat, thetrumpets of this war give back a cracked sound, the whole effect wassuspicious; history approves of France for making a difficulty aboutaccepting this false triumph. It seemed evident that certain Spanishofficers charged with resistance yielded too easily; the idea ofcorruption was connected with the victory; it appears as thoughgenerals and not battles had been won, and the conquering soldierreturned humiliated. A debasing war, in short, in which the _Bank ofFrance_ could be read in the folds of the flag.
Soldiers of the war of 1808, on whom Saragossa had fallen in formidableruin, frowned in 1823 at the easy surrender of citadels, and began toregret Palafox. It is the nature of France to prefer to haveRostopchine rather than Ballesteros in front of her.
From a still more serious point of view, and one which it is alsoproper to insist upon here, this war, which wounded the military spiritof France, enraged the democratic spirit. It was an enterprise ofenthralment. In that campaign, the object of the French soldier, theson of democracy, was the conquest of a yoke for others. A hideouscontradiction. France is made to arouse the soul of nations, not tostifle it. All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are the FrenchRevolution: liberty darts rays from France. That is a solar fact. Blindis he who will not see! It was Bonaparte who said it.
The war of 1823, an outrage on the generous Spanish nation, was then,at the same time, an outrage on the French Revolution. It was Francewho committed this monstrous violence; by foul means, for, with theexception of wars of liberation, everything that armies do is by foulmeans. The words _passive obedience_ indicate this. An army is astrange masterpiece of combination where force results from an enormoussum of impotence. Thus is war, made by humanity against humanity,despite humanity, explained.
As for the Bourbons, the war of 1823 was fatal to them. They took itfor a success. They did not perceive the danger that lies in having anidea slain to order. They went astray, in their innocence, to such adegree that they introduced the immense enfeeblement of a crime intotheir establishment as an element of strength. The spirit of the ambushentered into their politics. 1830 had its germ in 1823. The Spanishcampaign became in their counsels an argument for force and foradventures by right Divine. France, having re-established _el reynetto_ in Spain, might well have re-established the absolute king athome. They fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience of thesoldier for the consent of the nation. Such confidence is the ruin ofthrones. It is not permitted to fall asleep, either in the shadow of amachineel tree, nor in the shadow of an army.
Let us return to the ship _Orion_.
During the operations of the army commanded by the princegeneralissimo, a squadron had been cruising in the Mediterranean. Wehave just stated that the _Orion_ belonged to this fleet, and thataccidents of the sea had brought it into port at Toulon.
The presence of a vessel of war in a port has something about it whichattracts and engages a crowd. It is because it is great, and the crowdloves what is great.
A ship of the line is one of the most magnificent combinations of thegenius of man with the powers of nature.
A ship of the line is composed, at the same time, of the heaviest andthe lightest of possible matter, for it deals at one and the same timewith three forms of substance,—solid, liquid, and fluid,—and it must dobattle with all three. It has eleven claws of iron with which to seizethe granite on the bottom of the sea, and more wings and more antennæthan winged insects, to catch the wind in the clouds. Its breath poursout through its hundred and twenty cannons as through enormoustrumpets, and replies proudly to the thunder. The ocean seeks to leadit astray in the alarming sameness of its billows, but the vessel hasits soul, its compass, which counsels it and always shows it the north.In the blackest nights, its lanterns supply the place of the stars.Thus, against the wind, it has its cordage and its canvas; against thewater, wood; against the rocks, its iron, brass, and lead; against theshadows, its light; against immensity, a needle.
If one wishes to form an idea of all those gigantic proportions which,taken as a whole, constitute the ship of the line, one has only toenter one of the six-story covered construction stocks, in the ports ofBrest or Toulon. The vessels in process of construction are under abell-glass there, as it were. This colossal beam is a yard; that greatcolumn of wood which stretches out on the earth as far as the eye canreach is the main-mast. Taking it from its root in the stocks to itstip in the clouds, it is sixty fathoms long, and its diameter at itsbase is three feet. The English main-mast rises to a height of twohundred and seventeen feet above the water-line. The navy of ourfathers employed cables, ours employs chains. The simple pile of chainson a ship of a hundred guns is four feet high, twenty feet in breadth,and eight feet in depth. And how much wood is required to make thisship? Three thousand cubic metres. It is a floating forest.
And moreover, let this be borne in mind, it is only a question here ofthe military vessel of forty years ago, of the simple sailing-vessel;steam, then in its infancy, has since added new miracles to thatprodigy which is called a war vessel. At the present time, for example,the mixed vessel with a screw is a surprising machine, propelled bythree thousand square metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousandfive hundred horse-power.
Not to mention these new marvels, the ancient vessel of ChristopherColumbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man. It is asinexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales; it stores up thewind in its sails, it is precise in the immense vagueness of thebillows, it floats, and it reigns.
There comes an hour, nevertheless, when the gale breaks that sixty-footyard like a straw, when the wind bends that mast four hundred feettall, when that anchor, which weighs tens of thousands, is twisted inthe jaws of the waves like a fisherman’s hook in the jaws of a pike,when those monstrous cannons utter plaintive and futile roars, whichthe hurricane bears forth into the void and into night, when all thatpower and all that majesty are engulfed in a power and majesty whichare superior.
Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate in an immensefeebleness it affords men food for thought. Hence in the ports curiouspeople abound around these marvellous machines of war and ofnavigation, without being able to explain perfectly to themselves why.Every day, accordingly, from morning until night, the quays, sluices,and the jetties of the port of Toulon were covered with a multitude ofidlers and loungers, as they say in Paris, whose business consisted instaring at the _Orion_.
The _Orion_ was a ship that had been ailing for a long time; in thecourse of its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles had collectedon its keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half its speed; it hadgone into the dry dock the year before this, in order to have thebarnacles scraped off, then it had put to sea again; but this cleaninghad affected the bolts of the keel: in the neighborhood of the BalearicIsles the sides had been strained and had opened; and, as the platingin those days was not of sheet iron, the vessel had sprung a leak. Aviolent equinoctial gale had come up, which had first staved in agrating and a porthole on the larboard side, and damaged theforetop-gallant-shrouds; in consequence of these injuries, the _Orion_had run back to Toulon.
It anchored near the Arsenal; it was fully equipped, and repairs werebegun. The hull had received no damage on the starboard, but some ofthe planks had been unnailed here and there, according to custom, topermit of air entering the hold.
One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident.

  Enlarge
The Ship Orion, an Accident 2b2-1-the-ship-orion

The crew was busy bending the sails; the topman, who had to take theupper corner of the main-top-sail on the starboard, lost his balance;he was seen to waver; the multitude thronging the Arsenal quay uttereda cry; the man’s head overbalanced his body; the man fell around theyard, with his hands outstretched towards the abyss; on his way heseized the footrope, first with one hand, then with the other, andremained hanging from it: the sea lay below him at a dizzy depth; theshock of his fall had imparted to the foot-rope a violent swingingmotion; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope, like astone in a sling.
It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance; not one ofthe sailors, all fishermen of the coast, recently levied for theservice, dared to attempt it. In the meantime, the unfortunate topmanwas losing his strength; his anguish could not be discerned on hisface, but his exhaustion was visible in every limb; his arms werecontracted in horrible twitchings; every effort which he made tore-ascend served but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope; hedid not shout, for fear of exhausting his strength. All were awaitingthe minute when he should release his hold on the rope, and, frominstant to instant, heads were turned aside that his fall might not beseen. There are moments when a bit of rope, a pole, the branch of atree, is life itself, and it is a terrible thing to see a living beingdetach himself from it and fall like a ripe fruit.
All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agilityof a tiger-cat; this man was dressed in red; he was a convict; he worea green cap; he was a life convict. On arriving on a level with thetop, a gust of wind carried away his cap, and allowed a perfectly whitehead to be seen: he was not a young man.
A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had, infact, at the very first instant, hastened to the officer of the watch,and, in the midst of the consternation and the hesitation of the crew,while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back, he had asked theofficer’s permission to risk his life to save the topman; at anaffirmative sign from the officer he had broken the chain riveted tohis ankle with one blow of a hammer, then he had caught up a rope, andhad dashed into the rigging: no one noticed, at the instant, with whatease that chain had been broken; it was only later on that the incidentwas recalled.
In a twinkling he was on the yard; he paused for a few seconds andappeared to be measuring it with his eye; these seconds, during whichthe breeze swayed the topman at the extremity of a thread, seemedcenturies to those who were looking on. At last, the convict raised hiseyes to heaven and advanced a step: the crowd drew a long breath. Hewas seen to run out along the yard: on arriving at the point, hefastened the rope which he had brought to it, and allowed the other endto hang down, then he began to descend the rope, hand over hand, andthen,—and the anguish was indescribable,—instead of one man suspendedover the gulf, there were two.
One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly, only herethe spider brought life, not death. Ten thousand glances were fastenedon this group; not a cry, not a word; the same tremor contracted everybrow; all mouths held their breath as though they feared to add theslightest puff to the wind which was swaying the two unfortunate men.
In the meantime, the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to aposition near the sailor. It was high time; one minute more, and theexhausted and despairing man would have allowed himself to fall intothe abyss. The convict had moored him securely with the cord to whichhe clung with one hand, while he was working with the other. At last,he was seen to climb back on the yard, and to drag the sailor up afterhim; he held him there a moment to allow him to recover his strength,then he grasped him in his arms and carried him, walking on the yardhimself to the cap, and from there to the main-top, where he left himin the hands of his comrades.
At that moment the crowd broke into applause: old convict-sergeantsamong them wept, and women embraced each other on the quay, and allvoices were heard to cry with a sort of tender rage, “Pardon for thatman!”

He, in the meantime, had immediately begun to make his descent torejoin his detachment. In order to reach them the more speedily, hedropped into the rigging, and ran along one of the lower yards; alleyes were following him. At a certain moment fear assailed them;whether it was that he was fatigued, or that his head turned, theythought they saw him hesitate and stagger. All at once the crowduttered a loud shout: the convict had fallen into the sea.
The fall was perilous. The frigate _Algésiras_ was anchored alongsidethe _Orion_, and the poor convict had fallen between the two vessels:it was to be feared that he would slip under one or the other of them.Four men flung themselves hastily into a boat; the crowd cheered themon; anxiety again took possession of all souls; the man had not risento the surface; he had disappeared in the sea without leaving a ripple,as though he had fallen into a cask of oil: they sounded, they dived.In vain. The search was continued until the evening: they did not evenfind the body.
On the following day the Toulon newspaper printed these lines:—
“Nov. 17, 1823. Yesterday, a convict belonging to the detachment onboard of the _Orion_, on his return from rendering assistance to asailor, fell into the sea and was drowned. The body has not yet beenfound; it is supposed that it is entangled among the piles of theArsenal point: this man was committed under the number 9,430, and hisname was Jean Valjean.”




BOOK THIRD—ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROMISE MADE TO THE DEAD WOMAN



CHAPTER I—THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL

Montfermeil is situated between Livry and Chelles, on the southern edgeof that lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne. Atthe present day it is a tolerably large town, ornamented all the yearthrough with plaster villas, and on Sundays with beaming bourgeois. In1823 there were at Montfermeil neither so many white houses nor so manywell-satisfied citizens: it was only a village in the forest. Somepleasure-houses of the last century were to be met with there, to besure, which were recognizable by their grand air, their balconies intwisted iron, and their long windows, whose tiny panes cast all sortsof varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters; butMontfermeil was nonetheless a village. Retired cloth-merchants andrusticating attorneys had not discovered it as yet; it was a peacefuland charming place, which was not on the road to anywhere: there peoplelived, and cheaply, that peasant rustic life which is so bounteous andso easy; only, water was rare there, on account of the elevation of theplateau.
It was necessary to fetch it from a considerable distance; the end ofthe village towards Gagny drew its water from the magnificent pondswhich exist in the woods there. The other end, which surrounds thechurch and which lies in the direction of Chelles, found drinking-wateronly at a little spring half-way down the slope, near the road toChelles, about a quarter of an hour from Montfermeil.
Thus each household found it hard work to keep supplied with water. Thelarge houses, the aristocracy, of which the Thénardier tavern formed apart, paid half a farthing a bucketful to a man who made a business ofit, and who earned about eight sous a day in his enterprise ofsupplying Montfermeil with water; but this good man only worked untilseven o’clock in the evening in summer, and five in winter; and nightonce come and the shutters on the ground floor once closed, he who hadno water to drink went to fetch it for himself or did without it.
This constituted the terror of the poor creature whom the reader hasprobably not forgotten,—little Cosette. It will be remembered thatCosette was useful to the Thénardiers in two ways: they made the motherpay them, and they made the child serve them. So when the mother ceasedto pay altogether, the reason for which we have read in precedingchapters, the Thénardiers kept Cosette. She took the place of a servantin their house. In this capacity she it was who ran to fetch water whenit was required. So the child, who was greatly terrified at the idea ofgoing to the spring at night, took great care that water should neverbe lacking in the house.
Christmas of the year 1823 was particularly brilliant at Montfermeil.The beginning of the winter had been mild; there had been neither snownor frost up to that time. Some mountebanks from Paris had obtainedpermission of the mayor to erect their booths in the principal streetof the village, and a band of itinerant merchants, under protection ofthe same tolerance, had constructed their stalls on the Church Square,and even extended them into Boulanger Alley, where, as the reader willperhaps remember, the Thénardiers’ hostelry was situated. These peoplefilled the inns and drinking-shops, and communicated to that tranquillittle district a noisy and joyous life. In order to play the part of afaithful historian, we ought even to add that, among the curiositiesdisplayed in the square, there was a menagerie, in which frightfulclowns, clad in rags and coming no one knew whence, exhibited to thepeasants of Montfermeil in 1823 one of those horrible Brazilianvultures, such as our Royal Museum did not possess until 1845, andwhich have a tricolored cockade for an eye. I believe that naturalistscall this bird Caracara Polyborus; it belongs to the order of theApicides, and to the family of the vultures. Some good old Bonapartistsoldiers, who had retired to the village, went to see this creaturewith great devotion. The mountebanks gave out that the tricoloredcockade was a unique phenomenon made by God expressly for theirmenagerie.
On Christmas eve itself, a number of men, carters, and peddlers, wereseated at table, drinking and smoking around four or five candles inthe public room of Thénardier’s hostelry. This room resembled alldrinking-shop rooms,—tables, pewter jugs, bottles, drinkers, smokers;but little light and a great deal of noise. The date of the year 1823was indicated, nevertheless, by two objects which were then fashionablein the bourgeois class: to wit, a kaleidoscope and a lamp of ribbedtin. The female Thénardier was attending to the supper, which wasroasting in front of a clear fire; her husband was drinking with hiscustomers and talking politics.
Besides political conversations which had for their principal subjectsthe Spanish war and M. le Duc d’Angoulême, strictly local parentheses,like the following, were audible amid the uproar:—
“About Nanterre and Suresnes the vines have flourished greatly. Whenten pieces were reckoned on there have been twelve. They have yielded agreat deal of juice under the press.” “But the grapes cannot be ripe?”“In those parts the grapes should not be ripe; the wine turns oily assoon as spring comes.” “Then it is very thin wine?” “There are winespoorer even than these. The grapes must be gathered while green.” Etc.
Or a miller would call out:—
“Are we responsible for what is in the sacks? We find in them aquantity of small seed which we cannot sift out, and which we areobliged to send through the mill-stones; there are tares, fennel,vetches, hempseed, fox-tail, and a host of other weeds, not to mentionpebbles, which abound in certain wheat, especially in Breton wheat. Iam not fond of grinding Breton wheat, any more than long-sawyers liketo saw beams with nails in them. You can judge of the bad dust thatmakes in grinding. And then people complain of the flour. They are inthe wrong. The flour is no fault of ours.”

In a space between two windows a mower, who was seated at table with alanded proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow work to beperformed in the spring, was saying:—
“It does no harm to have the grass wet. It cuts better. Dew is a goodthing, sir. It makes no difference with that grass. Your grass is youngand very hard to cut still. It’s terribly tender. It yields before theiron.” Etc.
Cosette was in her usual place, seated on the cross-bar of the kitchentable near the chimney. She was in rags; her bare feet were thrust intowooden shoes, and by the firelight she was engaged in knitting woollenstockings destined for the young Thénardiers. A very young kitten wasplaying about among the chairs. Laughter and chatter were audible inthe adjoining room, from two fresh children’s voices: it was Éponineand Azelma.
In the chimney-corner a cat-o’-nine-tails was hanging on a nail.
At intervals the cry of a very young child, which was somewhere in thehouse, rang through the noise of the dram-shop. It was a little boy whohad been born to the Thénardiers during one of the precedingwinters,—“she did not know why,” she said, “the result of thecold,”—and who was a little more than three years old. The mother hadnursed him, but she did not love him. When the persistent clamor of thebrat became too annoying, “Your son is squalling,” Thénardier wouldsay; “do go and see what he wants.” “Bah!” the mother would reply, “hebothers me.” And the neglected child continued to shriek in the dark.



CHAPTER II—TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS

So far in this book the Thénardiers have been viewed only in profile;the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple, andconsidering it under all its aspects.
Thénardier had just passed his fiftieth birthday; Madame Thénardier wasapproaching her forties, which is equivalent to fifty in a woman; sothat there existed a balance of age between husband and wife.
Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of thisThénardier woman, ever since her first appearance,—tall, blond, red,fat, angular, square, enormous, and agile; she belonged, as we havesaid, to the race of those colossal wild women, who contort themselvesat fairs with paving-stones hanging from their hair. She did everythingabout the house,—made the beds, did the washing, the cooking, andeverything else. Cosette was her only servant; a mouse in the serviceof an elephant. Everything trembled at the sound of her voice,—windowpanes, furniture, and people. Her big face, dotted with red blotches,presented the appearance of a skimmer. She had a beard. She was anideal market-porter dressed in woman’s clothes. She swore splendidly;she boasted of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist.Except for the romances which she had read, and which made the affectedlady peep through the ogress at times, in a very queer way, the ideawould never have occurred to any one to say of her, “That is a woman.”This Thénardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted on afishwife. When one heard her speak, one said, “That is a gendarme”;when one saw her drink, one said, “That is a carter”; when one saw herhandle Cosette, one said, “That is the hangman.” One of her teethprojected when her face was in repose.
Thénardier was a small, thin, pale, angular, bony, feeble man, who hada sickly air and who was wonderfully healthy. His cunning began here;he smiled habitually, by way of precaution, and was almost polite toeverybody, even to the beggar to whom he refused half a farthing. Hehad the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters. Hegreatly resembled the portraits of the Abbé Delille. His coquetryconsisted in drinking with the carters. No one had ever succeeded inrendering him drunk. He smoked a big pipe. He wore a blouse, and underhis blouse an old black coat. He made pretensions to literature and tomaterialism. There were certain names which he often pronounced tosupport whatever things he might be saying,—Voltaire, Raynal, Parny,and, singularly enough, Saint Augustine. He declared that he had “asystem.” In addition, he was a great swindler. A _filousophe_[philosophe], a scientific thief. The species does exist. It will beremembered that he pretended to have served in the army; he was in thehabit of relating with exuberance, how, being a sergeant in the 6th orthe 9th light something or other, at Waterloo, he had alone, and in thepresence of a squadron of death-dealing hussars, covered with his bodyand saved from death, in the midst of the grape-shot, “a general, whohad been dangerously wounded.” Thence arose for his wall the flaringsign, and for his inn the name which it bore in the neighborhood, of“the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo.” He was a liberal, a classic,and a Bonapartist. He had subscribed for the Champ d’Asile. It was saidin the village that he had studied for the priesthood.
We believe that he had simply studied in Holland for an inn-keeper.This rascal of composite order was, in all probability, some Flemingfrom Lille, in Flanders, a Frenchman in Paris, a Belgian at Brussels,being comfortably astride of both frontiers. As for his prowess atWaterloo, the reader is already acquainted with that. It will beperceived that he exaggerated it a trifle. Ebb and flow, wandering,adventure, was the leven of his existence; a tattered conscienceentails a fragmentary life, and, apparently at the stormy epoch of June18, 1815, Thénardier belonged to that variety of marauding sutlers ofwhich we have spoken, beating about the country, selling to some,stealing from others, and travelling like a family man, with wife andchildren, in a rickety cart, in the rear of troops on the march, withan instinct for always attaching himself to the victorious army. Thiscampaign ended, and having, as he said, “some quibus,” he had come toMontfermeil and set up an inn there.
This _quibus_, composed of purses and watches, of gold rings and silvercrosses, gathered in harvest-time in furrows sown with corpses, did notamount to a large total, and did not carry this sutler turnedeating-house-keeper very far.
Thénardier had that peculiar rectilinear something about his gestureswhich, accompanied by an oath, recalls the barracks, and by a sign ofthe cross, the seminary. He was a fine talker. He allowed it to bethought that he was an educated man. Nevertheless, the schoolmaster hadnoticed that he pronounced improperly.12
He composed the travellers’ tariff card in a superior manner, butpractised eyes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it.Thénardier was cunning, greedy, slothful, and clever. He did notdisdain his servants, which caused his wife to dispense with them. Thisgiantess was jealous. It seemed to her that that thin and yellow littleman must be an object coveted by all.
Thénardier, who was, above all, an astute and well-balanced man, was ascamp of a temperate sort. This is the worst species; hypocrisy entersinto it.
It is not that Thénardier was not, on occasion, capable of wrath toquite the same degree as his wife; but this was very rare, and at suchtimes, since he was enraged with the human race in general, as he borewithin him a deep furnace of hatred. And since he was one of thosepeople who are continually avenging their wrongs, who accuse everythingthat passes before them of everything which has befallen them, and whoare always ready to cast upon the first person who comes to hand, as alegitimate grievance, the sum total of the deceptions, thebankruptcies, and the calamities of their lives,—when all this leavenwas stirred up in him and boiled forth from his mouth and eyes, he wasterrible. Woe to the person who came under his wrath at such a time!
In addition to his other qualities, Thénardier was attentive andpenetrating, silent or talkative, according to circumstances, andalways highly intelligent. He had something of the look of sailors, whoare accustomed to screw up their eyes to gaze through marine glasses.Thénardier was a statesman.
Every newcomer who entered the tavern said, on catching sight of MadameThénardier, “There is the master of the house.” A mistake. She was noteven the mistress. The husband was both master and mistress. Sheworked; he created. He directed everything by a sort of invisible andconstant magnetic action. A word was sufficient for him, sometimes asign; the mastodon obeyed. Thénardier was a sort of special andsovereign being in Madame Thénardier’s eyes, though she did notthoroughly realize it. She was possessed of virtues after her own kind;if she had ever had a disagreement as to any detail with “MonsieurThénardier,”—which was an inadmissible hypothesis, by the way,—shewould not have blamed her husband in public on any subject whatever.She would never have committed “before strangers” that mistake so oftencommitted by women, and which is called in parliamentary language,“exposing the crown.” Although their concord had only evil as itsresult, there was contemplation in Madame Thénardier’s submission toher husband. That mountain of noise and of flesh moved under the littlefinger of that frail despot. Viewed on its dwarfed and grotesque side,this was that grand and universal thing, the adoration of mind bymatter; for certain ugly features have a cause in the very depths ofeternal beauty. There was an unknown quantity about Thénardier; hencethe absolute empire of the man over that woman. At certain moments shebeheld him like a lighted candle; at others she felt him like a claw.
This woman was a formidable creature who loved no one except herchildren, and who did not fear any one except her husband. She was amother because she was mammiferous. But her maternity stopped shortwith her daughters, and, as we shall see, did not extend to boys. Theman had but one thought,—how to enrich himself.
He did not succeed in this. A theatre worthy of this great talent waslacking. Thénardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil, if ruin ispossible to zero; in Switzerland or in the Pyrenees this pennilessscamp would have become a millionaire; but an inn-keeper must browsewhere fate has hitched him.
It will be understood that the word _inn-keeper_ is here employed in arestricted sense, and does not extend to an entire class.
In this same year, 1823, Thénardier was burdened with about fifteenhundred francs’ worth of petty debts, and this rendered him anxious.
Whatever may have been the obstinate injustice of destiny in this case,Thénardier was one of those men who understand best, with the mostprofundity and in the most modern fashion, that thing which is a virtueamong barbarous peoples and an object of merchandise among civilizedpeoples,—hospitality. Besides, he was an admirable poacher, and quotedfor his skill in shooting. He had a certain cold and tranquil laugh,which was particularly dangerous.
His theories as a landlord sometimes burst forth in lightning flashes.He had professional aphorisms, which he inserted into his wife’s mind.“The duty of the inn-keeper,” he said to her one day, violently, and ina low voice, “is to sell to the first comer, stews, repose, light,fire, dirty sheets, a servant, lice, and a smile; to stop passers-by,to empty small purses, and to honestly lighten heavy ones; to sheltertravelling families respectfully: to shave the man, to pluck the woman,to pick the child clean; to quote the window open, the window shut, thechimney-corner, the armchair, the chair, the ottoman, the stool, thefeather-bed, the mattress and the truss of straw; to know how much theshadow uses up the mirror, and to put a price on it; and, by fivehundred thousand devils, to make the traveller pay for everything, evenfor the flies which his dog eats!”

This man and this woman were ruse and rage wedded—a hideous andterrible team.
While the husband pondered and combined, Madame Thénardier thought notof absent creditors, took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow, andlived in a fit of anger, all in a minute.
Such were these two beings. Cosette was between them, subjected totheir double pressure, like a creature who is at the same time beingground up in a mill and pulled to pieces with pincers. The man and thewoman each had a different method: Cosette was overwhelmed withblows—this was the woman’s; she went barefooted in winter—that was theman’s doing.
Cosette ran upstairs and down, washed, swept, rubbed, dusted, ran,fluttered about, panted, moved heavy articles, and weak as she was, didthe coarse work. There was no mercy for her; a fierce mistress andvenomous master. The Thénardier hostelry was like a spider’s web, inwhich Cosette had been caught, and where she lay trembling. The idealof oppression was realized by this sinister household. It was somethinglike the fly serving the spiders.
The poor child passively held her peace.
What takes place within these souls when they have but just quittedGod, find themselves thus, at the very dawn of life, very small and inthe midst of men all naked!



CHAPTER III—MEN MUST HAVE WINE, AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER

Four new travellers had arrived.
Cosette was meditating sadly; for, although she was only eight yearsold, she had already suffered so much that she reflected with thelugubrious air of an old woman. Her eye was black in consequence of ablow from Madame Thénardier’s fist, which caused the latter to remarkfrom time to time, “How ugly she is with her fist-blow on her eye!”

Cosette was thinking that it was dark, very dark, that the pitchers andcaraffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must havebeen filled and that there was no more water in the cistern.
She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thénardierestablishment drank much water. Thirsty people were never lackingthere; but their thirst was of the sort which applies to the jug ratherthan to the pitcher. Any one who had asked for a glass of water amongall those glasses of wine would have appeared a savage to all thesemen. But there came a moment when the child trembled; Madame Thénardierraised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling on the stove, thenseized a glass and briskly approached the cistern. She turned thefaucet; the child had raised her head and was following all the woman’smovements. A thin stream of water trickled from the faucet, and halffilled the glass. “Well,” said she, “there is no more water!” Amomentary silence ensued. The child did not breathe.
“Bah!” resumed Madame Thénardier, examining the half-filled glass,“this will be enough.”

Cosette applied herself to her work once more, but for a quarter of anhour she felt her heart leaping in her bosom like a big snow-flake.
She counted the minutes that passed in this manner, and wished it werethe next morning.
From time to time one of the drinkers looked into the street, andexclaimed, “It’s as black as an oven!” or, “One must needs be a cat togo about the streets without a lantern at this hour!” And Cosettetrembled.
All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered, andsaid in a harsh voice:—
“My horse has not been watered.”

“Yes, it has,” said Madame Thénardier.
“I tell you that it has not,” retorted the pedler.
Cosette had emerged from under the table.
“Oh, yes, sir!” said she, “the horse has had a drink; he drank out of abucket, a whole bucketful, and it was I who took the water to him, andI spoke to him.”

It was not true; Cosette lied.
“There’s a brat as big as my fist who tells lies as big as the house,”exclaimed the pedler. “I tell you that he has not been watered, youlittle jade! He has a way of blowing when he has had no water, which Iknow well.”

Cosette persisted, and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish,and which was hardly audible:—
“And he drank heartily.”

“Come,” said the pedler, in a rage, “this won’t do at all, let my horsebe watered, and let that be the end of it!”

Cosette crept under the table again.
“In truth, that is fair!” said Madame Thénardier, “if the beast has notbeen watered, it must be.”

Then glancing about her:—
“Well, now! Where’s that other beast?”

She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end of thetable, almost under the drinkers’ feet.
“Are you coming?” shrieked Madame Thénardier.
Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hiddenherself. The Thénardier resumed:—
“Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name, go and water that horse.”

“But, Madame,” said Cosette, feebly, “there is no water.”

The Thénardier threw the street door wide open:—
“Well, go and get some, then!”

Cosette dropped her head, and went for an empty bucket which stood nearthe chimney-corner.
This bucket was bigger than she was, and the child could have set downin it at her ease.
The Thénardier returned to her stove, and tasted what was in thestewpan, with a wooden spoon, grumbling the while:—
“There’s plenty in the spring. There never was such a maliciouscreature as that. I think I should have done better to strain myonions.”

Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous, pepper, andshallots.
“See here, Mam’selle Toad,” she added, “on your way back, you will geta big loaf from the baker. Here’s a fifteen-sou piece.”

Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron; she took the coinwithout saying a word, and put it in that pocket.
Then she stood motionless, bucket in hand, the open door before her.She seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue.
“Get along with you!” screamed the Thénardier.
Cosette went out. The door closed behind her.



CHAPTER IV—ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL

The line of open-air booths starting at the church, extended, as thereader will remember, as far as the hostelry of the Thénardiers. Thesebooths were all illuminated, because the citizens would soon pass ontheir way to the midnight mass, with candles burning in paper funnels,which, as the schoolmaster, then seated at the table at theThénardiers’ observed, produced “a magical effect.” In compensation,not a star was visible in the sky.
The last of these stalls, established precisely opposite theThénardiers’ door, was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel, glass,and magnificent objects of tin. In the first row, and far forwards, themerchant had placed on a background of white napkins, an immense doll,nearly two feet high, who was dressed in a robe of pink crepe, withgold wheat-ears on her head, which had real hair and enamel eyes. Allthat day, this marvel had been displayed to the wonderment of allpassers-by under ten years of age, without a mother being found inMontfermeil sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it toher child. Éponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it, andCosette herself had ventured to cast a glance at it, on the sly, it istrue.
At the moment when Cosette emerged, bucket in hand, melancholy andovercome as she was, she could not refrain from lifting her eyes tothat wonderful doll, towards _the lady_, as she called it. The poorchild paused in amazement. She had not yet beheld that doll close to.The whole shop seemed a palace to her: the doll was not a doll; it wasa vision. It was joy, splendor, riches, happiness, which appeared in asort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little being so profoundlyengulfed in gloomy and chilly misery. With the sad and innocentsagacity of childhood, Cosette measured the abyss which separated herfrom that doll. She said to herself that one must be a queen, or atleast a princess, to have a “thing” like that. She gazed at thatbeautiful pink dress, that beautiful smooth hair, and she thought, “Howhappy that doll must be!” She could not take her eyes from thatfantastic stall. The more she looked, the more dazzled she grew. Shethought she was gazing at paradise. There were other dolls behind thelarge one, which seemed to her to be fairies and genii. The merchant,who was pacing back and forth in front of his shop, produced on hersomewhat the effect of being the Eternal Father.
In this adoration she forgot everything, even the errand with which shewas charged.
All at once the Thénardier’s coarse voice recalled her to reality:“What, you silly jade! you have not gone? Wait! I’ll give it to you! Iwant to know what you are doing there! Get along, you little monster!”

The Thénardier had cast a glance into the street, and had caught sightof Cosette in her ecstasy.
Cosette fled, dragging her pail, and taking the longest strides ofwhich she was capable.



CHAPTER V—THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE

As the Thénardier hostelry was in that part of the village which isnear the church, it was to the spring in the forest in the direction ofChelles that Cosette was obliged to go for her water.
She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant. So longas she was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church, thelighted stalls illuminated the road; but soon the last light from thelast stall vanished. The poor child found herself in the dark. Sheplunged into it. Only, as a certain emotion overcame her, she made asmuch motion as possible with the handle of the bucket as she walkedalong. This made a noise which afforded her company.
The further she went, the denser the darkness became. There was no onein the streets. However, she did encounter a woman, who turned aroundon seeing her, and stood still, muttering between her teeth: “Where canthat child be going? Is it a werewolf child?” Then the woman recognizedCosette. “Well,” said she, “it’s the Lark!”

In this manner Cosette traversed the labyrinth of tortuous and desertedstreets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side ofChelles. So long as she had the houses or even the walls only on bothsides of her path, she proceeded with tolerable boldness. From time totime she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of ashutter—this was light and life; there were people there, and itreassured her. But in proportion as she advanced, her pace slackenedmechanically, as it were. When she had passed the corner of the lasthouse, Cosette paused. It had been hard to advance further than thelast stall; it became impossible to proceed further than the lasthouse. She set her bucket on the ground, thrust her hand into her hair,and began slowly to scratch her head,—a gesture peculiar to childrenwhen terrified and undecided what to do. It was no longer Montfermeil;it was the open fields. Black and desert space was before her. Shegazed in despair at that darkness, where there was no longer any one,where there were beasts, where there were spectres, possibly. She tooka good look, and heard the beasts walking on the grass, and shedistinctly saw spectres moving in the trees. Then she seized her bucketagain; fear had lent her audacity. “Bah!” said she; “I will tell himthat there was no more water!” And she resolutely re-enteredMontfermeil.
Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began toscratch her head again. Now it was the Thénardier who appeared to her,with her hideous, hyena mouth, and wrath flashing in her eyes. Thechild cast a melancholy glance before her and behind her. What was sheto do? What was to become of her? Where was she to go? In front of herwas the spectre of the Thénardier; behind her all the phantoms of thenight and of the forest. It was before the Thénardier that sherecoiled. She resumed her path to the spring, and began to run. Sheemerged from the village, she entered the forest at a run, no longerlooking at or listening to anything. She only paused in her course whenher breath failed her; but she did not halt in her advance. She wentstraight before her in desperation.
As she ran she felt like crying.
The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely.
She no longer thought, she no longer saw. The immensity of night wasfacing this tiny creature. On the one hand, all shadow; on the other,an atom.
It was only seven or eight minutes’ walk from the edge of the woods tothe spring. Cosette knew the way, through having gone over it manytimes in daylight. Strange to say, she did not get lost. A remnant ofinstinct guided her vaguely. But she did not turn her eyes either toright or to left, for fear of seeing things in the branches and in thebrushwood. In this manner she reached the spring.
It was a narrow, natural basin, hollowed out by the water in a clayeysoil, about two feet deep, surrounded with moss and with those tall,crimped grasses which are called Henry IV.‘s frills, and paved withseveral large stones. A brook ran out of it, with a tranquil littlenoise.
Cosette did not take time to breathe. It was very dark, but she was inthe habit of coming to this spring. She felt with her left hand in thedark for a young oak which leaned over the spring, and which usuallyserved to support her, found one of its branches, clung to it, bentdown, and plunged the bucket in the water. She was in a state of suchviolent excitement that her strength was trebled. While thus bent over,she did not notice that the pocket of her apron had emptied itself intothe spring. The fifteen-sou piece fell into the water. Cosette neithersaw nor heard it fall. She drew out the bucket nearly full, and set iton the grass.
That done, she perceived that she was worn out with fatigue. She wouldhave liked to set out again at once, but the effort required to fillthe bucket had been such that she found it impossible to take a step.She was forced to sit down. She dropped on the grass, and remainedcrouching there.
She shut her eyes; then she opened them again, without knowing why, butbecause she could not do otherwise. The agitated water in the bucketbeside her was describing circles which resembled tin serpents.
Overhead the sky was covered with vast black clouds, which were likemasses of smoke. The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend vaguely overthe child.
Jupiter was setting in the depths.
The child stared with bewildered eyes at this great star, with whichshe was unfamiliar, and which terrified her. The planet was, in fact,very near the horizon and was traversing a dense layer of mist whichimparted to it a horrible ruddy hue. The mist, gloomily empurpled,magnified the star. One would have called it a luminous wound.
A cold wind was blowing from the plain. The forest was dark, not a leafwas moving; there were none of the vague, fresh gleams of summertide.Great boughs uplifted themselves in frightful wise. Slender andmisshapen bushes whistled in the clearings. The tall grasses undulatedlike eels under the north wind. The nettles seemed to twist long armsfurnished with claws in search of prey. Some bits of dry heather,tossed by the breeze, flew rapidly by, and had the air of fleeing interror before something which was coming after. On all sides there werelugubrious stretches.
The darkness was bewildering. Man requires light. Whoever burieshimself in the opposite of day feels his heart contract. When the eyesees black, the heart sees trouble. In an eclipse in the night, in thesooty opacity, there is anxiety even for the stoutest of hearts. No onewalks alone in the forest at night without trembling. Shadows andtrees—two formidable densities. A chimerical reality appears in theindistinct depths. The inconceivable is outlined a few paces distantfrom you with a spectral clearness. One beholds floating, either inspace or in one’s own brain, one knows not what vague and intangiblething, like the dreams of sleeping flowers. There are fierce attitudeson the horizon. One inhales the effluvia of the great black void. Oneis afraid to glance behind him, yet desirous of doing so. The cavitiesof night, things grown haggard, taciturn profiles which vanish when oneadvances, obscure dishevelments, irritated tufts, livid pools, thelugubrious reflected in the funereal, the sepulchral immensity ofsilence, unknown but possible beings, bendings of mysterious branches,alarming torsos of trees, long handfuls of quivering plants,—againstall this one has no protection. There is no hardihood which does notshudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish. One isconscious of something hideous, as though one’s soul were becomingamalgamated with the darkness. This penetration of the shadows isindescribably sinister in the case of a child.
Forests are apocalypses, and the beating of the wings of a tiny soulproduces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault.
Without understanding her sensations, Cosette was conscious that shewas seized upon by that black enormity of nature; it was no longerterror alone which was gaining possession of her; it was something moreterrible even than terror; she shivered. There are no words to expressthe strangeness of that shiver which chilled her to the very bottom ofher heart; her eye grew wild; she thought she felt that she should notbe able to refrain from returning there at the same hour on the morrow.
Then, by a sort of instinct, she began to count aloud, one, two, three,four, and so on up to ten, in order to escape from that singular statewhich she did not understand, but which terrified her, and, when shehad finished, she began again; this restored her to a true perceptionof the things about her. Her hands, which she had wet in drawing thewater, felt cold; she rose; her terror, a natural and unconquerableterror, had returned: she had but one thought now,—to flee at fullspeed through the forest, across the fields to the houses, to thewindows, to the lighted candles. Her glance fell upon the water whichstood before her; such was the fright which the Thénardier inspired inher, that she dared not flee without that bucket of water: she seizedthe handle with both hands; she could hardly lift the pail.
In this manner she advanced a dozen paces, but the bucket was full; itwas heavy; she was forced to set it on the ground once more. She tookbreath for an instant, then lifted the handle of the bucket again, andresumed her march, proceeding a little further this time, but again shewas obliged to pause. After some seconds of repose she set out again.She walked bent forward, with drooping head, like an old woman; theweight of the bucket strained and stiffened her thin arms. The ironhandle completed the benumbing and freezing of her wet and tiny hands;she was forced to halt from time to time, and each time that she didso, the cold water which splashed from the pail fell on her bare legs.This took place in the depths of a forest, at night, in winter, farfrom all human sight; she was a child of eight: no one but God saw thatsad thing at the moment.
And her mother, no doubt, alas!
For there are things that make the dead open their eyes in theirgraves.
She panted with a sort of painful rattle; sobs contracted her throat,but she dared not weep, so afraid was she of the Thénardier, even at adistance: it was her custom to imagine the Thénardier always present.
However, she could not make much headway in that manner, and she wenton very slowly. In spite of diminishing the length of her stops, and ofwalking as long as possible between them, she reflected with anguishthat it would take her more than an hour to return to Montfermeil inthis manner, and that the Thénardier would beat her. This anguish wasmingled with her terror at being alone in the woods at night; she wasworn out with fatigue, and had not yet emerged from the forest. Onarriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she was acquainted, madea last halt, longer than the rest, in order that she might get wellrested; then she summoned up all her strength, picked up her bucketagain, and courageously resumed her march, but the poor littledesperate creature could not refrain from crying, “O my God! my God!”

At that moment she suddenly became conscious that her bucket no longerweighed anything at all: a hand, which seemed to her enormous, had justseized the handle, and lifted it vigorously. She raised her head. Alarge black form, straight and erect, was walking beside her throughthe darkness; it was a man who had come up behind her, and whoseapproach she had not heard. This man, without uttering a word, hadseized the handle of the bucket which she was carrying.
There are instincts for all the encounters of life.
The child was not afraid.



CHAPTER VI—WHICH POSSIBLY PROVES BOULATRUELLE’S INTELLIGENCE

On the afternoon of that same Christmas Day, 1823, a man had walked forrather a long time in the most deserted part of the Boulevard del’Hôpital in Paris. This man had the air of a person who is seekinglodgings, and he seemed to halt, by preference, at the most modesthouses on that dilapidated border of the faubourg Saint-Marceau.
We shall see further on that this man had, in fact, hired a chamber inthat isolated quarter.
This man, in his attire, as in all his person, realized the type ofwhat may be called the well-bred mendicant,—extreme wretchednesscombined with extreme cleanliness. This is a very rare mixture whichinspires intelligent hearts with that double respect which one feelsfor the man who is very poor, and for the man who is very worthy. Hewore a very old and very well brushed round hat; a coarse coat, wornperfectly threadbare, of an ochre yellow, a color that was not in theleast eccentric at that epoch; a large waistcoat with pockets of avenerable cut; black breeches, worn gray at the knee, stockings ofblack worsted; and thick shoes with copper buckles. He would have beenpronounced a preceptor in some good family, returned from theemigration. He would have been taken for more than sixty years of age,from his perfectly white hair, his wrinkled brow, his livid lips, andhis countenance, where everything breathed depression and weariness oflife. Judging from his firm tread, from the singular vigor whichstamped all his movements, he would have hardly been thought fifty. Thewrinkles on his brow were well placed, and would have disposed in hisfavor any one who observed him attentively. His lip contracted with astrange fold which seemed severe, and which was humble. There was inthe depth of his glance an indescribable melancholy serenity. In hisleft hand he carried a little bundle tied up in a handkerchief; in hisright he leaned on a sort of a cudgel, cut from some hedge. This stickhad been carefully trimmed, and had an air that was not toothreatening; the most had been made of its knots, and it had received acoral-like head, made from red wax: it was a cudgel, and it seemed tobe a cane.
There are but few passers-by on that boulevard, particularly in thewinter. The man seemed to avoid them rather than to seek them, but thiswithout any affectation.
At that epoch, King Louis XVIII. went nearly every day toChoisy-le-Roi: it was one of his favorite excursions. Towards twoo’clock, almost invariably, the royal carriage and cavalcade was seento pass at full speed along the Boulevard de l’Hôpital.
This served in lieu of a watch or clock to the poor women of thequarter who said, “It is two o’clock; there he is returning to theTuileries.”

And some rushed forward, and others drew up in line, for a passing kingalways creates a tumult; besides, the appearance and disappearance ofLouis XVIII. produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris. It wasrapid but majestic. This impotent king had a taste for a fast gallop;as he was not able to walk, he wished to run: that cripple would gladlyhave had himself drawn by the lightning. He passed, pacific and severe,in the midst of naked swords. His massive couch, all covered withgilding, with great branches of lilies painted on the panels, thunderednoisily along. There was hardly time to cast a glance upon it. In therear angle on the right there was visible on tufted cushions of whitesatin a large, firm, and ruddy face, a brow freshly powdered _àl’oiseau royal_, a proud, hard, crafty eye, the smile of an educatedman, two great epaulets with bullion fringe floating over a bourgeoiscoat, the Golden Fleece, the cross of Saint Louis, the cross of theLegion of Honor, the silver plaque of the Saint-Esprit, a huge belly,and a wide blue ribbon: it was the king. Outside of Paris, he held hishat decked with white ostrich plumes on his knees enwrapped in highEnglish gaiters; when he re-entered the city, he put on his hat andsaluted rarely; he stared coldly at the people, and they returned it inkind. When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter,the whole success which he produced is contained in this remark of aninhabitant of the faubourg to his comrade, “That big fellow yonder isthe government.”

This infallible passage of the king at the same hour was, therefore,the daily event of the Boulevard de l’Hôpital.
The promenader in the yellow coat evidently did not belong in thequarter, and probably did not belong in Paris, for he was ignorant asto this detail. When, at two o’clock, the royal carriage, surrounded bya squadron of the body-guard all covered with silver lace, debouched onthe boulevard, after having made the turn of the Salpêtrière, heappeared surprised and almost alarmed. There was no one but himself inthis cross-lane. He drew up hastily behind the corner of the wall of anenclosure, though this did not prevent M. le Duc de Havré from spyinghim out.
M. le Duc de Havré, as captain of the guard on duty that day, wasseated in the carriage, opposite the king. He said to his Majesty,“Yonder is an evil-looking man.” Members of the police, who wereclearing the king’s route, took equal note of him: one of them receivedan order to follow him. But the man plunged into the deserted littlestreets of the faubourg, and as twilight was beginning to fall, theagent lost trace of him, as is stated in a report addressed that sameevening to M. le Comte d’Anglès, Minister of State, Prefect of Police.
When the man in the yellow coat had thrown the agent off his track, heredoubled his pace, not without turning round many a time to assurehimself that he was not being followed. At a quarter-past four, that isto say, when night was fully come, he passed in front of the theatre ofthe Porte Saint-Martin, where _The Two Convicts_ was being played thatday. This poster, illuminated by the theatre lanterns, struck him; for,although he was walking rapidly, he halted to read it. An instant laterhe was in the blind alley of La Planchette, and he entered the _Platd’Etain_ [the Pewter Platter], where the office of the coach for Lagnywas then situated. This coach set out at half-past four. The horseswere harnessed, and the travellers, summoned by the coachman, werehastily climbing the lofty iron ladder of the vehicle.
The man inquired:—
“Have you a place?”

“Only one—beside me on the box,” said the coachman.
“I will take it.”

“Climb up.”

Nevertheless, before setting out, the coachman cast a glance at thetraveller’s shabby dress, at the diminutive size of his bundle, andmade him pay his fare.
“Are you going as far as Lagny?” demanded the coachman.
“Yes,” said the man.
The traveller paid to Lagny.
They started. When they had passed the barrier, the coachman tried toenter into conversation, but the traveller only replied inmonosyllables. The coachman took to whistling and swearing at hishorses.
The coachman wrapped himself up in his cloak. It was cold. The man didnot appear to be thinking of that. Thus they passed Gournay andNeuilly-sur-Marne.
Towards six o’clock in the evening they reached Chelles. The coachmandrew up in front of the carters’ inn installed in the ancient buildingsof the Royal Abbey, to give his horses a breathing spell.
“I get down here,” said the man.
He took his bundle and his cudgel and jumped down from the vehicle.
An instant later he had disappeared.
He did not enter the inn.
When the coach set out for Lagny a few minutes later, it did notencounter him in the principal street of Chelles.
The coachman turned to the inside travellers.
“There,” said he, “is a man who does not belong here, for I do not knowhim. He had not the air of owning a sou, but he does not considermoney; he pays to Lagny, and he goes only as far as Chelles. It isnight; all the houses are shut; he does not enter the inn, and he isnot to be found. So he has dived through the earth.”

The man had not plunged into the earth, but he had gone with greatstrides through the dark, down the principal street of Chelles, then hehad turned to the right before reaching the church, into the crossroadleading to Montfermeil, like a person who was acquainted with thecountry and had been there before.
He followed this road rapidly. At the spot where it is intersected bythe ancient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny, he heardpeople coming. He concealed himself precipitately in a ditch, and therewaited until the passers-by were at a distance. The precaution wasnearly superfluous, however; for, as we have already said, it was avery dark December night. Not more than two or three stars were visiblein the sky.
It is at this point that the ascent of the hill begins. The man did notreturn to the road to Montfermeil; he struck across the fields to theright, and entered the forest with long strides.
Once in the forest he slackened his pace, and began a carefulexamination of all the trees, advancing, step by step, as thoughseeking and following a mysterious road known to himself alone. Therecame a moment when he appeared to lose himself, and he paused inindecision. At last he arrived, by dint of feeling his way inch byinch, at a clearing where there was a great heap of whitish stones. Hestepped up briskly to these stones, and examined them attentivelythrough the mists of night, as though he were passing them in review. Alarge tree, covered with those excrescences which are the warts ofvegetation, stood a few paces distant from the pile of stones. He wentup to this tree and passed his hand over the bark of the trunk, asthough seeking to recognize and count all the warts.
Opposite this tree, which was an ash, there was a chestnut-tree,suffering from a peeling of the bark, to which a band of zinc had beennailed by way of dressing. He raised himself on tiptoe and touched thisband of zinc.
Then he trod about for awhile on the ground comprised in the spacebetween the tree and the heap of stones, like a person who is trying toassure himself that the soil has not recently been disturbed.
That done, he took his bearings, and resumed his march through theforest.
It was the man who had just met Cosette.
As he walked through the thicket in the direction of Montfermeil, hehad espied that tiny shadow moving with a groan, depositing a burden onthe ground, then taking it up and setting out again. He drew near, andperceived that it was a very young child, laden with an enormous bucketof water. Then he approached the child, and silently grasped the handleof the bucket.



CHAPTER VII—COSETTE SIDE BY SIDE WITH THE STRANGER IN THE DARK

Cosette, as we have said, was not frightened.
The man accosted her. He spoke in a voice that was grave and almostbass.
“My child, what you are carrying is very heavy for you.”

Cosette raised her head and replied:—
“Yes, sir.”

“Give it to me,” said the man; “I will carry it for you.”

Cosette let go of the bucket-handle. The man walked along beside her.
“It really is very heavy,” he muttered between his teeth. Then headded:—
“How old are you, little one?”

“Eight, sir.”

“And have you come from far like this?”

“From the spring in the forest.”

“Are you going far?”

“A good quarter of an hour’s walk from here.”

The man said nothing for a moment; then he remarked abruptly:—
“So you have no mother.”

“I don’t know,” answered the child.
Before the man had time to speak again, she added:—
“I don’t think so. Other people have mothers. I have none.”

And after a silence she went on:—
“I think that I never had any.”

The man halted; he set the bucket on the ground, bent down and placedboth hands on the child’s shoulders, making an effort to look at herand to see her face in the dark.
Cosette’s thin and sickly face was vaguely outlined by the livid lightin the sky.
“What is your name?” said the man.
“Cosette.”

The man seemed to have received an electric shock. He looked at heronce more; then he removed his hands from Cosette’s shoulders, seizedthe bucket, and set out again.
After a moment he inquired:—
“Where do you live, little one?”

“At Montfermeil, if you know where that is.”

“That is where we are going?”

“Yes, sir.”

He paused; then began again:—
“Who sent you at such an hour to get water in the forest?”

“It was Madame Thénardier.”

The man resumed, in a voice which he strove to render indifferent, butin which there was, nevertheless, a singular tremor:—
“What does your Madame Thénardier do?”

“She is my mistress,” said the child. “She keeps the inn.”

“The inn?” said the man. “Well, I am going to lodge there to-night.Show me the way.”

“We are on the way there,” said the child.
The man walked tolerably fast. Cosette followed him without difficulty.She no longer felt any fatigue. From time to time she raised her eyestowards the man, with a sort of tranquillity and an indescribableconfidence. She had never been taught to turn to Providence and topray; nevertheless, she felt within her something which resembled hopeand joy, and which mounted towards heaven.
Several minutes elapsed. The man resumed:—
“Is there no servant in Madame Thénardier’s house?”

“No, sir.”

“Are you alone there?”

“Yes, sir.”

Another pause ensued. Cosette lifted up her voice:—
“That is to say, there are two little girls.”

“What little girls?”

“Ponine and Zelma.”

This was the way the child simplified the romantic names so dear to thefemale Thénardier.
“Who are Ponine and Zelma?”

“They are Madame Thénardier’s young ladies; her daughters, as you wouldsay.”

“And what do those girls do?”

“Oh!” said the child, “they have beautiful dolls; things with gold inthem, all full of affairs. They play; they amuse themselves.”

“All day long?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And you?”

“I? I work.”

“All day long?”

The child raised her great eyes, in which hung a tear, which was notvisible because of the darkness, and replied gently:—
“Yes, sir.”

After an interval of silence she went on:—
“Sometimes, when I have finished my work and they let me, I amusemyself, too.”

“How do you amuse yourself?”

“In the best way I can. They let me alone; but I have not manyplaythings. Ponine and Zelma will not let me play with their dolls. Ihave only a little lead sword, no longer than that.”

The child held up her tiny finger.
“And it will not cut?”

“Yes, sir,” said the child; “it cuts salad and the heads of flies.”

They reached the village. Cosette guided the stranger through thestreets. They passed the bakeshop, but Cosette did not think of thebread which she had been ordered to fetch. The man had ceased to plyher with questions, and now preserved a gloomy silence.
When they had left the church behind them, the man, on perceiving allthe open-air booths, asked Cosette:—
“So there is a fair going on here?”

“No, sir; it is Christmas.”

As they approached the tavern, Cosette timidly touched his arm:—
“Monsieur?”

“What, my child?”

“We are quite near the house.”

“Well?”

“Will you let me take my bucket now?”

“Why?”

“If Madame sees that some one has carried it for me, she will beat me.”

The man handed her the bucket. An instant later they were at the taverndoor.



CHAPTER VIII—THE UNPLEASANTNESS OF RECEIVING INTO ONE’S HOUSE A POORMAN WHO MAY BE A RICH MAN

Cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the bigdoll, which was still displayed at the toy-merchant’s; then sheknocked. The door opened. The Thénardier appeared with a candle in herhand.
“Ah! so it’s you, you little wretch! good mercy, but you’ve taken yourtime! The hussy has been amusing herself!”

“Madame,” said Cosette, trembling all over, “here’s a gentleman whowants a lodging.”

The Thénardier speedily replaced her gruff air by her amiable grimace,a change of aspect common to tavern-keepers, and eagerly sought thenewcomer with her eyes.
“This is the gentleman?” said she.
“Yes, Madame,” replied the man, raising his hand to his hat.
Wealthy travellers are not so polite. This gesture, and an inspectionof the stranger’s costume and baggage, which the Thénardier passed inreview with one glance, caused the amiable grimace to vanish, and thegruff mien to reappear. She resumed dryly:—
“Enter, my good man.”

The “good man” entered. The Thénardier cast a second glance at him,paid particular attention to his frock-coat, which was absolutelythreadbare, and to his hat, which was a little battered, and, tossingher head, wrinkling her nose, and screwing up her eyes, she consultedher husband, who was still drinking with the carters. The husbandreplied by that imperceptible movement of the forefinger, which, backedup by an inflation of the lips, signifies in such cases: A regularbeggar. Thereupon, the Thénardier exclaimed:—
“Ah! see here, my good man; I am very sorry, but I have no room left.”

“Put me where you like,” said the man; “in the attic, in the stable. Iwill pay as though I occupied a room.”

“Forty sous.”

“Forty sous; agreed.”

“Very well, then!”

“Forty sous!” said a carter, in a low tone, to the Thénardier woman;“why, the charge is only twenty sous!”

“It is forty in his case,” retorted the Thénardier, in the same tone.“I don’t lodge poor folks for less.”

“That’s true,” added her husband, gently; “it ruins a house to havesuch people in it.”

In the meantime, the man, laying his bundle and his cudgel on a bench,had seated himself at a table, on which Cosette made haste to place abottle of wine and a glass. The merchant who had demanded the bucket ofwater took it to his horse himself. Cosette resumed her place under thekitchen table, and her knitting.
The man, who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he hadpoured out for himself, observed the child with peculiar attention.
Cosette was ugly. If she had been happy, she might have been pretty. Wehave already given a sketch of that sombre little figure. Cosette wasthin and pale; she was nearly eight years old, but she seemed to behardly six. Her large eyes, sunken in a sort of shadow, were almost putout with weeping. The corners of her mouth had that curve of habitualanguish which is seen in condemned persons and desperately sick people.Her hands were, as her mother had divined, “ruined with chilblains.”The fire which illuminated her at that moment brought into relief allthe angles of her bones, and rendered her thinness frightfullyapparent. As she was always shivering, she had acquired the habit ofpressing her knees one against the other. Her entire clothing was but arag which would have inspired pity in summer, and which inspired horrorin winter. All she had on was hole-ridden linen, not a scrap ofwoollen. Her skin was visible here and there and everywhere black andblue spots could be descried, which marked the places where theThénardier woman had touched her. Her naked legs were thin and red. Thehollows in her neck were enough to make one weep. This child’s wholeperson, her mien, her attitude, the sound of her voice, the intervalswhich she allowed to elapse between one word and the next, her glance,her silence, her slightest gesture, expressed and betrayed one soleidea,—fear.
Fear was diffused all over her; she was covered with it, so to speak;fear drew her elbows close to her hips, withdrew her heels under herpetticoat, made her occupy as little space as possible, allowed heronly the breath that was absolutely necessary, and had become whatmight be called the habit of her body, admitting of no possiblevariation except an increase. In the depths of her eyes there was anastonished nook where terror lurked.
Her fear was such, that on her arrival, wet as she was, Cosette did notdare to approach the fire and dry herself, but sat silently down to herwork again.
The expression in the glance of that child of eight years washabitually so gloomy, and at times so tragic, that it seemed at certainmoments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or ademon.
As we have stated, she had never known what it is to pray; she hadnever set foot in a church. “Have I the time?” said the Thénardier.
The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette.
All at once, the Thénardier exclaimed:—
“By the way, where’s that bread?”

Cosette, according to her custom whenever the Thénardier uplifted hervoice, emerged with great haste from beneath the table.
She had completely forgotten the bread. She had recourse to theexpedient of children who live in a constant state of fear. She lied.
“Madame, the baker’s shop was shut.”

“You should have knocked.”

“I did knock, Madame.”

“Well?”

“He did not open the door.”

“I’ll find out to-morrow whether that is true,” said the Thénardier;“and if you are telling me a lie, I’ll lead you a pretty dance. In themeantime, give me back my fifteen-sou piece.”

Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron, and turnedgreen. The fifteen-sou piece was not there.
“Ah, come now,” said Madame Thénardier, “did you hear me?”

Cosette turned her pocket inside out; there was nothing in it. Whatcould have become of that money? The unhappy little creature could notfind a word to say. She was petrified.
“Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece?” screamed the Thénardier,hoarsely, “or do you want to rob me of it?”

At the same time, she stretched out her arm towards thecat-o’-nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner.
This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength toshriek:—
“Mercy, Madame, Madame! I will not do so any more!”

The Thénardier took down the whip.
In the meantime, the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in thefob of his waistcoat, without any one having noticed his movements.Besides, the other travellers were drinking or playing cards, and werenot paying attention to anything.
Cosette contracted herself into a ball, with anguish, within the angleof the chimney, endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nudelimbs. The Thénardier raised her arm.
“Pardon me, Madame,” said the man, “but just now I caught sight ofsomething which had fallen from this little one’s apron pocket, androlled aside. Perhaps this is it.”

At the same time he bent down and seemed to be searching on the floorfor a moment.
“Exactly; here it is,” he went on, straightening himself up.
And he held out a silver coin to the Thénardier.
“Yes, that’s it,” said she.
It was not it, for it was a twenty-sou piece; but the Thénardier foundit to her advantage. She put the coin in her pocket, and confinedherself to casting a fierce glance at the child, accompanied with theremark, “Don’t let this ever happen again!”

Cosette returned to what the Thénardier called “her kennel,” and herlarge eyes, which were riveted on the traveller, began to take on anexpression such as they had never worn before. Thus far it was only aninnocent amazement, but a sort of stupefied confidence was mingled withit.
“By the way, would you like some supper?” the Thénardier inquired ofthe traveller.
He made no reply. He appeared to be absorbed in thought.
“What sort of a man is that?” she muttered between her teeth. “He’ssome frightfully poor wretch. He hasn’t a sou to pay for a supper. Willhe even pay me for his lodging? It’s very lucky, all the same, that itdid not occur to him to steal the money that was on the floor.”

In the meantime, a door had opened, and Éponine and Azelma entered.
They were two really pretty little girls, more bourgeois than peasantin looks, and very charming; the one with shining chestnut tresses, theother with long black braids hanging down her back, both vivacious,neat, plump, rosy, and healthy, and a delight to the eye. They werewarmly clad, but with so much maternal art that the thickness of thestuffs did not detract from the coquetry of arrangement. There was ahint of winter, though the springtime was not wholly effaced. Lightemanated from these two little beings. Besides this, they were on thethrone. In their toilettes, in their gayety, in the noise which theymade, there was sovereignty. When they entered, the Thénardier said tothem in a grumbling tone which was full of adoration, “Ah! there youare, you children!”

Then drawing them, one after the other to her knees, smoothing theirhair, tying their ribbons afresh, and then releasing them with thatgentle manner of shaking off which is peculiar to mothers, sheexclaimed, “What frights they are!”

They went and seated themselves in the chimney-corner. They had a doll,which they turned over and over on their knees with all sorts of joyouschatter. From time to time Cosette raised her eyes from her knitting,and watched their play with a melancholy air.
Éponine and Azelma did not look at Cosette. She was the same as a dogto them. These three little girls did not yet reckon up four and twentyyears between them, but they already represented the whole society ofman; envy on the one side, disdain on the other.
The doll of the Thénardier sisters was very much faded, very old, andmuch broken; but it seemed nonetheless admirable to Cosette, who hadnever had a doll in her life, _a real doll_, to make use of theexpression which all children will understand.
All at once, the Thénardier, who had been going back and forth in theroom, perceived that Cosette’s mind was distracted, and that, insteadof working, she was paying attention to the little ones at their play.
“Ah! I’ve caught you at it!” she cried. “So that’s the way you work!I’ll make you work to the tune of the whip; that I will.”

The stranger turned to the Thénardier, without quitting his chair.
“Bah, Madame,” he said, with an almost timid air, “let her play!”

Such a wish expressed by a traveller who had eaten a slice of muttonand had drunk a couple of bottles of wine with his supper, and who hadnot the air of being frightfully poor, would have been equivalent to anorder. But that a man with such a hat should permit himself such adesire, and that a man with such a coat should permit himself to have awill, was something which Madame Thénardier did not intend to tolerate.She retorted with acrimony:—
“She must work, since she eats. I don’t feed her to do nothing.”

“What is she making?” went on the stranger, in a gentle voice whichcontrasted strangely with his beggarly garments and his porter’sshoulders.
The Thénardier deigned to reply:—
“Stockings, if you please. Stockings for my little girls, who havenone, so to speak, and who are absolutely barefoot just now.”

The man looked at Cosette’s poor little red feet, and continued:—
“When will she have finished this pair of stockings?”

“She has at least three or four good days’ work on them still, the lazycreature!”

“And how much will that pair of stockings be worth when she hasfinished them?”

The Thénardier cast a glance of disdain on him.
“Thirty sous at least.”

“Will you sell them for five francs?” went on the man.
“Good heavens!” exclaimed a carter who was listening, with a loudlaugh; “five francs! the deuce, I should think so! five balls!”

Thénardier thought it time to strike in.
“Yes, sir; if such is your fancy, you will be allowed to have that pairof stockings for five francs. We can refuse nothing to travellers.”

“You must pay on the spot,” said the Thénardier, in her curt andperemptory fashion.
“I will buy that pair of stockings,” replied the man, “and,” he added,drawing a five-franc piece from his pocket, and laying it on the table,“I will pay for them.”

Then he turned to Cosette.
“Now I own your work; play, my child.”

The carter was so much touched by the five-franc piece, that heabandoned his glass and hastened up.
“But it’s true!” he cried, examining it. “A real hind wheel! and notcounterfeit!”

Thénardier approached and silently put the coin in his pocket.
The Thénardier had no reply to make. She bit her lips, and her faceassumed an expression of hatred.
In the meantime, Cosette was trembling. She ventured to ask:—
“Is it true, Madame? May I play?”

“Play!” said the Thénardier, in a terrible voice.
“Thanks, Madame,” said Cosette.
And while her mouth thanked the Thénardier, her whole little soulthanked the traveller.
Thénardier had resumed his drinking; his wife whispered in his ear:—
“Who can this yellow man be?”

“I have seen millionaires with coats like that,” replied Thénardier, ina sovereign manner.
Cosette had dropped her knitting, but had not left her seat. Cosettealways moved as little as possible. She picked up some old rags and herlittle lead sword from a box behind her.
Éponine and Azelma paid no attention to what was going on. They hadjust executed a very important operation; they had just got hold of thecat. They had thrown their doll on the ground, and Éponine, who was theelder, was swathing the little cat, in spite of its mewing and itscontortions, in a quantity of clothes and red and blue scraps. Whileperforming this serious and difficult work she was saying to her sisterin that sweet and adorable language of children, whose grace, like thesplendor of the butterfly’s wing, vanishes when one essays to fix itfast.
“You see, sister, this doll is more amusing than the other. She twists,she cries, she is warm. See, sister, let us play with her. She shall bemy little girl. I will be a lady. I will come to see you, and you shalllook at her. Gradually, you will perceive her whiskers, and that willsurprise you. And then you will see her ears, and then you will see hertail and it will amaze you. And you will say to me, ‘Ah! Mon Dieu!’ andI will say to you: ‘Yes, Madame, it is my little girl. Little girls aremade like that just at present.’”

Azelma listened admiringly to Éponine.
In the meantime, the drinkers had begun to sing an obscene song, and tolaugh at it until the ceiling shook. Thénardier accompanied andencouraged them.
As birds make nests out of everything, so children make a doll out ofanything which comes to hand. While Éponine and Azelma were bundling upthe cat, Cosette, on her side, had dressed up her sword. That done, shelaid it in her arms, and sang to it softly, to lull it to sleep.
The doll is one of the most imperious needs and, at the same time, oneof the most charming instincts of feminine childhood. To care for, toclothe, to deck, to dress, to undress, to redress, to teach, scold alittle, to rock, to dandle, to lull to sleep, to imagine that somethingis some one,—therein lies the whole woman’s future. While dreaming andchattering, making tiny outfits, and baby clothes, while sewing littlegowns, and corsages and bodices, the child grows into a young girl, theyoung girl into a big girl, the big girl into a woman. The first childis the continuation of the last doll.
A little girl without a doll is almost as unhappy, and quite asimpossible, as a woman without children.
So Cosette had made herself a doll out of the sword.
Madame Thénardier approached _the yellow man_; “My husband is right,”she thought; “perhaps it is M. Laffitte; there are such queer richmen!”

She came and set her elbows on the table.
“Monsieur,” said she. At this word, _Monsieur_, the man turned; up tothat time, the Thénardier had addressed him only as _brave homme_ or_bonhomme_.
“You see, sir,” she pursued, assuming a sweetish air that was even morerepulsive to behold than her fierce mien, “I am willing that the childshould play; I do not oppose it, but it is good for once, because youare generous. You see, she has nothing; she must needs work.”

“Then this child is not yours?” demanded the man.
“Oh! mon Dieu! no, sir! she is a little beggar whom we have taken inthrough charity; a sort of imbecile child. She must have water on thebrain; she has a large head, as you see. We do what we can for her, forwe are not rich; we have written in vain to her native place, and havereceived no reply these six months. It must be that her mother isdead.”

“Ah!” said the man, and fell into his reverie once more.
“Her mother didn’t amount to much,” added the Thénardier; “sheabandoned her child.”

During the whole of this conversation Cosette, as though warned by someinstinct that she was under discussion, had not taken her eyes from theThénardier’s face; she listened vaguely; she caught a few words hereand there.
Meanwhile, the drinkers, all three-quarters intoxicated, were repeatingtheir unclean refrain with redoubled gayety; it was a highly spiced andwanton song, in which the Virgin and the infant Jesus were introduced.The Thénardier went off to take part in the shouts of laughter.Cosette, from her post under the table, gazed at the fire, which wasreflected from her fixed eyes. She had begun to rock the sort of babywhich she had made, and, as she rocked it, she sang in a low voice, “Mymother is dead! my mother is dead! my mother is dead!”

On being urged afresh by the hostess, the yellow man, “themillionaire,” consented at last to take supper.
“What does Monsieur wish?”

“Bread and cheese,” said the man.
“Decidedly, he is a beggar” thought Madame Thénardier.
The drunken men were still singing their song, and the child under thetable was singing hers.
All at once, Cosette paused; she had just turned round and caught sightof the little Thénardiers’ doll, which they had abandoned for the catand had left on the floor a few paces from the kitchen table.
Then she dropped the swaddled sword, which only half met her needs, andcast her eyes slowly round the room. Madame Thénardier was whisperingto her husband and counting over some money; Ponine and Zelma wereplaying with the cat; the travellers were eating or drinking orsinging; not a glance was fixed on her. She had not a moment to lose;she crept out from under the table on her hands and knees, made sureonce more that no one was watching her; then she slipped quickly up tothe doll and seized it. An instant later she was in her place again,seated motionless, and only turned so as to cast a shadow on the dollwhich she held in her arms. The happiness of playing with a doll was sorare for her that it contained all the violence of voluptuousness.
No one had seen her, except the traveller, who was slowly devouring hismeagre supper.
This joy lasted about a quarter of an hour.
But with all the precautions that Cosette had taken she did notperceive that one of the doll’s legs stuck out and that the fire on thehearth lighted it up very vividly. That pink and shining foot,projecting from the shadow, suddenly struck the eye of Azelma, who saidto Éponine, “Look! sister.”

The two little girls paused in stupefaction; Cosette had dared to taketheir doll!
Éponine rose, and, without releasing the cat, she ran to her mother,and began to tug at her skirt.
“Let me alone!” said her mother; “what do you want?”

“Mother,” said the child, “look there!”

And she pointed to Cosette.
Cosette, absorbed in the ecstasies of possession, no longer saw orheard anything.
Madame Thénardier’s countenance assumed that peculiar expression whichis composed of the terrible mingled with the trifles of life, and whichhas caused this style of woman to be named _Megaeras_.
On this occasion, wounded pride exasperated her wrath still further.Cosette had overstepped all bounds; Cosette had laid violent hands onthe doll belonging to “these young ladies.” A czarina who should see amuzhik trying on her imperial son’s blue ribbon would wear no otherface.
She shrieked in a voice rendered hoarse with indignation:—
“Cosette!”

Cosette started as though the earth had trembled beneath her; sheturned round.
“Cosette!” repeated the Thénardier.
Cosette took the doll and laid it gently on the floor with a sort ofveneration, mingled with despair; then, without taking her eyes fromit, she clasped her hands, and, what is terrible to relate of a childof that age, she wrung them; then—not one of the emotions of the day,neither the trip to the forest, nor the weight of the bucket of water,nor the loss of the money, nor the sight of the whip, nor even the sadwords which she had heard Madame Thénardier utter had been able towring this from her—she wept; she burst out sobbing.
Meanwhile, the traveller had risen to his feet.
“What is the matter?” he said to the Thénardier.
“Don’t you see?” said the Thénardier, pointing to the _corpus delicti_which lay at Cosette’s feet.
“Well, what of it?” resumed the man.
“That beggar,” replied the Thénardier, “has permitted herself to touchthe children’s doll!”

“All this noise for that!” said the man; “well, what if she did playwith that doll?”

“She touched it with her dirty hands!” pursued the Thénardier, “withher frightful hands!”

Here Cosette redoubled her sobs.
“Will you stop your noise?” screamed the Thénardier.
The man went straight to the street door, opened it, and stepped out.
As soon as he had gone, the Thénardier profited by his absence to giveCosette a hearty kick under the table, which made the child utter loudcries.
The door opened again, the man reappeared; he carried in both hands thefabulous doll which we have mentioned, and which all the village bratshad been staring at ever since the morning, and he set it upright infront of Cosette, saying:—
“Here; this is for you.”

It must be supposed that in the course of the hour and more which hehad spent there he had taken confused notice through his reverie ofthat toy shop, lighted up by fire-pots and candles so splendidly thatit was visible like an illumination through the window of thedrinking-shop.
Cosette raised her eyes; she gazed at the man approaching her with thatdoll as she might have gazed at the sun; she heard the unprecedentedwords, “It is for you”; she stared at him; she stared at the doll; thenshe slowly retreated, and hid herself at the extreme end, under thetable in a corner of the wall.
She no longer cried; she no longer wept; she had the appearance of nolonger daring to breathe.
The Thénardier, Éponine, and Azelma were like statues also; the verydrinkers had paused; a solemn silence reigned through the whole room.
Madame Thénardier, petrified and mute, recommenced her conjectures:“Who is that old fellow? Is he a poor man? Is he a millionaire? Perhapshe is both; that is to say, a thief.”

The face of the male Thénardier presented that expressive fold whichaccentuates the human countenance whenever the dominant instinctappears there in all its bestial force. The tavern-keeper staredalternately at the doll and at the traveller; he seemed to be scentingout the man, as he would have scented out a bag of money. This did notlast longer than the space of a flash of lightning. He stepped up tohis wife and said to her in a low voice:—
“That machine costs at least thirty francs. No nonsense. Down on yourbelly before that man!”

Gross natures have this in common with _naïve_ natures, that theypossess no transition state.
“Well, Cosette,” said the Thénardier, in a voice that strove to besweet, and which was composed of the bitter honey of malicious women,“aren’t you going to take your doll?”

Cosette ventured to emerge from her hole.
“The gentleman has given you a doll, my little Cosette,” saidThénardier, with a caressing air. “Take it; it is yours.”

Cosette gazed at the marvellous doll in a sort of terror. Her face wasstill flooded with tears, but her eyes began to fill, like the sky atdaybreak, with strange beams of joy. What she felt at that moment was alittle like what she would have felt if she had been abruptly told,“Little one, you are the Queen of France.”

It seemed to her that if she touched that doll, lightning would dartfrom it.
This was true, up to a certain point, for she said to herself that theThénardier would scold and beat her.
Nevertheless, the attraction carried the day. She ended by drawing nearand murmuring timidly as she turned towards Madame Thénardier:—
“May I, Madame?”

No words can render that air, at once despairing, terrified, andecstatic.
“Pardi!” cried the Thénardier, “it is yours. The gentleman has given itto you.”

“Truly, sir?” said Cosette. “Is it true? Is the ‘lady’ mine?”

The stranger’s eyes seemed to be full of tears. He appeared to havereached that point of emotion where a man does not speak for fear lesthe should weep. He nodded to Cosette, and placed the “lady’s” hand inher tiny hand.
Cosette hastily withdrew her hand, as though that of the “lady”scorched her, and began to stare at the floor. We are forced to addthat at that moment she stuck out her tongue immoderately. All at onceshe wheeled round and seized the doll in a transport.
“I shall call her Catherine,” she said.
It was an odd moment when Cosette’s rags met and clasped the ribbonsand fresh pink muslins of the doll.
“Madame,” she resumed, “may I put her on a chair?”

“Yes, my child,” replied the Thénardier.
It was now the turn of Éponine and Azelma to gaze at Cosette with envy.
Cosette placed Catherine on a chair, then seated herself on the floorin front of her, and remained motionless, without uttering a word, inan attitude of contemplation.
“Play, Cosette,” said the stranger.
“Oh! I am playing,” returned the child.
This stranger, this unknown individual, who had the air of a visitwhich Providence was making on Cosette, was the person whom theThénardier hated worse than any one in the world at that moment.However, it was necessary to control herself. Habituated as she was todissimulation through endeavoring to copy her husband in all hisactions, these emotions were more than she could endure. She made hasteto send her daughters to bed, then she asked the man’s _permission_ tosend Cosette off also; “for she has worked hard all day,” she addedwith a maternal air. Cosette went off to bed, carrying Catherine in herarms.
From time to time the Thénardier went to the other end of the roomwhere her husband was, to _relieve her soul_, as she said. Sheexchanged with her husband words which were all the more furiousbecause she dared not utter them aloud.
“Old beast! What has he got in his belly, to come and upset us in thismanner! To want that little monster to play! to give away forty-francdolls to a jade that I would sell for forty sous, so I would! A littlemore and he will be saying _Your Majesty_ to her, as though to theDuchesse de Berry! Is there any sense in it? Is he mad, then, thatmysterious old fellow?”

“Why! it is perfectly simple,” replied Thénardier, “if that amuses him!It amuses you to have the little one work; it amuses him to have herplay. He’s all right. A traveller can do what he pleases when he paysfor it. If the old fellow is a philanthropist, what is that to you? Ifhe is an imbecile, it does not concern you. What are you worrying for,so long as he has money?”

The language of a master, and the reasoning of an innkeeper, neither ofwhich admitted of any reply.
The man had placed his elbows on the table, and resumed his thoughtfulattitude. All the other travellers, both pedlers and carters, hadwithdrawn a little, and had ceased singing. They were staring at himfrom a distance, with a sort of respectful awe. This poorly dressedman, who drew “hind-wheels” from his pocket with so much ease, and wholavished gigantic dolls on dirty little brats in wooden shoes, wascertainly a magnificent fellow, and one to be feared.
Many hours passed. The midnight mass was over, the chimes had ceased,the drinkers had taken their departure, the drinking-shop was closed,the public room was deserted, the fire extinct, the stranger stillremained in the same place and the same attitude. From time to time hechanged the elbow on which he leaned. That was all; but he had not saida word since Cosette had left the room.
The Thénardiers alone, out of politeness and curiosity, had remained inthe room.
“Is he going to pass the night in that fashion?” grumbled theThénardier. When two o’clock in the morning struck, she declaredherself vanquished, and said to her husband, “I’m going to bed. Do asyou like.” Her husband seated himself at a table in the corner, lighteda candle, and began to read the _Courrier Français_.
A good hour passed thus. The worthy inn-keeper had perused the_Courrier Français_ at least three times, from the date of the numberto the printer’s name. The stranger did not stir.
Thénardier fidgeted, coughed, spit, blew his nose, and creaked hischair. Not a movement on the man’s part. “Is he asleep?” thoughtThénardier. The man was not asleep, but nothing could arouse him.
At last Thénardier took off his cap, stepped gently up to him, andventured to say:—
“Is not Monsieur going to his repose?”

_Not going to bed_ would have seemed to him excessive and familiar. _Torepose_ smacked of luxury and respect. These words possess themysterious and admirable property of swelling the bill on the followingday. A chamber where one _sleeps_ costs twenty sous; a chamber in whichone _reposes_ costs twenty francs.
“Well!” said the stranger, “you are right. Where is your stable?”

“Sir!” exclaimed Thénardier, with a smile, “I will conduct you, sir.”

He took the candle; the man picked up his bundle and cudgel, andThénardier conducted him to a chamber on the first floor, which was ofrare splendor, all furnished in mahogany, with a low bedstead,curtained with red calico.
“What is this?” said the traveller.
“It is really our bridal chamber,” said the tavern-keeper. “My wife andI occupy another. This is only entered three or four times a year.”

“I should have liked the stable quite as well,” said the man, abruptly.
Thénardier pretended not to hear this unamiable remark.
He lighted two perfectly fresh wax candles which figured on thechimney-piece. A very good fire was flickering on the hearth.
On the chimney-piece, under a glass globe, stood a woman’s head-dressin silver wire and orange flowers.
“And what is this?” resumed the stranger.
“That, sir,” said Thénardier, “is my wife’s wedding bonnet.”

The traveller surveyed the object with a glance which seemed to say,“There really was a time, then, when that monster was a maiden?”

Thénardier lied, however. When he had leased this paltry building forthe purpose of converting it into a tavern, he had found this chamberdecorated in just this manner, and had purchased the furniture andobtained the orange flowers at second hand, with the idea that thiswould cast a graceful shadow on “his spouse,” and would result in whatthe English call respectability for his house.
When the traveller turned round, the host had disappeared. Thénardierhad withdrawn discreetly, without venturing to wish him a good night,as he did not wish to treat with disrespectful cordiality a man whom heproposed to fleece royally the following morning.
The inn-keeper retired to his room. His wife was in bed, but she wasnot asleep. When she heard her husband’s step she turned over and saidto him:—
“Do you know, I’m going to turn Cosette out of doors to-morrow.”

Thénardier replied coldly:—
“How you do go on!”

They exchanged no further words, and a few moments later their candlewas extinguished.
As for the traveller, he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle in acorner. The landlord once gone, he threw himself into an armchair andremained for some time buried in thought. Then he removed his shoes,took one of the two candles, blew out the other, opened the door, andquitted the room, gazing about him like a person who is in search ofsomething. He traversed a corridor and came upon a staircase. There heheard a very faint and gentle sound like the breathing of a child. Hefollowed this sound, and came to a sort of triangular recess builtunder the staircase, or rather formed by the staircase itself. Thisrecess was nothing else than the space under the steps. There, in themidst of all sorts of old papers and potsherds, among dust and spiders’webs, was a bed—if one can call by the name of bed a straw pallet sofull of holes as to display the straw, and a coverlet so tattered as toshow the pallet. No sheets. This was placed on the floor.
In this bed Cosette was sleeping.
The man approached and gazed down upon her.
Cosette was in a profound sleep; she was fully dressed. In the wintershe did not undress, in order that she might not be so cold.
Against her breast was pressed the doll, whose large eyes, wide open,glittered in the dark. From time to time she gave vent to a deep sighas though she were on the point of waking, and she strained the dollalmost convulsively in her arms. Beside her bed there was only one ofher wooden shoes.
A door which stood open near Cosette’s pallet permitted a view of arather large, dark room. The stranger stepped into it. At the furtherextremity, through a glass door, he saw two small, very white beds.They belonged to Éponine and Azelma. Behind these beds, and halfhidden, stood an uncurtained wicker cradle, in which the little boy whohad cried all the evening lay asleep.
The stranger conjectured that this chamber connected with that of theThénardier pair. He was on the point of retreating when his eye fellupon the fireplace—one of those vast tavern chimneys where there isalways so little fire when there is any fire at all, and which are socold to look at. There was no fire in this one, there was not evenashes; but there was something which attracted the stranger’s gaze,nevertheless. It was two tiny children’s shoes, coquettish in shape andunequal in size. The traveller recalled the graceful and immemorialcustom in accordance with which children place their shoes in thechimney on Christmas eve, there to await in the darkness some sparklinggift from their good fairy. Éponine and Azelma had taken care not toomit this, and each of them had set one of her shoes on the hearth.
The traveller bent over them.
The fairy, that is to say, their mother, had already paid her visit,and in each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece.
The man straightened himself up, and was on the point of withdrawing,when far in, in the darkest corner of the hearth, he caught sight ofanother object. He looked at it, and recognized a wooden shoe, afrightful shoe of the coarsest description, half dilapidated and allcovered with ashes and dried mud. It was Cosette’s sabot. Cosette, withthat touching trust of childhood, which can always be deceived yetnever discouraged, had placed her shoe on the hearth-stone also.
Hope in a child who has never known anything but despair is a sweet andtouching thing.
There was nothing in this wooden shoe.
The stranger fumbled in his waistcoat, bent over and placed a louisd’or in Cosette’s shoe.
Then he regained his own chamber with the stealthy tread of a wolf.



CHAPTER IX— THÉNARDIER AND HIS MANŒUVRES

On the following morning, two hours at least before day-break,Thénardier, seated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern,pen in hand, was making out the bill for the traveller with the yellowcoat.
His wife, standing beside him, and half bent over him, was followinghim with her eyes. They exchanged not a word. On the one hand, therewas profound meditation, on the other, the religious admiration withwhich one watches the birth and development of a marvel of the humanmind. A noise was audible in the house; it was the Lark sweeping thestairs.
After the lapse of a good quarter of an hour, and some erasures,Thénardier produced the following masterpiece:—
BILL OF THE GENTLEMAN IN No. 1.
Supper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3 francs.Chamber  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10   ” Candle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5   ” Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4   ” Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1   ” —————Total . . . . . .    23 francs.

Service was written _servisse_.
“Twenty-three francs!” cried the woman, with an enthusiasm which wasmingled with some hesitation.
Like all great artists, Thénardier was dissatisfied.
“Peuh!” he exclaimed.
It was the accent of Castlereagh auditing France’s bill at the Congressof Vienna.
“Monsieur Thénardier, you are right; he certainly owes that,” murmuredthe wife, who was thinking of the doll bestowed on Cosette in thepresence of her daughters. “It is just, but it is too much. He will notpay it.”

Thénardier laughed coldly, as usual, and said:—
“He will pay.”

This laugh was the supreme assertion of certainty and authority. Thatwhich was asserted in this manner must needs be so. His wife did notinsist.
She set about arranging the table; her husband paced the room. A momentlater he added:—
“I owe full fifteen hundred francs!”

He went and seated himself in the chimney-corner, meditating, with hisfeet among the warm ashes.
“Ah! by the way,” resumed his wife, “you don’t forget that I’m going toturn Cosette out of doors to-day? The monster! She breaks my heart withthat doll of hers! I’d rather marry Louis XVIII. than keep her anotherday in the house!”

Thénardier lighted his pipe, and replied between two puffs:—
“You will hand that bill to the man.”

Then he went out.
Hardly had he left the room when the traveller entered.
Thénardier instantly reappeared behind him and remained motionless inthe half-open door, visible only to his wife.
The yellow man carried his bundle and his cudgel in his hand.
“Up so early?” said Madame Thénardier; “is Monsieur leaving usalready?”

As she spoke thus, she was twisting the bill about in her hands with anembarrassed air, and making creases in it with her nails. Her hard facepresented a shade which was not habitual with it,—timidity andscruples.
To present such a bill to a man who had so completely the air “of apoor wretch” seemed difficult to her.
The traveller appeared to be preoccupied and absent-minded. Hereplied:—
“Yes, Madame, I am going.”

“So Monsieur has no business in Montfermeil?”

“No, I was passing through. That is all. What do I owe you, Madame,” headded.
The Thénardier silently handed him the folded bill.
The man unfolded the paper and glanced at it; but his thoughts wereevidently elsewhere.
“Madame,” he resumed, “is business good here in Montfermeil?”

“So so, Monsieur,” replied the Thénardier, stupefied at not witnessinganother sort of explosion.
She continued, in a dreary and lamentable tone:—
“Oh! Monsieur, times are so hard! and then, we have so few bourgeois inthe neighborhood! All the people are poor, you see. If we had not, nowand then, some rich and generous travellers like Monsieur, we shouldnot get along at all. We have so many expenses. Just see, that child iscosting us our very eyes.”

“What child?”

“Why, the little one, you know! Cosette—the Lark, as she is calledhereabouts!”

“Ah!” said the man.
She went on:—
“How stupid these peasants are with their nicknames! She has more theair of a bat than of a lark. You see, sir, we do not ask charity, andwe cannot bestow it. We earn nothing and we have to pay out a greatdeal. The license, the imposts, the door and window tax, thehundredths! Monsieur is aware that the government demands a terribledeal of money. And then, I have my daughters. I have no need to bringup other people’s children.”

The man resumed, in that voice which he strove to render indifferent,and in which there lingered a tremor:—
“What if one were to rid you of her?”

“Who? Cosette?”

“Yes.”

The landlady’s red and violent face brightened up hideously.
“Ah! sir, my dear sir, take her, keep her, lead her off, carry heraway, sugar her, stuff her with truffles, drink her, eat her, and theblessings of the good holy Virgin and of all the saints of paradise beupon you!”

“Agreed.”

“Really! You will take her away?”

“I will take her away.”

“Immediately?”

“Immediately. Call the child.”

“Cosette!” screamed the Thénardier.
“In the meantime,” pursued the man, “I will pay you what I owe you. Howmuch is it?”

He cast a glance on the bill, and could not restrain a start ofsurprise:—
“Twenty-three francs!”

He looked at the landlady, and repeated:—
“Twenty-three francs?”

There was in the enunciation of these words, thus repeated, an accentbetween an exclamation and an interrogation point.
The Thénardier had had time to prepare herself for the shock. Shereplied, with assurance:—
“Good gracious, yes, sir, it is twenty-three francs.”

The stranger laid five five-franc pieces on the table.
“Go and get the child,” said he.
At that moment Thénardier advanced to the middle of the room, andsaid:—
“Monsieur owes twenty-six sous.”

“Twenty-six sous!” exclaimed his wife.
“Twenty sous for the chamber,” resumed Thénardier, coldly, “and sixsous for his supper. As for the child, I must discuss that matter alittle with the gentleman. Leave us, wife.”

Madame Thénardier was dazzled as with the shock caused by unexpectedlightning flashes of talent. She was conscious that a great actor wasmaking his entrance on the stage, uttered not a word in reply, and leftthe room.
As soon as they were alone, Thénardier offered the traveller a chair.The traveller seated himself; Thénardier remained standing, and hisface assumed a singular expression of good-fellowship and simplicity.
“Sir,” said he, “what I have to say to you is this, that I adore thatchild.”

The stranger gazed intently at him.
“What child?”

Thénardier continued:—
“How strange it is, one grows attached. What money is that? Take backyour hundred-sou piece. I adore the child.”

“Whom do you mean?” demanded the stranger.
“Eh! our little Cosette! Are you not intending to take her away fromus? Well, I speak frankly; as true as you are an honest man, I will notconsent to it. I shall miss that child. I saw her first when she was atiny thing. It is true that she costs us money; it is true that she hasher faults; it is true that we are not rich; it is true that I havepaid out over four hundred francs for drugs for just one of herillnesses! But one must do something for the good God’s sake. She hasneither father nor mother. I have brought her up. I have bread enoughfor her and for myself. In truth, I think a great deal of that child.You understand, one conceives an affection for a person; I am a goodsort of a beast, I am; I do not reason; I love that little girl; mywife is quick-tempered, but she loves her also. You see, she is justthe same as our own child. I want to keep her to babble about thehouse.”

The stranger kept his eye intently fixed on Thénardier. The lattercontinued:—
“Excuse me, sir, but one does not give away one’s child to a passer-by,like that. I am right, am I not? Still, I don’t say—you are rich; youhave the air of a very good man,—if it were for her happiness. But onemust find out that. You understand: suppose that I were to let her goand to sacrifice myself, I should like to know what becomes of her; Ishould not wish to lose sight of her; I should like to know with whomshe is living, so that I could go to see her from time to time; so thatshe may know that her good foster-father is alive, that he is watchingover her. In short, there are things which are not possible. I do noteven know your name. If you were to take her away, I should say: ‘Well,and the Lark, what has become of her?’ One must, at least, see somepetty scrap of paper, some trifle in the way of a passport, you know!”

The stranger, still surveying him with that gaze which penetrates, asthe saying goes, to the very depths of the conscience, replied in agrave, firm voice:—
“Monsieur Thénardier, one does not require a passport to travel fiveleagues from Paris. If I take Cosette away, I shall take her away, andthat is the end of the matter. You will not know my name, you will notknow my residence, you will not know where she is; and my intention isthat she shall never set eyes on you again so long as she lives. Ibreak the thread which binds her foot, and she departs. Does that suityou? Yes or no?”

Since geniuses, like demons, recognize the presence of a superior Godby certain signs, Thénardier comprehended that he had to deal with avery strong person. It was like an intuition; he comprehended it withhis clear and sagacious promptitude. While drinking with the carters,smoking, and singing coarse songs on the preceding evening, he haddevoted the whole of the time to observing the stranger, watching himlike a cat, and studying him like a mathematician. He had watched him,both on his own account, for the pleasure of the thing, and throughinstinct, and had spied upon him as though he had been paid for sodoing. Not a movement, not a gesture, on the part of the man in theyellow great-coat had escaped him. Even before the stranger had soclearly manifested his interest in Cosette, Thénardier had divined hispurpose. He had caught the old man’s deep glances returning constantlyto the child. Who was this man? Why this interest? Why this hideouscostume, when he had so much money in his purse? Questions which he putto himself without being able to solve them, and which irritated him.He had pondered it all night long. He could not be Cosette’s father.Was he her grandfather? Then why not make himself known at once? Whenone has a right, one asserts it. This man evidently had no right overCosette. What was it, then? Thénardier lost himself in conjectures. Hecaught glimpses of everything, but he saw nothing. Be that as it may,on entering into conversation with the man, sure that there was somesecret in the case, that the latter had some interest in remaining inthe shadow, he felt himself strong; when he perceived from thestranger’s clear and firm retort, that this mysterious personage wasmysterious in so simple a way, he became conscious that he was weak. Hehad expected nothing of the sort. His conjectures were put to the rout.He rallied his ideas. He weighed everything in the space of a second.Thénardier was one of those men who take in a situation at a glance. Hedecided that the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward, andquickly at that. He did as great leaders do at the decisive moment,which they know that they alone recognize; he abruptly unmasked hisbatteries.
“Sir,” said he, “I am in need of fifteen hundred francs.”

The stranger took from his side pocket an old pocketbook of blackleather, opened it, drew out three bank-bills, which he laid on thetable. Then he placed his large thumb on the notes and said to theinn-keeper:—
“Go and fetch Cosette.”

While this was taking place, what had Cosette been doing?
On waking up, Cosette had run to get her shoe. In it she had found thegold piece. It was not a Napoleon; it was one of those perfectly newtwenty-franc pieces of the Restoration, on whose effigy the littlePrussian queue had replaced the laurel wreath. Cosette was dazzled. Herdestiny began to intoxicate her. She did not know what a gold piecewas; she had never seen one; she hid it quickly in her pocket, asthough she had stolen it. Still, she felt that it really was hers; sheguessed whence her gift had come, but the joy which she experienced wasfull of fear. She was happy; above all she was stupefied. Suchmagnificent and beautiful things did not appear real. The dollfrightened her, the gold piece frightened her. She trembled vaguely inthe presence of this magnificence. The stranger alone did not frightenher. On the contrary, he reassured her. Ever since the precedingevening, amid all her amazement, even in her sleep, she had beenthinking in her little childish mind of that man who seemed to be sopoor and so sad, and who was so rich and so kind. Everything hadchanged for her since she had met that good man in the forest. Cosette,less happy than the most insignificant swallow of heaven, had neverknown what it was to take refuge under a mother’s shadow and under awing. For the last five years, that is to say, as far back as hermemory ran, the poor child had shivered and trembled. She had alwaysbeen exposed completely naked to the sharp wind of adversity; now itseemed to her she was clothed. Formerly her soul had seemed cold, nowit was warm. Cosette was no longer afraid of the Thénardier. She was nolonger alone; there was some one there.
She hastily set about her regular morning duties. That louis, which shehad about her, in the very apron pocket whence the fifteen-sou piecehad fallen on the night before, distracted her thoughts. She dared nottouch it, but she spent five minutes in gazing at it, with her tonguehanging out, if the truth must be told. As she swept the staircase, shepaused, remained standing there motionless, forgetful of her broom andof the entire universe, occupied in gazing at that star which wasblazing at the bottom of her pocket.
It was during one of these periods of contemplation that the Thénardierjoined her. She had gone in search of Cosette at her husband’s orders.What was quite unprecedented, she neither struck her nor said aninsulting word to her.
“Cosette,” she said, almost gently, “come immediately.”

An instant later Cosette entered the public room.
The stranger took up the bundle which he had brought and untied it.This bundle contained a little woollen gown, an apron, a fustianbodice, a kerchief, a petticoat, woollen stockings, shoes—a completeoutfit for a girl of seven years. All was black.
“My child,” said the man, “take these, and go and dress yourselfquickly.”

Daylight was appearing when those of the inhabitants of Montfermeil whohad begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man leading alittle girl dressed in mourning, and carrying a pink doll in her arms,pass along the road to Paris. They were going in the direction ofLivry.
It was our man and Cosette.
No one knew the man; as Cosette was no longer in rags, many did notrecognize her. Cosette was going away. With whom? She did not know.Whither? She knew not. All that she understood was that she was leavingthe Thénardier tavern behind her. No one had thought of bidding herfarewell, nor had she thought of taking leave of any one. She wasleaving that hated and hating house.
Poor, gentle creature, whose heart had been repressed up to that hour!
Cosette walked along gravely, with her large eyes wide open, and gazingat the sky. She had put her louis in the pocket of her new apron. Fromtime to time, she bent down and glanced at it; then she looked at thegood man. She felt something as though she were beside the good God.



CHAPTER X—HE WHO SEEKS TO BETTER HIMSELF MAY RENDER HIS SITUATION WORSE

Madame Thénardier had allowed her husband to have his own way, as washer wont. She had expected great results. When the man and Cosette hadtaken their departure, Thénardier allowed a full quarter of an hour toelapse; then he took her aside and showed her the fifteen hundredfrancs.
“Is that all?” said she.
It was the first time since they had set up housekeeping that she haddared to criticise one of the master’s acts.
The blow told.
“You are right, in sooth,” said he; “I am a fool. Give me my hat.”

He folded up the three bank-bills, thrust them into his pocket, and ranout in all haste; but he made a mistake and turned to the right first.Some neighbors, of whom he made inquiries, put him on the track again;the Lark and the man had been seen going in the direction of Livry. Hefollowed these hints, walking with great strides, and talking tohimself the while:—
“That man is evidently a million dressed in yellow, and I am an animal.First he gave twenty sous, then five francs, then fifty francs, thenfifteen hundred francs, all with equal readiness. He would have givenfifteen thousand francs. But I shall overtake him.”

And then, that bundle of clothes prepared beforehand for the child; allthat was singular; many mysteries lay concealed under it. One does notlet mysteries out of one’s hand when one has once grasped them. Thesecrets of the wealthy are sponges of gold; one must know how tosubject them to pressure. All these thoughts whirled through his brain.“I am an animal,” said he.
When one leaves Montfermeil and reaches the turn which the road takesthat runs to Livry, it can be seen stretching out before one to a greatdistance across the plateau. On arriving there, he calculated that heought to be able to see the old man and the child. He looked as far ashis vision reached, and saw nothing. He made fresh inquiries, but hehad wasted time. Some passers-by informed him that the man and child ofwhom he was in search had gone towards the forest in the direction ofGagny. He hastened in that direction.
They were far in advance of him; but a child walks slowly, and hewalked fast; and then, he was well acquainted with the country.
All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead like aman who has forgotten some essential point and who is ready to retracehis steps.
“I ought to have taken my gun,” said he to himself.
Thénardier was one of those double natures which sometimes pass throughour midst without our being aware of the fact, and who disappearwithout our finding them out, because destiny has only exhibited oneside of them. It is the fate of many men to live thus half submerged.In a calm and even situation, Thénardier possessed all that is requiredto make—we will not say to be—what people have agreed to call an honesttrader, a good bourgeois. At the same time certain circumstances beinggiven, certain shocks arriving to bring his under-nature to thesurface, he had all the requisites for a blackguard. He was ashopkeeper in whom there was some taint of the monster. Satan must haveoccasionally crouched down in some corner of the hovel in whichThénardier dwelt, and have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of thishideous masterpiece.
After a momentary hesitation:—
“Bah!” he thought; “they will have time to make their escape.”

And he pursued his road, walking rapidly straight ahead, and withalmost an air of certainty, with the sagacity of a fox scenting a coveyof partridges.
In truth, when he had passed the ponds and had traversed in an obliquedirection the large clearing which lies on the right of the Avenue deBellevue, and reached that turf alley which nearly makes the circuit ofthe hill, and covers the arch of the ancient aqueduct of the Abbey ofChelles, he caught sight, over the top of the brushwood, of the hat onwhich he had already erected so many conjectures; it was that man’shat. The brushwood was not high. Thénardier recognized the fact thatthe man and Cosette were sitting there. The child could not be seen onaccount of her small size, but the head of her doll was visible.
Thénardier was not mistaken. The man was sitting there, and lettingCosette get somewhat rested. The inn-keeper walked round the brushwoodand presented himself abruptly to the eyes of those whom he was insearch of.
“Pardon, excuse me, sir,” he said, quite breathless, “but here are yourfifteen hundred francs.”

So saying, he handed the stranger the three bank-bills.
The man raised his eyes.
“What is the meaning of this?”

Thénardier replied respectfully:—
“It means, sir, that I shall take back Cosette.”

Cosette shuddered, and pressed close to the old man.
He replied, gazing to the very bottom of Thénardier’s eyes the while,and enunciating every syllable distinctly:—
“You are go-ing to take back Co-sette?”

“Yes, sir, I am. I will tell you; I have considered the matter. Infact, I have not the right to give her to you. I am an honest man, yousee; this child does not belong to me; she belongs to her mother. Itwas her mother who confided her to me; I can only resign her to hermother. You will say to me, ‘But her mother is dead.’ Good; in thatcase I can only give the child up to the person who shall bring me awriting, signed by her mother, to the effect that I am to hand thechild over to the person therein mentioned; that is clear.”

The man, without making any reply, fumbled in his pocket, andThénardier beheld the pocket-book of bank-bills make its appearanceonce more.
The tavern-keeper shivered with joy.
“Good!” thought he; “let us hold firm; he is going to bribe me!”

Before opening the pocket-book, the traveller cast a glance about him:the spot was absolutely deserted; there was not a soul either in thewoods or in the valley. The man opened his pocket-book once more anddrew from it, not the handful of bills which Thénardier expected, but asimple little paper, which he unfolded and presented fully open to theinn-keeper, saying:—
“You are right; read!”

Thénardier took the paper and read:—
“M. SUR M., March 25, 1823.
“MONSIEUR THÉNARDIER:—
You will deliver Cosette to this person.You will be paid for all the little things.I have the honor to salute you with respect,FANTINE.”

“You know that signature?” resumed the man.
It certainly was Fantine’s signature; Thénardier recognized it.
There was no reply to make; he experienced two violent vexations, thevexation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for, and thevexation of being beaten; the man added:—
“You may keep this paper as your receipt.”

Thénardier retreated in tolerably good order.
“This signature is fairly well imitated,” he growled between his teeth;“however, let it go!”

Then he essayed a desperate effort.
“It is well, sir,” he said, “since you are the person, but I must bepaid for all those little things. A great deal is owing to me.”

The man rose to his feet, filliping the dust from his threadbaresleeve:—
“Monsieur Thénardier, in January last, the mother reckoned that sheowed you one hundred and twenty francs. In February, you sent her abill of five hundred francs; you received three hundred francs at theend of February, and three hundred francs at the beginning of March.Since then nine months have elapsed, at fifteen francs a month, theprice agreed upon, which makes one hundred and thirty-five francs. Youhad received one hundred francs too much; that makes thirty-five stillowing you. I have just given you fifteen hundred francs.”

Thénardier’s sensations were those of the wolf at the moment when hefeels himself nipped and seized by the steel jaw of the trap.
“Who is this devil of a man?” he thought.
He did what the wolf does: he shook himself. Audacity had succeededwith him once.
“Monsieur-I-don’t-know-your-name,” he said resolutely, and this timecasting aside all respectful ceremony, “I shall take back Cosette ifyou do not give me a thousand crowns.”

The stranger said tranquilly:—
“Come, Cosette.”

He took Cosette by his left hand, and with his right he picked up hiscudgel, which was lying on the ground.
Thénardier noted the enormous size of the cudgel and the solitude ofthe spot.
The man plunged into the forest with the child, leaving the inn-keepermotionless and speechless.
While they were walking away, Thénardier scrutinized his hugeshoulders, which were a little rounded, and his great fists.
Then, bringing his eyes back to his own person, they fell upon hisfeeble arms and his thin hands. “I really must have been exceedinglystupid not to have thought to bring my gun,” he said to himself, “sinceI was going hunting!”

However, the inn-keeper did not give up.
“I want to know where he is going,” said he, and he set out to followthem at a distance. Two things were left on his hands, an irony in theshape of the paper signed _Fantine_, and a consolation, the fifteenhundred francs.
The man led Cosette off in the direction of Livry and Bondy. He walkedslowly, with drooping head, in an attitude of reflection and sadness.The winter had thinned out the forest, so that Thénardier did not losethem from sight, although he kept at a good distance. The man turnedround from time to time, and looked to see if he was being followed.All at once he caught sight of Thénardier. He plunged suddenly into thebrushwood with Cosette, where they could both hide themselves. “Thedeuce!” said Thénardier, and he redoubled his pace.
The thickness of the undergrowth forced him to draw nearer to them.When the man had reached the densest part of the thicket, he wheeledround. It was in vain that Thénardier sought to conceal himself in thebranches; he could not prevent the man seeing him. The man cast uponhim an uneasy glance, then elevated his head and continued his course.The inn-keeper set out again in pursuit. Thus they continued for two orthree hundred paces. All at once the man turned round once more; he sawthe inn-keeper. This time he gazed at him with so sombre an air thatThénardier decided that it was “useless” to proceed further. Thénardierretraced his steps.



CHAPTER XI—NUMBER 9,430 REAPPEARS, AND COSETTE WINS IT IN THE LOTTERY

Jean Valjean was not dead.
When he fell into the sea, or rather, when he threw himself into it, hewas not ironed, as we have seen. He swam under water until he reached avessel at anchor, to which a boat was moored. He found means of hidinghimself in this boat until night. At night he swam off again, andreached the shore a little way from Cape Brun. There, as he did notlack money, he procured clothing. A small country-house in theneighborhood of Balaguier was at that time the dressing-room of escapedconvicts,—a lucrative specialty. Then Jean Valjean, like all the sorryfugitives who are seeking to evade the vigilance of the law and socialfatality, pursued an obscure and undulating itinerary. He found hisfirst refuge at Pradeaux, near Beausset. Then he directed his coursetowards Grand-Villard, near Briançon, in the Hautes-Alpes. It was afumbling and uneasy flight,—a mole’s track, whose branchings areuntraceable. Later on, some trace of his passage into Ain, in theterritory of Civrieux, was discovered; in the Pyrenees, at Accons; atthe spot called Grange-de-Doumec, near the market of Chavailles, and inthe environs of Perigueux at Brunies, canton of La Chapelle-Gonaguet.He reached Paris. We have just seen him at Montfermeil.
His first care on arriving in Paris had been to buy mourning clothesfor a little girl of from seven to eight years of age; then to procurea lodging. That done, he had betaken himself to Montfermeil. It will beremembered that already, during his preceding escape, he had made amysterious trip thither, or somewhere in that neighborhood, of whichthe law had gathered an inkling.
However, he was thought to be dead, and this still further increasedthe obscurity which had gathered about him. At Paris, one of thejournals which chronicled the fact fell into his hands. He feltreassured and almost at peace, as though he had really been dead.
On the evening of the day when Jean Valjean rescued Cosette from theclaws of the Thénardiers, he returned to Paris. He re-entered it atnightfall, with the child, by way of the Barrier Monceaux. There heentered a cabriolet, which took him to the esplanade of theObservatoire. There he got out, paid the coachman, took Cosette by thehand, and together they directed their steps through thedarkness,—through the deserted streets which adjoin the Ourcine and theGlacière, towards the Boulevard de l’Hôpital.
The day had been strange and filled with emotions for Cosette. They hadeaten some bread and cheese purchased in isolated taverns, behindhedges; they had changed carriages frequently; they had travelled shortdistances on foot. She made no complaint, but she was weary, and JeanValjean perceived it by the way she dragged more and more on his handas she walked. He took her on his back. Cosette, without letting go ofCatherine, laid her head on Jean Valjean’s shoulder, and there fellasleep.



BOOK FOURTH—THE GORBEAU HOVEL


  Enlarge
The Gorbeau Hovel  2b3-10-gorbeau-house



CHAPTER I—MASTER GORBEAU

Forty years ago, a rambler who had ventured into that unknown countryof the Salpêtrière, and who had mounted to the Barrière d’Italie by wayof the boulevard, reached a point where it might be said that Parisdisappeared. It was no longer solitude, for there were passers-by; itwas not the country, for there were houses and streets; it was not thecity, for the streets had ruts like highways, and the grass grew inthem; it was not a village, the houses were too lofty. What was it,then? It was an inhabited spot where there was no one; it was a desertplace where there was some one; it was a boulevard of the great city, astreet of Paris; more wild at night than the forest, more gloomy by daythan a cemetery.
It was the old quarter of the Marché-aux-Chevaux.
The rambler, if he risked himself outside the four decrepit walls ofthis Marché-aux-Chevaux; if he consented even to pass beyond the Rue duPetit-Banquier, after leaving on his right a garden protected by highwalls; then a field in which tan-bark mills rose like gigantic beaverhuts; then an enclosure encumbered with timber, with a heap of stumps,sawdust, and shavings, on which stood a large dog, barking; then along, low, utterly dilapidated wall, with a little black door inmourning, laden with mosses, which were covered with flowers in thespring; then, in the most deserted spot, a frightful and decrepitbuilding, on which ran the inscription in large letters: POST NOBILLS,—this daring rambler would have reached little known latitudes atthe corner of the Rue des Vignes-Saint-Marcel. There, near a factory,and between two garden walls, there could be seen, at that epoch, amean building, which, at the first glance, seemed as small as athatched hovel, and which was, in reality, as large as a cathedral. Itpresented its side and gable to the public road; hence its apparentdiminutiveness. Nearly the whole of the house was hidden. Only the doorand one window could be seen.
This hovel was only one story high.
The first detail that struck the observer was, that the door couldnever have been anything but the door of a hovel, while the window, ifit had been carved out of dressed stone instead of being in roughmasonry, might have been the lattice of a lordly mansion.
The door was nothing but a collection of worm-eaten planks roughlybound together by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs. Itopened directly on a steep staircase of lofty steps, muddy, chalky,plaster-stained, dusty steps, of the same width as itself, which couldbe seen from the street, running straight up like a ladder anddisappearing in the darkness between two walls. The top of theshapeless bay into which this door shut was masked by a narrowscantling in the centre of which a triangular hole had been sawed,which served both as wicket and air-hole when the door was closed. Onthe inside of the door the figures 52 had been traced with a couple ofstrokes of a brush dipped in ink, and above the scantling the same handhad daubed the number 50, so that one hesitated. Where was one? Abovethe door it said, “Number 50”; the inside replied, “no, Number 52.” Noone knows what dust-colored figures were suspended like draperies fromthe triangular opening.
The window was large, sufficiently elevated, garnished with Venetianblinds, and with a frame in large square panes; only these large paneswere suffering from various wounds, which were both concealed andbetrayed by an ingenious paper bandage. And the blinds, dislocated andunpasted, threatened passers-by rather than screened the occupants. Thehorizontal slats were missing here and there and had been naïvelyreplaced with boards nailed on perpendicularly; so that what began as ablind ended as a shutter. This door with an unclean, and this windowwith an honest though dilapidated air, thus beheld on the same house,produced the effect of two incomplete beggars walking side by side,with different miens beneath the same rags, the one having always beena mendicant, and the other having once been a gentleman.
The staircase led to a very vast edifice which resembled a shed whichhad been converted into a house. This edifice had, for its intestinaltube, a long corridor, on which opened to right and left sorts ofcompartments of varied dimensions which were inhabitable under stressof circumstances, and rather more like stalls than cells. Thesechambers received their light from the vague waste grounds in theneighborhood.
All this was dark, disagreeable, wan, melancholy, sepulchral; traversedaccording as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door, by cold raysor by icy winds. An interesting and picturesque peculiarity of thissort of dwelling is the enormous size of the spiders.
To the left of the entrance door, on the boulevard side, at about theheight of a man from the ground, a small window which had been walledup formed a square niche full of stones which the children had thrownthere as they passed by.
A portion of this building has recently been demolished. From whatstill remains of it one can form a judgment as to what it was in formerdays. As a whole, it was not over a hundred years old. A hundred yearsis youth in a church and age in a house. It seems as though man’slodging partook of his ephemeral character, and God’s house of hiseternity.
The postmen called the house Number 50-52; but it was known in theneighborhood as the Gorbeau house.
Let us explain whence this appellation was derived.
Collectors of petty details, who become herbalists of anecdotes, andprick slippery dates into their memories with a pin, know that therewas in Paris, during the last century, about 1770, two attorneys at theChâtelet named, one Corbeau (Raven), the other Renard (Fox). The twonames had been forestalled by La Fontaine. The opportunity was too finefor the lawyers; they made the most of it. A parody was immediately putin circulation in the galleries of the court-house, in verses thatlimped a little:—
Maître Corbeau, sur un dossier perché,Tenait dans son bec une saisie exécutoire;Maître Renard, par l’odeur alléché,Lui fit à peu près cette histoire:Hé! bonjour.  Etc.13


The two honest practitioners, embarrassed by the jests, and finding thebearing of their heads interfered with by the shouts of laughter whichfollowed them, resolved to get rid of their names, and hit upon theexpedient of applying to the king.
Their petition was presented to Louis XV. on the same day when thePapal Nuncio, on the one hand, and the Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon onthe other, both devoutly kneeling, were each engaged in putting on, inhis Majesty’s presence, a slipper on the bare feet of Madame du Barry,who had just got out of bed. The king, who was laughing, continued tolaugh, passed gayly from the two bishops to the two lawyers, andbestowed on these limbs of the law their former names, or nearly so. Bythe kings command, Maître Corbeau was permitted to add a tail to hisinitial letter and to call himself Gorbeau. Maître Renard was lesslucky; all he obtained was leave to place a P in front of his R, and tocall himself Prenard; so that the second name bore almost as muchresemblance as the first.
Now, according to local tradition, this Maître Gorbeau had been theproprietor of the building numbered 50-52 on the Boulevard del’Hôpital. He was even the author of the monumental window.
Hence the edifice bore the name of the Gorbeau house.
Opposite this house, among the trees of the boulevard, rose a great elmwhich was three-quarters dead; almost directly facing it opens the Ruede la Barrière des Gobelins, a street then without houses, unpaved,planted with unhealthy trees, which was green or muddy according to theseason, and which ended squarely in the exterior wall of Paris. An odorof copperas issued in puffs from the roofs of the neighboring factory.
The barrier was close at hand. In 1823 the city wall was still inexistence.
This barrier itself evoked gloomy fancies in the mind. It was the roadto Bicêtre. It was through it that, under the Empire and theRestoration, prisoners condemned to death re-entered Paris on the dayof their execution. It was there, that, about 1829, was committed thatmysterious assassination, called “The assassination of theFontainebleau barrier,” whose authors justice was never able todiscover; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated, afrightful enigma which has never been unriddled. Take a few steps, andyou come upon that fatal Rue Croulebarbe, where Ulbach stabbed thegoat-girl of Ivry to the sound of thunder, as in the melodramas. A fewpaces more, and you arrive at the abominable pollarded elms of theBarrière Saint-Jacques, that expedient of the philanthropist to concealthe scaffold, that miserable and shameful Place de Grève of ashop-keeping and bourgeois society, which recoiled before the deathpenalty, neither daring to abolish it with grandeur, nor to uphold itwith authority.
Leaving aside this Place Saint-Jacques, which was, as it were,predestined, and which has always been horrible, probably the mostmournful spot on that mournful boulevard, seven and thirty years ago,was the spot which even to-day is so unattractive, where stood thebuilding Number 50-52.
Bourgeois houses only began to spring up there twenty-five years later.The place was unpleasant. In addition to the gloomy thoughts whichassailed one there, one was conscious of being between the Salpêtrière,a glimpse of whose dome could be seen, and Bicêtre, whose outskirts onewas fairly touching; that is to say, between the madness of women andthe madness of men. As far as the eye could see, one could perceivenothing but the abattoirs, the city wall, and the fronts of a fewfactories, resembling barracks or monasteries; everywhere about stoodhovels, rubbish, ancient walls blackened like cerecloths, new whitewalls like winding-sheets; everywhere parallel rows of trees, buildingserected on a line, flat constructions, long, cold rows, and themelancholy sadness of right angles. Not an unevenness of the ground,not a caprice in the architecture, not a fold. The _ensemble_ wasglacial, regular, hideous. Nothing oppresses the heart like symmetry.It is because symmetry is ennui, and ennui is at the very foundation ofgrief. Despair yawns. Something more terrible than a hell where onesuffers may be imagined, and that is a hell where one is bored. If sucha hell existed, that bit of the Boulevard de l’Hôpital might haveformed the entrance to it.
Nevertheless, at nightfall, at the moment when the daylight isvanishing, especially in winter, at the hour when the twilight breezetears from the elms their last russet leaves, when the darkness is deepand starless, or when the moon and the wind are making openings in theclouds and losing themselves in the shadows, this boulevard suddenlybecomes frightful. The black lines sink inwards and are lost in theshades, like morsels of the infinite. The passer-by cannot refrain fromrecalling the innumerable traditions of the place which are connectedwith the gibbet. The solitude of this spot, where so many crimes havebeen committed, had something terrible about it. One almost had apresentiment of meeting with traps in that darkness; all the confusedforms of the darkness seemed suspicious, and the long, hollow square,of which one caught a glimpse between each tree, seemed graves: by dayit was ugly; in the evening melancholy; by night it was sinister.
In summer, at twilight, one saw, here and there, a few old women seatedat the foot of the elm, on benches mouldy with rain. These good oldwomen were fond of begging.
However, this quarter, which had a superannuated rather than an antiqueair, was tending even then to transformation. Even at that time any onewho was desirous of seeing it had to make haste. Each day some detailof the whole effect was disappearing. For the last twenty years thestation of the Orleans railway has stood beside the old faubourg anddistracted it, as it does to-day. Wherever it is placed on the bordersof a capital, a railway station is the death of a suburb and the birthof a city. It seems as though, around these great centres of themovements of a people, the earth, full of germs, trembled and yawned,to engulf the ancient dwellings of men and to allow new ones to springforth, at the rattle of these powerful machines, at the breath of thesemonstrous horses of civilization which devour coal and vomit fire. Theold houses crumble and new ones rise.
Since the Orleans railway has invaded the region of the Salpêtrière,the ancient, narrow streets which adjoin the moats Saint-Victor and theJardin des Plantes tremble, as they are violently traversed three orfour times each day by those currents of coach fiacres and omnibuseswhich, in a given time, crowd back the houses to the right and theleft; for there are things which are odd when said that are rigorouslyexact; and just as it is true to say that in large cities the sun makesthe southern fronts of houses to vegetate and grow, it is certain thatthe frequent passage of vehicles enlarges streets. The symptoms of anew life are evident. In this old provincial quarter, in the wildestnooks, the pavement shows itself, the sidewalks begin to crawl and togrow longer, even where there are as yet no pedestrians. One morning,—amemorable morning in July, 1845,—black pots of bitumen were seensmoking there; on that day it might be said that civilization hadarrived in the Rue de l’Ourcine, and that Paris had entered the suburbof Saint-Marceau.



CHAPTER II—A NEST FOR OWL AND A WARBLER

It was in front of this Gorbeau house that Jean Valjean halted. Likewild birds, he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest.
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket, drew out a sort of a pass-key,opened the door, entered, closed it again carefully, and ascended thestaircase, still carrying Cosette.
At the top of the stairs he drew from his pocket another key, withwhich he opened another door. The chamber which he entered, and whichhe closed again instantly, was a kind of moderately spacious attic,furnished with a mattress laid on the floor, a table, and severalchairs; a stove in which a fire was burning, and whose embers werevisible, stood in one corner. A lantern on the boulevard cast a vaguelight into this poor room. At the extreme end there was a dressing-roomwith a folding bed; Jean Valjean carried the child to this bed and laidher down there without waking her.
He struck a match and lighted a candle. All this was preparedbeforehand on the table, and, as he had done on the previous evening,he began to scrutinize Cosette’s face with a gaze full of ecstasy, inwhich the expression of kindness and tenderness almost amounted toaberration. The little girl, with that tranquil confidence whichbelongs only to extreme strength and extreme weakness, had fallenasleep without knowing with whom she was, and continued to sleepwithout knowing where she was.
Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child’s hand.
Nine months before he had kissed the hand of the mother, who had alsojust fallen asleep.
The same sad, piercing, religious sentiment filled his heart.
He knelt beside Cosette’s bed.
lt was broad daylight, and the child still slept. A wan ray of theDecember sun penetrated the window of the attic and lay upon theceiling in long threads of light and shade. All at once a heavily ladencarrier’s cart, which was passing along the boulevard, shook the frailbed, like a clap of thunder, and made it quiver from top to bottom.
“Yes, madame!” cried Cosette, waking with a start, “here I am! here Iam!”

And she sprang out of bed, her eyes still half shut with the heavinessof sleep, extending her arms towards the corner of the wall.
“Ah! mon Dieu, my broom!” said she.
She opened her eyes wide now, and beheld the smiling countenance ofJean Valjean.
“Ah! so it is true!” said the child. “Good morning, Monsieur.”

Children accept joy and happiness instantly and familiarly, beingthemselves by nature joy and happiness.
Cosette caught sight of Catherine at the foot of her bed, and tookpossession of her, and, as she played, she put a hundred questions toJean Valjean. Where was she? Was Paris very large? Was MadameThénardier very far away? Was she to go back? etc., etc. All at onceshe exclaimed, “How pretty it is here!”

It was a frightful hole, but she felt free.
“Must I sweep?” she resumed at last.
“Play!” said Jean Valjean.
The day passed thus. Cosette, without troubling herself to understandanything, was inexpressibly happy with that doll and that kind man.



CHAPTER III—TWO MISFORTUNES MAKE ONE PIECE OF GOOD FORTUNE

On the following morning, at daybreak, Jean Valjean was still byCosette’s bedside; he watched there motionless, waiting for her towake.
Some new thing had come into his soul.
Jean Valjean had never loved anything; for twenty-five years he hadbeen alone in the world. He had never been father, lover, husband,friend. In the prison he had been vicious, gloomy, chaste, ignorant,and shy. The heart of that ex-convict was full of virginity. His sisterand his sister’s children had left him only a vague and far-off memorywhich had finally almost completely vanished; he had made every effortto find them, and not having been able to find them, he had forgottenthem. Human nature is made thus; the other tender emotions of hisyouth, if he had ever had any, had fallen into an abyss.
When he saw Cosette, when he had taken possession of her, carried heroff, and delivered her, he felt his heart moved within him.
All the passion and affection within him awoke, and rushed towards thatchild. He approached the bed, where she lay sleeping, and trembled withjoy. He suffered all the pangs of a mother, and he knew not what itmeant; for that great and singular movement of a heart which begins tolove is a very obscure and a very sweet thing.
Poor old man, with a perfectly new heart!
Only, as he was five and fifty, and Cosette eight years of age, allthat might have been love in the whole course of his life flowedtogether into a sort of ineffable light.
It was the second white apparition which he had encountered. The Bishophad caused the dawn of virtue to rise on his horizon; Cosette causedthe dawn of love to rise.
The early days passed in this dazzled state.
Cosette, on her side, had also, unknown to herself, become anotherbeing, poor little thing! She was so little when her mother left her,that she no longer remembered her. Like all children, who resembleyoung shoots of the vine, which cling to everything, she had tried tolove; she had not succeeded. All had repulsed her,—the Thénardiers,their children, other children. She had loved the dog, and he had died,after which nothing and nobody would have anything to do with her. Itis a sad thing to say, and we have already intimated it, that, at eightyears of age, her heart was cold. It was not her fault; it was not thefaculty of loving that she lacked; alas! it was the possibility. Thus,from the very first day, all her sentient and thinking powers lovedthis kind man. She felt that which she had never felt before—asensation of expansion.
The man no longer produced on her the effect of being old or poor; shethought Jean Valjean handsome, just as she thought the hovel pretty.
These are the effects of the dawn, of childhood, of joy. The novelty ofthe earth and of life counts for something here. Nothing is so charmingas the coloring reflection of happiness on a garret. We all have in ourpast a delightful garret.
Nature, a difference of fifty years, had set a profound gulf betweenJean Valjean and Cosette; destiny filled in this gulf. Destiny suddenlyunited and wedded with its irresistible power these two uprootedexistences, differing in age, alike in sorrow. One, in fact, completedthe other. Cosette’s instinct sought a father, as Jean Valjean’sinstinct sought a child. To meet was to find each other. At themysterious moment when their hands touched, they were welded together.When these two souls perceived each other, they recognized each otheras necessary to each other, and embraced each other closely.
Taking the words in their most comprehensive and absolute sense, we maysay that, separated from every one by the walls of the tomb, JeanValjean was the widower, and Cosette was the orphan: this situationcaused Jean Valjean to become Cosette’s father after a celestialfashion.
And in truth, the mysterious impression produced on Cosette in thedepths of the forest of Chelles by the hand of Jean Valjean graspinghers in the dark was not an illusion, but a reality. The entrance ofthat man into the destiny of that child had been the advent of God.
Moreover, Jean Valjean had chosen his refuge well. There he seemedperfectly secure.
The chamber with a dressing-room, which he occupied with Cosette, wasthe one whose window opened on the boulevard. This being the onlywindow in the house, no neighbors’ glances were to be feared fromacross the way or at the side.
The ground floor of Number 50-52, a sort of dilapidated penthouse,served as a wagon-house for market-gardeners, and no communicationexisted between it and the first story. It was separated by theflooring, which had neither traps nor stairs, and which formed thediaphragm of the building, as it were. The first story contained, as wehave said, numerous chambers and several attics, only one of which wasoccupied by the old woman who took charge of Jean Valjean’shousekeeping; all the rest was uninhabited.
It was this old woman, ornamented with the name of the _principallodger_, and in reality intrusted with the functions of portress, whohad let him the lodging on Christmas eve. He had represented himself toher as a gentleman of means who had been ruined by Spanish bonds, whowas coming there to live with his little daughter. He had paid her sixmonths in advance, and had commissioned the old woman to furnish thechamber and dressing-room, as we have seen. It was this good woman whohad lighted the fire in the stove, and prepared everything on theevening of their arrival.
Week followed week; these two beings led a happy life in that hovel.
Cosette laughed, chattered, and sang from daybreak. Children have theirmorning song as well as birds.
It sometimes happened that Jean Valjean clasped her tiny red hand, allcracked with chilblains, and kissed it. The poor child, who was used tobeing beaten, did not know the meaning of this, and ran away inconfusion.
At times she became serious and stared at her little black gown.Cosette was no longer in rags; she was in mourning. She had emergedfrom misery, and she was entering into life.
Jean Valjean had undertaken to teach her to read. Sometimes, as he madethe child spell, he remembered that it was with the idea of doing evilthat he had learned to read in prison. This idea had ended in teachinga child to read. Then the ex-convict smiled with the pensive smile ofthe angels.
He felt in it a premeditation from on high, the will of some one whowas not man, and he became absorbed in reverie. Good thoughts havetheir abysses as well as evil ones.
To teach Cosette to read, and to let her play, this constituted nearlythe whole of Jean Valjean’s existence. And then he talked of hermother, and he made her pray.
She called him _father_, and knew no other name for him.
He passed hours in watching her dressing and undressing her doll, andin listening to her prattle. Life, henceforth, appeared to him to befull of interest; men seemed to him good and just; he no longerreproached any one in thought; he saw no reason why he should not liveto be a very old man, now that this child loved him. He saw a wholefuture stretching out before him, illuminated by Cosette as by acharming light. The best of us are not exempt from egotisticalthoughts. At times, he reflected with a sort of joy that she would beugly.
This is only a personal opinion; but, to utter our whole thought, atthe point where Jean Valjean had arrived when he began to love Cosette,it is by no means clear to us that he did not need this encouragementin order that he might persevere in well-doing. He had just viewed themalice of men and the misery of society under a new aspect—incompleteaspects, which unfortunately only exhibited one side of the truth, thefate of woman as summed up in Fantine, and public authority aspersonified in Javert. He had returned to prison, this time for havingdone right; he had quaffed fresh bitterness; disgust and lassitude wereoverpowering him; even the memory of the Bishop probably suffered atemporary eclipse, though sure to reappear later on luminous andtriumphant; but, after all, that sacred memory was growing dim. Whoknows whether Jean Valjean had not been on the eve of growingdiscouraged and of falling once more? He loved and grew strong again.Alas! he walked with no less indecision than Cosette. He protected her,and she strengthened him. Thanks to him, she could walk through life;thanks to her, he could continue in virtue. He was that child’s stay,and she was his prop. Oh, unfathomable and divine mystery of thebalances of destiny!



CHAPTER IV—THE REMARKS OF THE PRINCIPAL TENANT

Jean Valjean was prudent enough never to go out by day. Every evening,at twilight, he walked for an hour or two, sometimes alone, often withCosette, seeking the most deserted side alleys of the boulevard, andentering churches at nightfall. He liked to go to Saint-Médard, whichis the nearest church. When he did not take Cosette with him, sheremained with the old woman; but the child’s delight was to go out withthe good man. She preferred an hour with him to all her rapturous_tête-à-têtes_ with Catherine. He held her hand as they walked, andsaid sweet things to her.
It turned out that Cosette was a very gay little person.
The old woman attended to the housekeeping and cooking and went tomarket.
They lived soberly, always having a little fire, but like people invery moderate circumstances. Jean Valjean had made no alterations inthe furniture as it was the first day; he had merely had the glass doorleading to Cosette’s dressing-room replaced by a solid door.
He still wore his yellow coat, his black breeches, and his old hat. Inthe street, he was taken for a poor man. It sometimes happened thatkind-hearted women turned back to bestow a sou on him. Jean Valjeanaccepted the sou with a deep bow. It also happened occasionally that heencountered some poor wretch asking alms; then he looked behind him tomake sure that no one was observing him, stealthily approached theunfortunate man, put a piece of money into his hand, often a silvercoin, and walked rapidly away. This had its disadvantages. He began tobe known in the neighborhood under the name of _the beggar who givesalms_.
The old _principal lodger_, a cross-looking creature, who wasthoroughly permeated, so far as her neighbors were concerned, with theinquisitiveness peculiar to envious persons, scrutinized Jean Valjean agreat deal, without his suspecting the fact. She was a little deaf,which rendered her talkative. There remained to her from her past, twoteeth,—one above, the other below,—which she was continually knockingagainst each other. She had questioned Cosette, who had not been ableto tell her anything, since she knew nothing herself except that shehad come from Montfermeil. One morning, this spy saw Jean Valjean, withan air which struck the old gossip as peculiar, entering one of theuninhabited compartments of the hovel. She followed him with the stepof an old cat, and was able to observe him without being seen, througha crack in the door, which was directly opposite him. Jean Valjean hadhis back turned towards this door, by way of greater security, nodoubt. The old woman saw him fumble in his pocket and draw thence acase, scissors, and thread; then he began to rip the lining of one ofthe skirts of his coat, and from the opening he took a bit of yellowishpaper, which he unfolded. The old woman recognized, with terror, thefact that it was a bank-bill for a thousand francs. It was the secondor third only that she had seen in the course of her existence. Shefled in alarm.
A moment later, Jean Valjean accosted her, and asked her to go and getthis thousand-franc bill changed for him, adding that it was hisquarterly income, which he had received the day before. “Where?”thought the old woman. “He did not go out until six o’clock in theevening, and the government bank certainly is not open at that hour.”The old woman went to get the bill changed, and mentioned her surmises.That thousand-franc note, commented on and multiplied, produced a vastamount of terrified discussion among the gossips of the Rue des VignesSaint-Marcel.
A few days later, it chanced that Jean Valjean was sawing some wood, inhis shirt-sleeves, in the corridor. The old woman was in the chamber,putting things in order. She was alone. Cosette was occupied inadmiring the wood as it was sawed. The old woman caught sight of thecoat hanging on a nail, and examined it. The lining had been sewed upagain. The good woman felt of it carefully, and thought she observed inthe skirts and revers thicknesses of paper. More thousand-francbank-bills, no doubt!
She also noticed that there were all sorts of things in the pockets.Not only the needles, thread, and scissors which she had seen, but abig pocket-book, a very large knife, and—a suspiciouscircumstance—several wigs of various colors. Each pocket of this coathad the air of being in a manner provided against unexpected accidents.
Thus the inhabitants of the house reached the last days of winter.



CHAPTER V—A FIVE-FRANC PIECE FALLS ON THE GROUND AND PRODUCES A TUMULT

Near Saint-Médard’s church there was a poor man who was in the habit ofcrouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned, andon whom Jean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity. He never passedthis man without giving him a few sous. Sometimes he spoke to him.Those who envied this mendicant said that he belonged to the police. Hewas an ex-beadle of seventy-five, who was constantly mumbling hisprayers.
One evening, as Jean Valjean was passing by, when he had not Cosettewith him, he saw the beggar in his usual place, beneath the lanternwhich had just been lighted. The man seemed engaged in prayer,according to his custom, and was much bent over. Jean Valjean steppedup to him and placed his customary alms in his hand. The mendicantraised his eyes suddenly, stared intently at Jean Valjean, then droppedhis head quickly. This movement was like a flash of lightning. JeanValjean was seized with a shudder. It seemed to him that he had justcaught sight, by the light of the street lantern, not of the placid andbeaming visage of the old beadle, but of a well-known and startlingface. He experienced the same impression that one would have on findingone’s self, all of a sudden, face to face, in the dark, with a tiger.He recoiled, terrified, petrified, daring neither to breathe, to speak,to remain, nor to flee, staring at the beggar who had dropped his head,which was enveloped in a rag, and no longer appeared to know that hewas there. At this strange moment, an instinct—possibly the mysteriousinstinct of self-preservation,—restrained Jean Valjean from uttering aword. The beggar had the same figure, the same rags, the sameappearance as he had every day. “Bah!” said Jean Valjean, “I am mad! Iam dreaming! Impossible!” And he returned profoundly troubled.
He hardly dared to confess, even to himself, that the face which hethought he had seen was the face of Javert.
That night, on thinking the matter over, he regretted not havingquestioned the man, in order to force him to raise his head a secondtime.
On the following day, at nightfall, he went back. The beggar was at hispost. “Good day, my good man,” said Jean Valjean, resolutely, handinghim a sou. The beggar raised his head, and replied in a whining voice,“Thanks, my good sir.” It was unmistakably the ex-beadle.
Jean Valjean felt completely reassured. He began to laugh. “How thedeuce could I have thought that I saw Javert there?” he thought. “Am Igoing to lose my eyesight now?” And he thought no more about it.
A few days afterwards,—it might have been at eight o’clock in theevening,—he was in his room, and engaged in making Cosette spell aloud,when he heard the house door open and then shut again. This struck himas singular. The old woman, who was the only inhabitant of the houseexcept himself, always went to bed at nightfall, so that she might notburn out her candles. Jean Valjean made a sign to Cosette to be quiet.He heard some one ascending the stairs. It might possibly be the oldwoman, who might have fallen ill and have been out to the apothecary’s.Jean Valjean listened.
The step was heavy, and sounded like that of a man; but the old womanwore stout shoes, and there is nothing which so strongly resembles thestep of a man as that of an old woman. Nevertheless, Jean Valjean blewout his candle.
He had sent Cosette to bed, saying to her in a low voice, “Get into bedvery softly”; and as he kissed her brow, the steps paused.
Jean Valjean remained silent, motionless, with his back towards thedoor, seated on the chair from which he had not stirred, and holdinghis breath in the dark.
After the expiration of a rather long interval, he turned round, as heheard nothing more, and, as he raised his eyes towards the door of hischamber, he saw a light through the keyhole. This light formed a sortof sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall. There wasevidently some one there, who was holding a candle in his hand andlistening.
Several minutes elapsed thus, and the light retreated. But he heard nosound of footsteps, which seemed to indicate that the person who hadbeen listening at the door had removed his shoes.
Jean Valjean threw himself, all dressed as he was, on his bed, andcould not close his eyes all night.
At daybreak, just as he was falling into a doze through fatigue, he wasawakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some attic at theend of the corridor, then he heard the same masculine footstep whichhad ascended the stairs on the preceding evening. The step wasapproaching. He sprang off the bed and applied his eye to the keyhole,which was tolerably large, hoping to see the person who had made hisway by night into the house and had listened at his door, as he passed.It was a man, in fact, who passed, this time without pausing, in frontof Jean Valjean’s chamber. The corridor was too dark to allow of theperson’s face being distinguished; but when the man reached thestaircase, a ray of light from without made it stand out like asilhouette, and Jean Valjean had a complete view of his back. The manwas of lofty stature, clad in a long frock-coat, with a cudgel underhis arm. The formidable neck and shoulders belonged to Javert.
Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of himthrough his window opening on the boulevard, but he would have beenobliged to open the window: he dared not.
It was evident that this man had entered with a key, and like himself.Who had given him that key? What was the meaning of this?
When the old woman came to do the work, at seven o’clock in themorning, Jean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her, but he did notquestion her. The good woman appeared as usual.
As she swept up she remarked to him:—
“Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night?”

At that age, and on that boulevard, eight o’clock in the evening wasthe dead of the night.
“That is true, by the way,” he replied, in the most natural tonepossible. “Who was it?”

“It was a new lodger who has come into the house,” said the old woman.
“And what is his name?”

“I don’t know exactly; Dumont, or Daumont, or some name of that sort.”

“And who is this Monsieur Dumont?”

The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes, and answered:—
“A gentleman of property, like yourself.”

Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning. Jean Valjean thought he perceivedone.
When the old woman had taken her departure, he did up a hundred francswhich he had in a cupboard, into a roll, and put it in his pocket. Inspite of all the precautions which he took in this operation so that hemight not be heard rattling silver, a hundred-sou piece escaped fromhis hands and rolled noisily on the floor.
When darkness came on, he descended and carefully scrutinized bothsides of the boulevard. He saw no one. The boulevard appeared to beabsolutely deserted. It is true that a person can conceal himselfbehind trees.
He went upstairs again.
“Come.” he said to Cosette.
He took her by the hand, and they both went out.



BOOK FIFTH—FOR A BLACK HUNT, A MUTE PACK



CHAPTER I—THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY

An observation here becomes necessary, in view of the pages which thereader is about to peruse, and of others which will be met with furtheron.
The author of this book, who regrets the necessity of mentioninghimself, has been absent from Paris for many years. Paris has beentransformed since he quitted it. A new city has arisen, which is, aftera fashion, unknown to him. There is no need for him to say that heloves Paris: Paris is his mind’s natal city. In consequence ofdemolitions and reconstructions, the Paris of his youth, that Pariswhich he bore away religiously in his memory, is now a Paris of daysgone by. He must be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it stillexisted. It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to aspot and says, “In such a street there stands such and such a house,”neither street nor house will any longer exist in that locality.Readers may verify the facts if they care to take the trouble. For hisown part, he is unacquainted with the new Paris, and he writes with theold Paris before his eyes in an illusion which is precious to him. Itis a delight to him to dream that there still lingers behind himsomething of that which he beheld when he was in his own country, andthat all has not vanished. So long as you go and come in your nativeland, you imagine that those streets are a matter of indifference toyou; that those windows, those roofs, and those doors are nothing toyou; that those walls are strangers to you; that those trees are merelythe first encountered haphazard; that those houses, which you do notenter, are useless to you; that the pavements which you tread aremerely stones. Later on, when you are no longer there, you perceivethat the streets are dear to you; that you miss those roofs, thosedoors; and that those walls are necessary to you, those trees are wellbeloved by you; that you entered those houses which you never entered,every day, and that you have left a part of your heart, of your blood,of your soul, in those pavements. All those places which you no longerbehold, which you may never behold again, perchance, and whose memoryyou have cherished, take on a melancholy charm, recur to your mind withthe melancholy of an apparition, make the holy land visible to you, andare, so to speak, the very form of France, and you love them; and youcall them up as they are, as they were, and you persist in this, andyou will submit to no change: for you are attached to the figure ofyour fatherland as to the face of your mother.
May we, then, be permitted to speak of the past in the present? Thatsaid, we beg the reader to take note of it, and we continue.
Jean Valjean instantly quitted the boulevard and plunged into thestreets, taking the most intricate lines which he could devise,returning on his track at times, to make sure that he was not beingfollowed.

  Enlarge
The Black Hunt  2b5-1-black-hunt

This manœuvre is peculiar to the hunted stag. On soil where an imprintof the track may be left, this manœuvre possesses, among otheradvantages, that of deceiving the huntsmen and the dogs, by throwingthem on the wrong scent. In venery this is called _falsere-imbushment_.
The moon was full that night. Jean Valjean was not sorry for this. Themoon, still very close to the horizon, cast great masses of light andshadow in the streets. Jean Valjean could glide along close to thehouses on the dark side, and yet keep watch on the light side. He didnot, perhaps, take sufficiently into consideration the fact that thedark side escaped him. Still, in the deserted lanes which lie near theRue Poliveau, he thought he felt certain that no one was following him.
Cosette walked on without asking any questions. The sufferings of thefirst six years of her life had instilled something passive into hernature. Moreover,—and this is a remark to which we shall frequentlyhave occasion to recur,—she had grown used, without being herself awareof it, to the peculiarities of this good man and to the freaks ofdestiny. And then she was with him, and she felt safe.
Jean Valjean knew no more where he was going than did Cosette. Hetrusted in God, as she trusted in him. It seemed as though he also wereclinging to the hand of some one greater than himself; he thought hefelt a being leading him, though invisible. However, he had no settledidea, no plan, no project. He was not even absolutely sure that it wasJavert, and then it might have been Javert, without Javert knowing thathe was Jean Valjean. Was not he disguised? Was not he believed to bedead? Still, queer things had been going on for several days. He wantedno more of them. He was determined not to return to the Gorbeau house.Like the wild animal chased from its lair, he was seeking a hole inwhich he might hide until he could find one where he might dwell.
Jean Valjean described many and varied labyrinths in the Mouffetardquarter, which was already asleep, as though the discipline of theMiddle Ages and the yoke of the curfew still existed; he combined invarious manners, with cunning strategy, the Rue Censier and the RueCopeau, the Rue du Battoir-Saint-Victor and the Rue du Puits l’Ermite.There are lodging houses in this locality, but he did not even enterone, finding nothing which suited him. He had no doubt that if any onehad chanced to be upon his track, they would have lost it.
As eleven o’clock struck from Saint-Étienne-du-Mont, he was traversingthe Rue de Pontoise, in front of the office of the commissary ofpolice, situated at No. 14. A few moments later, the instinct of whichwe have spoken above made him turn round. At that moment he sawdistinctly, thanks to the commissary’s lantern, which betrayed them,three men who were following him closely, pass, one after the other,under that lantern, on the dark side of the street. One of the threeentered the alley leading to the commissary’s house. The one whomarched at their head struck him as decidedly suspicious.
“Come, child,” he said to Cosette; and he made haste to quit the RuePontoise.
He took a circuit, turned into the Passage des Patriarches, which wasclosed on account of the hour, strode along the Rue de l‘Épée-de-Boisand the Rue de l’Arbalète, and plunged into the Rue des Postes.
At that time there was a square formed by the intersection of streets,where the College Rollin stands to-day, and where the RueNeuve-Sainte-Geneviève turns off.
It is understood, of course, that the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève is anold street, and that a posting-chaise does not pass through the Rue desPostes once in ten years. In the thirteenth century this Rue des Posteswas inhabited by potters, and its real name is Rue des Pots.
The moon cast a livid light into this open space. Jean Valjean wentinto ambush in a doorway, calculating that if the men were stillfollowing him, he could not fail to get a good look at them, as theytraversed this illuminated space.
In point of fact, three minutes had not elapsed when the men made theirappearance. There were four of them now. All were tall, dressed inlong, brown coats, with round hats, and huge cudgels in their hands.Their great stature and their vast fists rendered them no less alarmingthan did their sinister stride through the darkness. One would havepronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois.
They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group, like men inconsultation. They had an air of indecision. The one who appeared to betheir leader turned round and pointed hastily with his right hand inthe direction which Jean Valjean had taken; another seemed to indicatethe contrary direction with considerable obstinacy. At the moment whenthe first man wheeled round, the moon fell full in his face. JeanValjean recognized Javert perfectly.



CHAPTER II—IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D’AUSTERLITZ BEARS CARRIAGES

Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean: fortunately it still lastedfor the men. He took advantage of their hesitation. It was time lostfor them, but gained for him. He slipped from under the gate where hehad concealed himself, and went down the Rue des Postes, towards theregion of the Jardin des Plantes. Cosette was beginning to be tired. Hetook her in his arms and carried her. There were no passers-by, and thestreet lanterns had not been lighted on account of there being a moon.
He redoubled his pace.
In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries, on the front ofwhich the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancientinscription:—
De Goblet fils c’est ici la fabrique;Venez choisir des cruches et des brocs,Des pots à fleurs, des tuyaux, de la brique.A tout venant le Cœur vend des Carreaux.14

He left behind him the Rue de la Clef, then the Fountain Saint-Victor,skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets, and reached thequay. There he turned round. The quay was deserted. The streets weredeserted. There was no one behind him. He drew a long breath.
He gained the Pont d’Austerlitz.
Tolls were still collected there at that epoch.
He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou.
“It is two sous,” said the old soldier in charge of the bridge. “Youare carrying a child who can walk. Pay for two.”

He paid, vexed that his passage should have aroused remark. Everyflight should be an imperceptible slipping away.
A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself, and onits way, like him, to the right bank. This was of use to him. He couldtraverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart.
Towards the middle of the Bridge, Cosette, whose feet were benumbed,wanted to walk. He set her on the ground and took her hand again.
The bridge once crossed, he perceived some timber-yards on his right.He directed his course thither. In order to reach them, it wasnecessary to risk himself in a tolerably large unsheltered andilluminated space. He did not hesitate. Those who were on his track hadevidently lost the scent, and Jean Valjean believed himself to be outof danger. Hunted, yes; followed, no.
A little street, the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, opened outbetween two timber-yards enclosed in walls. This street was dark andnarrow and seemed made expressly for him. Before entering it he cast aglance behind him.
From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent of the Pontd’Austerlitz.
Four shadows were just entering on the bridge.
These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes and wereon their way to the right bank.
These four shadows were the four men.
Jean Valjean shuddered like the wild beast which is recaptured.
One hope remained to him; it was, that the men had not, perhaps,stepped on the bridge, and had not caught sight of him while he wascrossing the large illuminated space, holding Cosette by the hand.
In that case, by plunging into the little street before him, he mightescape, if he could reach the timber-yards, the marshes, themarket-gardens, the uninhabited ground which was not built upon.
It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent littlestreet. He entered it.



CHAPTER III—TO WIT, THE PLAN OF PARIS IN 1727

Three hundred paces further on, he arrived at a point where the streetforked. It separated into two streets, which ran in a slanting line,one to the right, and the other to the left.
Jean Valjean had before him what resembled the two branches of a Y.Which should he choose? He did not hesitate, but took the one on theright.
Why?
Because that to the left ran towards a suburb, that is to say, towardsinhabited regions, and the right branch towards the open country, thatis to say, towards deserted regions.
However, they no longer walked very fast. Cosette’s pace retarded JeanValjean’s.
He took her up and carried her again. Cosette laid her head on theshoulder of the good man and said not a word.
He turned round from time to time and looked behind him. He took careto keep always on the dark side of the street. The street was straightin his rear. The first two or three times that he turned round he sawnothing; the silence was profound, and he continued his march somewhatreassured. All at once, on turning round, he thought he perceived inthe portion of the street which he had just passed through, far off inthe obscurity, something which was moving.
He rushed forward precipitately rather than walked, hoping to find someside-street, to make his escape through it, and thus to break his scentonce more.
He arrived at a wall.
This wall, however, did not absolutely prevent further progress; it wasa wall which bordered a transverse street, in which the one he hadtaken ended.
Here again, he was obliged to come to a decision; should he go to theright or to the left.
He glanced to the right. The fragmentary lane was prolonged betweenbuildings which were either sheds or barns, then ended at a blindalley. The extremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible,—a loftywhite wall.
He glanced to the left. On that side the lane was open, and about twohundred paces further on, ran into a street of which it was theaffluent. On that side lay safety.
At the moment when Jean Valjean was meditating a turn to the left, inan effort to reach the street which he saw at the end of the lane, heperceived a sort of motionless, black statue at the corner of the laneand the street towards which he was on the point of directing hissteps.
It was some one, a man, who had evidently just been posted there, andwho was barring the passage and waiting.
Jean Valjean recoiled.
The point of Paris where Jean Valjean found himself, situated betweenthe Faubourg Saint-Antoine and la Râpée, is one of those which recentimprovements have transformed from top to bottom,—resulting indisfigurement according to some, and in a transfiguration according toothers. The market-gardens, the timber-yards, and the old buildingshave been effaced. To-day, there are brand-new, wide streets, arenas,circuses, hippodromes, railway stations, and a prison, Mazas, there;progress, as the reader sees, with its antidote.
Half a century ago, in that ordinary, popular tongue, which is allcompounded of traditions, which persists in calling the Institut _lesQuatre-Nations_, and the Opera-Comique _Feydeau_, the precise spotwhither Jean Valjean had arrived was called _le Petit-Picpus_. ThePorte Saint-Jacques, the Porte Paris, the Barrière des Sergents, thePorcherons, la Galiote, les Célestins, les Capucins, le Mail, laBourbe, l’Arbre de Cracovie, la Petite-Pologne—these are the names ofold Paris which survive amid the new. The memory of the populace hoversover these relics of the past.
Le Petit-Picpus, which, moreover, hardly ever had any existence, andnever was more than the outline of a quarter, had nearly the monkishaspect of a Spanish town. The roads were not much paved; the streetswere not much built up. With the exception of the two or three streets,of which we shall presently speak, all was wall and solitude there. Nota shop, not a vehicle, hardly a candle lighted here and there in thewindows; all lights extinguished after ten o’clock. Gardens, convents,timber-yards, marshes; occasional lowly dwellings and great walls ashigh as the houses.
Such was this quarter in the last century. The Revolution snubbed itsoundly. The republican government demolished and cut through it.Rubbish shoots were established there. Thirty years ago, this quarterwas disappearing under the erasing process of new buildings. To-day, ithas been utterly blotted out. The Petit-Picpus, of which no existingplan has preserved a trace, is indicated with sufficient clearness inthe plan of 1727, published at Paris by Denis Thierry, RueSaint-Jacques, opposite the Rue du Plâtre; and at Lyons, by Jean Girin,Rue Mercière, at the sign of Prudence. Petit-Picpus had, as we havejust mentioned, a Y of streets, formed by the Rue duChemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, which spread out in two branches, taking onthe left the name of Little Picpus Street, and on the right the name ofthe Rue Polonceau. The two limbs of the Y were connected at the apex asby a bar; this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur. The Rue Polonceau endedthere; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on, and ascended towards the Lenoirmarket. A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the RuePolonceau, and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur, turning abruptly ata right angle, in front of him the wall of that street, and on hisright a truncated prolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur, which had no issueand was called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot.
It was here that Jean Valjean stood.
As we have just said, on catching sight of that black silhouettestanding on guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the RuePetit-Picpus, he recoiled. There could be no doubt of it. That phantomwas lying in wait for him.
What was he to do?
The time for retreating was passed. That which he had perceived inmovement an instant before, in the distant darkness, was Javert and hissquad without a doubt. Javert was probably already at the commencementof the street at whose end Jean Valjean stood. Javert, to allappearances, was acquainted with this little labyrinth, and had takenhis precautions by sending one of his men to guard the exit. Thesesurmises, which so closely resembled proofs, whirled suddenly, like ahandful of dust caught up by an unexpected gust of wind, through JeanValjean’s mournful brain. He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot; there hewas cut off. He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus; there stood a sentinel.He saw that black form standing out in relief against the whitepavement, illuminated by the moon; to advance was to fall into thisman’s hands; to retreat was to fling himself into Javert’s arms. JeanValjean felt himself caught, as in a net, which was slowly contracting;he gazed heavenward in despair.



CHAPTER IV—THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT

In order to understand what follows, it is requisite to form an exactidea of the Droit-Mur lane, and, in particular, of the angle which oneleaves on the left when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau into thislane. Droit-Mur lane was almost entirely bordered on the right, as faras the Rue Petit-Picpus, by houses of mean aspect; on the left by asolitary building of severe outlines, composed of numerous parts whichgrew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the RuePetit-Picpus side; so that this building, which was very lofty on theRue Petit-Picpus side, was tolerably low on the side adjoining the RuePolonceau. There, at the angle of which we have spoken, it descended tosuch a degree that it consisted of merely a wall. This wall did notabut directly on the street; it formed a deeply retreating niche,concealed by its two corners from two observers who might have been,one in the Rue Polonceau, the other in the Rue Droit-Mur.
Beginning with these angles of the niche, the wall extended along theRue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49, and along theRue Droit-Mur, where the fragment was much shorter, as far as thegloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected,thus forming another retreating angle in the street. This gable wassombre of aspect; only one window was visible, or, to speak morecorrectly, two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and keptconstantly closed.
The state of the places of which we are here giving a description isrigorously exact, and will certainly awaken a very precise memory inthe mind of old inhabitants of the quarter.
The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal andwretched door; it was a vast, formless assemblage of perpendicularplanks, the upper ones being broader than the lower, bound together bylong transverse strips of iron. At one side there was a carriage gateof the ordinary dimensions, and which had evidently not been cut morethan fifty years previously.
A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche, and the wall wascovered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau.
In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself, this sombrebuilding had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which temptedhim. He ran his eyes rapidly over it; he said to himself, that if hecould contrive to get inside it, he might save himself. First heconceived an idea, then a hope.
In the central portion of the front of this building, on the RueDroit-Mur side, there were at all the windows of the different storiesancient cistern pipes of lead. The various branches of the pipes whichled from one central pipe to all these little basins sketched out asort of tree on the front. These ramifications of pipes with theirhundred elbows imitated those old leafless vine-stocks which writheover the fronts of old farm-houses.
This odd espalier, with its branches of lead and iron, was the firstthing that struck Jean Valjean. He seated Cosette with her back againsta stone post, with an injunction to be silent, and ran to the spotwhere the conduit touched the pavement. Perhaps there was some way ofclimbing up by it and entering the house. But the pipe was dilapidatedand past service, and hardly hung to its fastenings. Moreover, all thewindows of this silent dwelling were grated with heavy iron bars, eventhe attic windows in the roof. And then, the moon fell full upon thatfaçade, and the man who was watching at the corner of the street wouldhave seen Jean Valjean in the act of climbing. And finally, what was tobe done with Cosette? How was she to be drawn up to the top of athree-story house?
He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe, and crawledalong the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau.
When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette, henoticed that no one could see him there. As we have just explained, hewas concealed from all eyes, no matter from which direction they wereapproaching; besides this, he was in the shadow. Finally, there weretwo doors; perhaps they might be forced. The wall above which he sawthe linden-tree and the ivy evidently abutted on a garden where hecould, at least, hide himself, although there were as yet no leaves onthe trees, and spend the remainder of the night.
Time was passing; he must act quickly.
He felt over the carriage door, and immediately recognized the factthat it was impracticable outside and in.
He approached the other door with more hope; it was frightfullydecrepit; its very immensity rendered it less solid; the planks wererotten; the iron bands—there were only three of them—were rusted. Itseemed as though it might be possible to pierce this worm-eatenbarrier.
On examining it he found that the door was not a door; it had neitherhinges, cross-bars, lock, nor fissure in the middle; the iron bandstraversed it from side to side without any break. Through the crevicesin the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stoneroughly cemented together, which passers-by might still have seen thereten years ago. He was forced to acknowledge with consternation thatthis apparent door was simply the wooden decoration of a buildingagainst which it was placed. It was easy to tear off a plank; but then,one found one’s self face to face with a wall.



CHAPTER V—WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS

At that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible at somedistance. Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street.Seven or eight soldiers, drawn up in a platoon, had just debouched intothe Rue Polonceau. He saw the gleam of their bayonets. They wereadvancing towards him; these soldiers, at whose head he distinguishedJavert’s tall figure, advanced slowly and cautiously. They haltedfrequently; it was plain that they were searching all the nooks of thewalls and all the embrasures of the doors and alleys.
This was some patrol that Javert had encountered—there could be nomistake as to this surmise—and whose aid he had demanded.
Javert’s two acolytes were marching in their ranks.
At the rate at which they were marching, and in consideration of thehalts which they were making, it would take them about a quarter of anhour to reach the spot where Jean Valjean stood. It was a frightfulmoment. A few minutes only separated Jean Valjean from that terribleprecipice which yawned before him for the third time. And the galleysnow meant not only the galleys, but Cosette lost to him forever; thatis to say, a life resembling the interior of a tomb.
There was but one thing which was possible.
Jean Valjean had this peculiarity, that he carried, as one might say,two beggar’s pouches: in one he kept his saintly thoughts; in the otherthe redoubtable talents of a convict. He rummaged in the one or theother, according to circumstances.
Among his other resources, thanks to his numerous escapes from theprison at Toulon, he was, as it will be remembered, a past master inthe incredible art of crawling up without ladder or climbing-irons, bysheer muscular force, by leaning on the nape of his neck, hisshoulders, his hips, and his knees, by helping himself on the rareprojections of the stone, in the right angle of a wall, as high as thesixth story, if need be; an art which has rendered so celebrated and soalarming that corner of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris by whichBattemolle, condemned to death, made his escape twenty years ago.
Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied thelinden; it was about eighteen feet in height. The angle which it formedwith the gable of the large building was filled, at its lowerextremity, by a mass of masonry of a triangular shape, probablyintended to preserve that too convenient corner from the rubbish ofthose dirty creatures called the passers-by. This practice of fillingup corners of the wall is much in use in Paris.
This mass was about five feet in height; the space above the summit ofthis mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteenfeet.
The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping.
Cosette was the difficulty, for she did not know how to climb a wall.Should he abandon her? Jean Valjean did not once think of that. It wasimpossible to carry her. A man’s whole strength is required tosuccessfully carry out these singular ascents. The least burden woulddisturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards.
A rope would have been required; Jean Valjean had none. Where was he toget a rope at midnight, in the Rue Polonceau? Certainly, if JeanValjean had had a kingdom, he would have given it for a rope at thatmoment.
All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which sometimesdazzle, sometimes illuminate us.
Jean Valjean’s despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post of theblind alley Genrot.
At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris. Atnightfall lanterns placed at regular distances were lighted; they wereascended and descended by means of a rope, which traversed the streetfrom side to side, and was adjusted in a groove of the post. The pulleyover which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern in alittle iron box, the key to which was kept by the lamp-lighter, and therope itself was protected by a metal case.
Jean Valjean, with the energy of a supreme struggle, crossed the streetat one bound, entered the blind alley, broke the latch of the littlebox with the point of his knife, and an instant later he was besideCosette once more. He had a rope. These gloomy inventors of expedientswork rapidly when they are fighting against fatality.
We have already explained that the lanterns had not been lighted thatnight. The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus naturally extinct,like the rest; and one could pass directly under it without evennoticing that it was no longer in its place.
Nevertheless, the hour, the place, the darkness, Jean Valjean’sabsorption, his singular gestures, his goings and comings, all hadbegun to render Cosette uneasy. Any other child than she would havegiven vent to loud shrieks long before. She contented herself withplucking Jean Valjean by the skirt of his coat. They could hear thesound of the patrol’s approach ever more and more distinctly.
“Father,” said she, in a very low voice, “I am afraid. Who is comingyonder?”

“Hush!” replied the unhappy man; “it is Madame Thénardier.”

Cosette shuddered. He added:—
“Say nothing. Don’t interfere with me. If you cry out, if you weep, theThénardier is lying in wait for you. She is coming to take you back.”

Then, without haste, but without making a useless movement, with firmand curt precision, the more remarkable at a moment when the patrol andJavert might come upon him at any moment, he undid his cravat, passedit round Cosette’s body under the armpits, taking care that it shouldnot hurt the child, fastened this cravat to one end of the rope, bymeans of that knot which seafaring men call a “swallow knot,” took theother end of the rope in his teeth, pulled off his shoes and stockings,which he threw over the wall, stepped upon the mass of masonry, andbegan to raise himself in the angle of the wall and the gable with asmuch solidity and certainty as though he had the rounds of a ladderunder his feet and elbows. Half a minute had not elapsed when he wasresting on his knees on the wall.
Cosette gazed at him in stupid amazement, without uttering a word. JeanValjean’s injunction, and the name of Madame Thénardier, had chilledher blood.
All at once she heard Jean Valjean’s voice crying to her, though in avery low tone:—
“Put your back against the wall.”

She obeyed.
“Don’t say a word, and don’t be alarmed,” went on Jean Valjean.
And she felt herself lifted from the ground.
Before she had time to recover herself, she was on the top of the wall.
Jean Valjean grasped her, put her on his back, took her two tiny handsin his large left hand, lay down flat on his stomach and crawled alongon top of the wall as far as the cant. As he had guessed, there stood abuilding whose roof started from the top of the wooden barricade anddescended to within a very short distance of the ground, with a gentleslope which grazed the linden-tree. A lucky circumstance, for the wallwas much higher on this side than on the street side. Jean Valjeancould only see the ground at a great depth below him.
He had just reached the slope of the roof, and had not yet left thecrest of the wall, when a violent uproar announced the arrival of thepatrol. The thundering voice of Javert was audible:—
“Search the blind alley! The Rue Droit-Mur is guarded! so is the RuePetit-Picpus. I’ll answer for it that he is in the blind alley.”

The soldiers rushed into the Genrot alley.
Jean Valjean allowed himself to slide down the roof, still holding fastto Cosette, reached the linden-tree, and leaped to the ground. Whetherfrom terror or courage, Cosette had not breathed a sound, though herhands were a little abraded.



CHAPTER VI—THE BEGINNING OF AN ENIGMA

Jean Valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast andof singular aspect; one of those melancholy gardens which seem made tobe looked at in winter and at night. This garden was oblong in shape,with an alley of large poplars at the further end, tolerably tallforest trees in the corners, and an unshaded space in the centre, wherecould be seen a very large, solitary tree, then several fruit-trees,gnarled and bristling like bushes, beds of vegetables, a melon patch,whose glass frames sparkled in the moonlight, and an old well. Here andthere stood stone benches which seemed black with moss. The alleys werebordered with gloomy and very erect little shrubs. The grass had halftaken possession of them, and a green mould covered the rest.
Jean Valjean had beside him the building whose roof had served him as ameans of descent, a pile of fagots, and, behind the fagots, directlyagainst the wall, a stone statue, whose mutilated face was no longeranything more than a shapeless mask which loomed vaguely through thegloom.
The building was a sort of ruin, where dismantled chambers weredistinguishable, one of which, much encumbered, seemed to serve as ashed.
The large building of the Rue Droit-Mur, which had a wing on the RuePetit-Picpus, turned two façades, at right angles, towards this garden.These interior façades were even more tragic than the exterior. All thewindows were grated. Not a gleam of light was visible at any one ofthem. The upper story had scuttles like prisons. One of those façadescast its shadow on the other, which fell over the garden like animmense black pall.
No other house was visible. The bottom of the garden was lost in mistand darkness. Nevertheless, walls could be confusedly made out, whichintersected as though there were more cultivated land beyond, and thelow roofs of the Rue Polonceau.
Nothing more wild and solitary than this garden could be imagined.There was no one in it, which was quite natural in view of the hour;but it did not seem as though this spot were made for any one to walkin, even in broad daylight.
Jean Valjean’s first care had been to get hold of his shoes and putthem on again, then to step under the shed with Cosette. A man who isfleeing never thinks himself sufficiently hidden. The child, whosethoughts were still on the Thénardier, shared his instinct forwithdrawing from sight as much as possible.
Cosette trembled and pressed close to him. They heard the tumultuousnoise of the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets; theblows of their gun-stocks against the stones; Javert’s appeals to thepolice spies whom he had posted, and his imprecations mingled withwords which could not be distinguished.
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour it seemed as though thatspecies of stormy roar were becoming more distant. Jean Valjean heldhis breath.
He had laid his hand lightly on Cosette’s mouth.
However, the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm, thatthis frightful uproar, close and furious as it was, did not disturb himby so much as the shadow of a misgiving. It seemed as though thosewalls had been built of the deaf stones of which the Scriptures speak.
All at once, in the midst of this profound calm, a fresh sound arose; asound as celestial, divine, ineffable, ravishing, as the other had beenhorrible. It was a hymn which issued from the gloom, a dazzling burstof prayer and harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of the night;women’s voices, but voices composed at one and the same time of thepure accents of virgins and the innocent accents of children,—voiceswhich are not of the earth, and which resemble those that the newborninfant still hears, and which the dying man hears already. This songproceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above the garden. Atthe moment when the hubbub of demons retreated, one would have saidthat a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom.
Cosette and Jean Valjean fell on their knees.
They knew not what it was, they knew not where they were; but both ofthem, the man and the child, the penitent and the innocent, felt thatthey must kneel.
These voices had this strange characteristic, that they did not preventthe building from seeming to be deserted. It was a supernatural chantin an uninhabited house.
While these voices were singing, Jean Valjean thought of nothing. He nolonger beheld the night; he beheld a blue sky. It seemed to him that hefelt those wings which we all have within us, unfolding.
The song died away. It may have lasted a long time. Jean Valjean couldnot have told. Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment.
All fell silent again. There was no longer anything in the street;there was nothing in the garden. That which had menaced, that which hadreassured him,—all had vanished. The breeze swayed a few dry weeds onthe crest of the wall, and they gave out a faint, sweet, melancholysound.



CHAPTER VII—CONTINUATION OF THE ENIGMA

The night wind had risen, which indicated that it must be between oneand two o’clock in the morning. Poor Cosette said nothing. As she hadseated herself beside him and leaned her head against him, Jean Valjeanhad fancied that she was asleep. He bent down and looked at her.Cosette’s eyes were wide open, and her thoughtful air pained JeanValjean.
She was still trembling.
“Are you sleepy?” said Jean Valjean.
“I am very cold,” she replied.
A moment later she resumed:—
“Is she still there?”

“Who?” said Jean Valjean.
“Madame Thénardier.”

Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed tomake Cosette keep silent.
“Ah!” said he, “she is gone. You need fear nothing further.”

The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast.
The ground was damp, the shed open on all sides, the breeze grew morekeen every instant. The goodman took off his coat and wrapped it roundCosette.
“Are you less cold now?” said he.
“Oh, yes, father.”

“Well, wait for me a moment. I will soon be back.”

He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building, seeking abetter shelter. He came across doors, but they were closed. There werebars at all the windows of the ground floor.
Just after he had turned the inner angle of the edifice, he observedthat he was coming to some arched windows, where he perceived a light.He stood on tiptoe and peeped through one of these windows. They allopened on a tolerably vast hall, paved with large flagstones, cut up byarcades and pillars, where only a tiny light and great shadows werevisible. The light came from a taper which was burning in one corner.The apartment was deserted, and nothing was stirring in it.Nevertheless, by dint of gazing intently he thought he perceived on theground something which appeared to be covered with a winding-sheet, andwhich resembled a human form. This form was lying face downward, flaton the pavement, with the arms extended in the form of a cross, in theimmobility of death. One would have said, judging from a sort ofserpent which undulated over the floor, that this sinister form had arope round its neck.
The whole chamber was bathed in that mist of places which are sparelyilluminated, which adds to horror.
Jean Valjean often said afterwards, that, although many funerealspectres had crossed his path in life, he had never beheld anythingmore blood-curdling and terrible than that enigmatical formaccomplishing some inexplicable mystery in that gloomy place, andbeheld thus at night. It was alarming to suppose that that thing wasperhaps dead; and still more alarming to think that it was perhapsalive.
He had the courage to plaster his face to the glass, and to watchwhether the thing would move. In spite of his remaining thus whatseemed to him a very long time, the outstretched form made no movement.All at once he felt himself overpowered by an inexpressible terror, andhe fled. He began to run towards the shed, not daring to look behindhim. It seemed to him, that if he turned his head, he should see thatform following him with great strides and waving its arms.
He reached the ruin all out of breath. His knees were giving waybeneath him; the perspiration was pouring from him.
Where was he? Who could ever have imagined anything like that sort ofsepulchre in the midst of Paris! What was this strange house? Anedifice full of nocturnal mystery, calling to souls through thedarkness with the voice of angels, and when they came, offering themabruptly that terrible vision; promising to open the radiant portals ofheaven, and then opening the horrible gates of the tomb! And itactually was an edifice, a house, which bore a number on the street! Itwas not a dream! He had to touch the stones to convince himself thatsuch was the fact.
Cold, anxiety, uneasiness, the emotions of the night, had given him agenuine fever, and all these ideas were clashing together in his brain.
He stepped up to Cosette. She was asleep.



CHAPTER VIII—THE ENIGMA BECOMES DOUBLY MYSTERIOUS

The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep.
He sat down beside her and began to think. Little by little, as hegazed at her, he grew calm and regained possession of his freedom ofmind.
He clearly perceived this truth, the foundation of his life henceforth,that so long as she was there, so long as he had her near him, heshould need nothing except for her, he should fear nothing except forher. He was not even conscious that he was very cold, since he hadtaken off his coat to cover her.
Nevertheless, athwart this reverie into which he had fallen he hadheard for some time a peculiar noise. It was like the tinkling of abell. This sound proceeded from the garden. It could be hearddistinctly though faintly. It resembled the faint, vague music producedby the bells of cattle at night in the pastures.
This noise made Valjean turn round.
He looked and saw that there was some one in the garden.
A being resembling a man was walking amid the bell-glasses of the melonbeds, rising, stooping, halting, with regular movements, as though hewere dragging or spreading out something on the ground. This personappeared to limp.
Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy. Forthem everything is hostile and suspicious. They distrust the daybecause it enables people to see them, and the night because it aids insurprising them. A little while before he had shivered because thegarden was deserted, and now he shivered because there was some onethere.
He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors. He said tohimself that Javert and the spies had, perhaps, not taken theirdeparture; that they had, no doubt, left people on the watch in thestreet; that if this man should discover him in the garden, he wouldcry out for help against thieves and deliver him up. He took thesleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind a heap ofold furniture, which was out of use, in the most remote corner of theshed. Cosette did not stir.
From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melonpatch. The strange thing about it was, that the sound of the bellfollowed each of this man’s movements. When the man approached, thesound approached; when the man retreated, the sound retreated; if hemade any hasty gesture, a tremolo accompanied the gesture; when hehalted, the sound ceased. It appeared evident that the bell wasattached to that man; but what could that signify? Who was this man whohad a bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox?
As he put these questions to himself, he touched Cosette’s hands. Theywere icy cold.
“Ah! good God!” he cried.
He spoke to her in a low voice:—
“Cosette!”

She did not open her eyes.
He shook her vigorously.
She did not wake.
“Is she dead?” he said to himself, and sprang to his feet, quiveringfrom head to foot.
The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind. Thereare moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies,and violently force the partitions of our brains. When those we loveare in question, our prudence invents every sort of madness. Heremembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal.
Cosette was pale, and had fallen at full length on the ground at hisfeet, without a movement.
He listened to her breathing: she still breathed, but with arespiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction.
How was he to warm her back to life? How was he to rouse her? All thatwas not connected with this vanished from his thoughts. He rushedwildly from the ruin.
It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside afire in less than a quarter of an hour.



CHAPTER IX—THE MAN WITH THE BELL

He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden. He hadtaken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of hiswaistcoat.
The man’s head was bent down, and he did not see him approaching. In afew strides Jean Valjean stood beside him.
Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry:—
“One hundred francs!”

The man gave a start and raised his eyes.
“You can earn a hundred francs,” went on Jean Valjean, “if you willgrant me shelter for this night.”

The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean’s terrified countenance.
“What! so it is you, Father Madeleine!” said the man.
That name, thus pronounced, at that obscure hour, in that unknown spot,by that strange man, made Jean Valjean start back.
He had expected anything but that. The person who thus addressed himwas a bent and lame old man, dressed almost like a peasant, who wore onhis left knee a leather knee-cap, whence hung a moderately large bell.His face, which was in the shadow, was not distinguishable.
However, the goodman had removed his cap, and exclaimed, trembling allover:—
“Ah, good God! How come you here, Father Madeleine? Where did youenter? Dieu-Jésus! Did you fall from heaven? There is no trouble aboutthat: if ever you do fall, it will be from there. And what a state youare in! You have no cravat; you have no hat; you have no coat! Do youknow, you would have frightened any one who did not know you? No coat!Lord God! Are the saints going mad nowadays? But how did you get inhere?”

His words tumbled over each other. The goodman talked with a rusticvolubility, in which there was nothing alarming. All this was utteredwith a mixture of stupefaction and _naïve_ kindliness.
“Who are you? and what house is this?” demanded Jean Valjean.
“Ah! pardieu, this is too much!” exclaimed the old man. “I am theperson for whom you got the place here, and this house is the one whereyou had me placed. What! You don’t recognize me?”

“No,” said Jean Valjean; “and how happens it that you know me?”

“You saved my life,” said the man.
He turned. A ray of moonlight outlined his profile, and Jean Valjeanrecognized old Fauchelevent.
“Ah!” said Jean Valjean, “so it is you? Yes, I recollect you.”

“That is very lucky,” said the old man, in a reproachful tone.
“And what are you doing here?” resumed Jean Valjean.
“Why, I am covering my melons, of course!”

In fact, at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him, old Faucheleventheld in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied inspreading over the melon bed. During the hour or thereabouts that hehad been in the garden he had already spread out a number of them. Itwas this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiarmovements observed from the shed by Jean Valjean.
He continued:—
“I said to myself, ‘The moon is bright: it is going to freeze. What ifI were to put my melons into their greatcoats?’ And,” he added, lookingat Jean Valjean with a broad smile,—“pardieu! you ought to have donethe same! But how do you come here?”

Jean Valjean, finding himself known to this man, at least only underthe name of Madeleine, thenceforth advanced only with caution. Hemultiplied his questions. Strange to say, their rôles seemed to bereversed. It was he, the intruder, who interrogated.
“And what is this bell which you wear on your knee?”

“This,” replied Fauchelevent, “is so that I may be avoided.”

“What! so that you may be avoided?”

Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air.
“Ah, goodness! there are only women in this house—many young girls. Itappears that I should be a dangerous person to meet. The bell givesthem warning. When I come, they go.”

“What house is this?”

“Come, you know well enough.”

“But I do not.”

“Not when you got me the place here as gardener?”

“Answer me as though I knew nothing.”

“Well, then, this is the Petit-Picpus convent.”

Memories recurred to Jean Valjean. Chance, that is to say, Providence,had cast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoinewhere old Fauchelevent, crippled by the fall from his cart, had beenadmitted on his recommendation two years previously. He repeated, asthough talking to himself:—
“The Petit-Picpus convent.”

“Exactly,” returned old Fauchelevent. “But to come to the point, howthe deuce did you manage to get in here, you, Father Madeleine? Nomatter if you are a saint; you are a man as well, and no man entershere.”

“You certainly are here.”

“There is no one but me.”

“Still,” said Jean Valjean, “I must stay here.”

“Ah, good God!” cried Fauchelevent.
Jean Valjean drew near to the old man, and said to him in a gravevoice:—
“Father Fauchelevent, I saved your life.”

“I was the first to recall it,” returned Fauchelevent.
“Well, you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the oldendays.”

Fauchelevent took in his aged, trembling, and wrinkled hands JeanValjean’s two robust hands, and stood for several minutes as thoughincapable of speaking. At length he exclaimed:—
“Oh! that would be a blessing from the good God, if I could make yousome little return for that! Save your life! Monsieur le Maire, disposeof the old man!”

A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man. His countenance seemedto emit a ray of light.
“What do you wish me to do?” he resumed.
“That I will explain to you. You have a chamber?”

“I have an isolated hovel yonder, behind the ruins of the old convent,in a corner which no one ever looks into. There are three rooms in it.”

The hut was, in fact, so well hidden behind the ruins, and so cleverlyarranged to prevent it being seen, that Jean Valjean had not perceivedit.
“Good,” said Jean Valjean. “Now I am going to ask two things of you.”

“What are they, Mr. Mayor?”

“In the first place, you are not to tell any one what you know aboutme. In the second, you are not to try to find out anything more.”

“As you please. I know that you can do nothing that is not honest, thatyou have always been a man after the good God’s heart. And then,moreover, you it was who placed me here. That concerns you. I am atyour service.”

“That is settled then. Now, come with me. We will go and get thechild.”

“Ah!” said Fauchelevent, “so there is a child?”

He added not a word further, and followed Jean Valjean as a dog followshis master.
Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette, who had grown rosy againbefore the flame of a good fire, was lying asleep in the old gardener’sbed. Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more; his hat,which he had flung over the wall, had been found and picked up. WhileJean Valjean was putting on his coat, Fauchelevent had removed the belland kneecap, which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket thatadorned the wall. The two men were warming themselves with their elbowsresting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese,black bread, a bottle of wine, and two glasses, and the old man wassaying to Jean Valjean, as he laid his hand on the latter’s knee: “Ah!Father Madeleine! You did not recognize me immediately; you savepeople’s lives, and then you forget them! That is bad! But theyremember you! You are an ingrate!”




CHAPTER X—WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT

The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side, so to speak,had come about in the simplest possible manner.
When Jean Valjean, on the evening of the very day when Javert hadarrested him beside Fantine’s death-bed, had escaped from the town jailof M. sur M., the police had supposed that he had betaken himself toParis. Paris is a maelstrom where everything is lost, and everythingdisappears in this belly of the world, as in the belly of the sea. Noforest hides a man as does that crowd. Fugitives of every sort knowthis. They go to Paris as to an abyss; there are gulfs which save. Thepolice know it also, and it is in Paris that they seek what they havelost elsewhere. They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert wassummoned to Paris to throw light on their researches. Javert had, infact, rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean.Javert’s zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked by M.Chabouillet, secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Anglès. M.Chabouillet, who had, moreover, already been Javert’s patron, had theinspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris. ThereJavert rendered himself useful in divers and, though the word may seemstrange for such services, honorable manners.
He no longer thought of Jean Valjean,—the wolf of to-day causes thesedogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday,—when,in December, 1823, he read a newspaper, he who never read newspapers;but Javert, a monarchical man, had a desire to know the particulars ofthe triumphal entry of the “Prince Generalissimo” into Bayonne. Just ashe was finishing the article, which interested him; a name, the name ofJean Valjean, attracted his attention at the bottom of a page. Thepaper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead, and publishedthe fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it. He confinedhimself to the remark, “That’s a good entry.” Then he threw aside thepaper, and thought no more about it.
Some time afterwards, it chanced that a police report was transmittedfrom the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police inParis, concerning the abduction of a child, which had taken place,under peculiar circumstances, as it was said, in the commune ofMontfermeil. A little girl of seven or eight years of age, the reportsaid, who had been intrusted by her mother to an inn-keeper of thatneighborhood, had been stolen by a stranger; this child answered to thename of Cosette, and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine, who haddied in the hospital, it was not known where or when.
This report came under Javert’s eye and set him to thinking.
The name of Fantine was well known to him. He remembered that JeanValjean had made him, Javert, burst into laughter, by asking him for arespite of three days, for the purpose of going to fetch thatcreature’s child. He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had beenarrested in Paris at the very moment when he was stepping into thecoach for Montfermeil. Some signs had made him suspect at the time thatthis was the second occasion of his entering that coach, and that hehad already, on the previous day, made an excursion to the neighborhoodof that village, for he had not been seen in the village itself. Whathad he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil? It could noteven be surmised. Javert understood it now. Fantine’s daughter wasthere. Jean Valjean was going there in search of her. And now thischild had been stolen by a stranger! Who could that stranger be? Couldit be Jean Valjean? But Jean Valjean was dead. Javert, without sayinganything to anybody, took the coach from the _Pewter Platter_,Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette, and made a trip to Montfermeil.
He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there; hefound a great deal of obscurity.
For the first few days the Thénardiers had chattered in their rage. Thedisappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village. Heimmediately obtained numerous versions of the story, which ended in theabduction of a child. Hence the police report. But their first vexationhaving passed off, Thénardier, with his wonderful instinct, had veryquickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up theprosecutor of the Crown, and that his complaints with regard to the_abduction_ of Cosette would have as their first result to fix uponhimself, and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand, theglittering eye of justice. The last thing that owls desire is to have acandle brought to them. And in the first place, how explain the fifteenhundred francs which he had received? He turned squarely round, put agag on his wife’s mouth, and feigned astonishment when the _stolenchild_ was mentioned to him. He understood nothing about it; no doubthe had grumbled for awhile at having that dear little creature “takenfrom him” so hastily; he should have liked to keep her two or threedays longer, out of tenderness; but her “grandfather” had come for herin the most natural way in the world. He added the “grandfather,” whichproduced a good effect. This was the story that Javert hit upon when hearrived at Montfermeil. The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish.
Nevertheless, Javert dropped a few questions, like plummets, intoThénardier’s history. “Who was that grandfather? and what was hisname?” Thénardier replied with simplicity: “He is a wealthy farmer. Isaw his passport. I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert.”

Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name. ThereuponJavert returned to Paris.
“Jean Valjean is certainly dead,” said he, “and I am a ninny.”

He had again begun to forget this history, when, in the course ofMarch, 1824, he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parishof Saint-Médard and who had been surnamed “the mendicant who givesalms.” This person, the story ran, was a man of means, whose name noone knew exactly, and who lived alone with a little girl of eightyears, who knew nothing about herself, save that she had come fromMontfermeil. Montfermeil! that name was always coming up, and it madeJavert prick up his ears. An old beggar police spy, an ex-beadle, towhom this person had given alms, added a few more details. Thisgentleman of property was very shy,—never coming out except in theevening, speaking to no one, except, occasionally to the poor, andnever allowing any one to approach him. He wore a horrible old yellowfrock-coat, which was worth many millions, being all wadded withbank-bills. This piqued Javert’s curiosity in a decided manner. Inorder to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarminghim, he borrowed the beadle’s outfit for a day, and the place where theold spy was in the habit of crouching every evening, whining orisonsthrough his nose, and playing the spy under cover of prayer.
“The suspected individual” did indeed approach Javert thus disguised,and bestow alms on him. At that moment Javert raised his head, and theshock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal tothe one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean.
However, the darkness might have misled him; Jean Valjean’s death wasofficial; Javert cherished very grave doubts; and when in doubt,Javert, the man of scruples, never laid a finger on any one’s collar.
He followed his man to the Gorbeau house, and got “the old woman” totalking, which was no difficult matter. The old woman confirmed thefact regarding the coat lined with millions, and narrated to him theepisode of the thousand-franc bill. She had seen it! She had handledit! Javert hired a room; that evening he installed himself in it. Hecame and listened at the mysterious lodger’s door, hoping to catch thesound of his voice, but Jean Valjean saw his candle through thekey-hole, and foiled the spy by keeping silent.
On the following day Jean Valjean decamped; but the noise made by thefall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman, who, hearingthe rattling of coin, suspected that he might be intending to leave,and made haste to warn Javert. At night, when Jean Valjean came out,Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with twomen.
Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture, but he had notmentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize; that washis secret, and he had kept it for three reasons: in the first place,because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert;next, because, to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escapeand was reputed dead, on a criminal whom justice had formerly classedforever as _among malefactors of the most dangerous sort_, was amagnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police wouldassuredly not leave to a newcomer like Javert, and he was afraid ofbeing deprived of his convict; and lastly, because Javert, being anartist, had a taste for the unforeseen. He hated those well-heraldedsuccesses which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloombrushed off. He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark andto unveil them suddenly at the last.
Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree, then from corner tocorner of the street, and had not lost sight of him for a singleinstant; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to bethe most secure Javert’s eye had been on him. Why had not Javertarrested Jean Valjean? Because he was still in doubt.
It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not preciselyat its ease; the free press embarrassed it; several arbitrary arrestsdenounced by the newspapers, had echoed even as far as the Chambers,and had rendered the Prefecture timid. Interference with individualliberty was a grave matter. The police agents were afraid of making amistake; the prefect laid the blame on them; a mistake meant dismissal.The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph,reproduced by twenty newspapers, would have caused in Paris:“Yesterday, an aged grandfather, with white hair, a respectable andwell-to-do gentleman, who was walking with his grandchild, aged eight,was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as anescaped convict!”

Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own;injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of theprefect. He was really in doubt.
Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark.
Sadness, uneasiness, anxiety, depression, this fresh misfortune ofbeing forced to flee by night, to seek a chance refuge in Paris forCosette and himself, the necessity of regulating his pace to the paceof the child—all this, without his being aware of it, had altered JeanValjean’s walk, and impressed on his bearing such senility, that thepolice themselves, incarnate in the person of Javert, might, and did infact, make a mistake. The impossibility of approaching too close, hiscostume of an _émigré_ preceptor, the declaration of Thénardier whichmade a grandfather of him, and, finally, the belief in his death inprison, added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick inJavert’s mind.
For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for hispapers; but if the man was not Jean Valjean, and if this man was not agood, honest old fellow living on his income, he was probably somemerry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the obscure web ofParisian misdeeds, some chief of a dangerous band, who gave alms toconceal his other talents, which was an old dodge. He had trustyfellows, accomplices’ retreats in case of emergencies, in which hewould, no doubt, take refuge. All these turns which he was makingthrough the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple andhonest man. To arrest him too hastily would be “to kill the hen thatlaid the golden eggs.” Where was the inconvenience in waiting? Javertwas very sure that he would not escape.
Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind, putting tohimself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage.
It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise, that, thanks to thebrilliant light thrown from a dram-shop, he decidedly recognized JeanValjean.
There are in this world two beings who give a profound start,—themother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey.Javert gave that profound start.
As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean, the formidableconvict, he perceived that there were only three of them, and he askedfor reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise. Oneputs on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel.
This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with hisagents came near causing him to lose the trail. He speedily divined,however, that Jean Valjean would want to put the river between hispursuers and himself. He bent his head and reflected like a blood-houndwho puts his nose to the ground to make sure that he is on the rightscent. Javert, with his powerful rectitude of instinct, went straightto the bridge of Austerlitz. A word with the toll-keeper furnished himwith the information which he required: “Have you seen a man with alittle girl?” “I made him pay two sous,” replied the toll-keeper.Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse thesmall illuminated spot on the other side of the water, leading Cosetteby the hand. He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine; heremembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap, and of thesole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus. _He made sureof his back burrows_, as huntsmen say; he hastily despatched one of hisagents, by a roundabout way, to guard that issue. A patrol which wasreturning to the Arsenal post having passed him, he made a requisitionon it, and caused it to accompany him. In such games soldiers are aces.Moreover, the principle is, that in order to get the best of a wildboar, one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs. Thesecombinations having been effected, feeling that Jean Valjean was caughtbetween the blind alley Genrot on the right, his agent on the left, andhimself, Javert, in the rear, he took a pinch of snuff.
Then he began the game. He experienced one ecstatic and infernalmoment; he allowed his man to go on ahead, knowing that he had himsafe, but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long aspossible, happy at the thought that he was taken and yet at seeing himfree, gloating over him with his gaze, with that voluptuousness of thespider which allows the fly to flutter, and of the cat which lets themouse run. Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality,—the obscuremovements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers. What a delightthis strangling is!
Javert was enjoying himself. The meshes of his net were stoutlyknotted. He was sure of success; all he had to do now was to close hishand.
Accompanied as he was, the very idea of resistance was impossible,however vigorous, energetic, and desperate Jean Valjean might be.

  Enlarge
Javert on the Hunt  2b5-10-javert-on-the-hunt

Javert advanced slowly, sounding, searching on his way all the nooks ofthe street like so many pockets of thieves.
When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there.
His exasperation can be imagined.
He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus;that agent, who had remained imperturbably at his post, had not seenthe man pass.
It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns; that is tosay, he escapes although he has the pack on his very heels, and thenthe oldest huntsmen know not what to say. Duvivier, Ligniville, andDesprez halt short. In a discomfiture of this sort, Artonge exclaims,“It was not a stag, but a sorcerer.” Javert would have liked to utterthe same cry.
His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage.
It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia,that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India, that Cæsar mademistakes in the war in Africa, that Cyrus was at fault in the war inScythia, and that Javert blundered in this campaign against JeanValjean. He was wrong, perhaps, in hesitating in his recognition of theexconvict. The first glance should have sufficed him. He was wrong innot arresting him purely and simply in the old building; he was wrongin not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue dePontoise. He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in thefull light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin. Advice is certainlyuseful; it is a good thing to know and to interrogate those of the dogswho deserve confidence; but the hunter cannot be too cautious when heis chasing uneasy animals like the wolf and the convict. Javert, bytaking too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of thepack on the trail, alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart,and so made him run. Above all, he was wrong in that after he hadpicked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz, he played thatformidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of athread. He thought himself stronger than he was, and believed that hecould play at the game of the mouse and the lion. At the same time, hereckoned himself as too weak, when he judged it necessary to obtainreinforcement. Fatal precaution, waste of precious time! Javertcommitted all these blunders, and nonetheless was one of the cleverestand most correct spies that ever existed. He was, in the full force ofthe term, what is called in venery a _knowing dog_. But what is therethat is perfect?
Great strategists have their eclipses.
The greatest follies are often composed, like the largest ropes, of amultitude of strands. Take the cable thread by thread, take all thepetty determining motives separately, and you can break them one afterthe other, and you say, “That is all there is of it!” Braid them, twistthem together; the result is enormous: it is Attila hesitating betweenMarcian on the east and Valentinian on the west; it is Hannibaltarrying at Capua; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube.
However that may be, even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjeanhad escaped him, Javert did not lose his head. Sure that the convictwho had broken his ban could not be far off, he established sentinels,he organized traps and ambuscades, and beat the quarter all that night.The first thing he saw was the disorder in the street lantern whoserope had been cut. A precious sign which, however, led him astray,since it caused him to turn all his researches in the direction of theCul-de-Sac Genrot. In this blind alley there were tolerably low wallswhich abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches ofwaste land. Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction.The fact is, that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-SacGenrot, he would probably have done so and have been lost. Javertexplored these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had beenhunting for a needle.
At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook, and returned tothe Prefecture of Police, as much ashamed as a police spy who had beencaptured by a robber might have been.



BOOK SIXTH—LE PETIT-PICPUS



CHAPTER I—NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS

Nothing, half a century ago, more resembled every other carriage gatethan the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. This entrance,which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion, permitted a viewof two things, neither of which have anything very funereal aboutthem,—a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines, and the face ofa lounging porter. Above the wall, at the bottom of the court, talltrees were visible. When a ray of sunlight enlivened the courtyard,when a glass of wine cheered up the porter, it was difficult to passNumber 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smilingimpression of it. Nevertheless, it was a sombre place of which one hadhad a glimpse.
The threshold smiled; the house prayed and wept.
If one succeeded in passing the porter, which was not easy,—which waseven nearly impossible for every one, for there was an _open sesame!_which it was necessary to know,—if, the porter once passed, one entereda little vestibule on the right, on which opened a staircase shut inbetween two walls and so narrow that only one person could ascend it ata time, if one did not allow one’s self to be alarmed by a daubing ofcanary yellow, with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase,if one ventured to ascend it, one crossed a first landing, then asecond, and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellowwash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceablepersistency. Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautifulwindows. The corridor took a turn and became dark. If one doubled thiscape, one arrived a few paces further on, in front of a door which wasall the more mysterious because it was not fastened. If one opened it,one found one’s self in a little chamber about six feet square, tiled,well-scrubbed, clean, cold, and hung with nankin paper with greenflowers, at fifteen sous the roll. A white, dull light fell from alarge window, with tiny panes, on the left, which usurped the wholewidth of the room. One gazed about, but saw no one; one listened, oneheard neither a footstep nor a human murmur. The walls were bare, thechamber was not furnished; there was not even a chair.
One looked again, and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangularhole, about a foot square, with a grating of interlacing iron bars,black, knotted, solid, which formed squares—I had almost said meshes—ofless than an inch and a half in diagonal length. The little greenflowers of the nankin paper ran in a calm and orderly manner to thoseiron bars, without being startled or thrown into confusion by theirfunereal contact. Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfullythin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole, thisgrating would have prevented it. It did not allow the passage of thebody, but it did allow the passage of the eyes; that is to say, of themind. This seems to have occurred to them, for it had been re-enforcedby a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear, andpierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of astrainer. At the bottom of this plate, an aperture had been piercedexactly similar to the orifice of a letter box. A bit of tape attachedto a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening.
If the tape was pulled, a bell rang, and one heard a voice very near athand, which made one start.
“Who is there?” the voice demanded.
It was a woman’s voice, a gentle voice, so gentle that it was mournful.
Here, again, there was a magical word which it was necessary to know.If one did not know it, the voice ceased, the wall became silent oncemore, as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been onthe other side of it.
If one knew the password, the voice resumed, “Enter on the right.”

One then perceived on the right, facing the window, a glass doorsurmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray. On raising the latch andcrossing the threshold, one experienced precisely the same impressionas when one enters at the theatre into a grated _baignoire_, before thegrating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted. One was, in fact, ina sort of theatre-box, narrow, furnished with two old chairs, and amuch-frayed straw matting, sparely illuminated by the vague light fromthe glass door; a regular box, with its front just of a height to leanupon, bearing a tablet of black wood. This box was grated, only thegrating of it was not of gilded wood, as at the opera; it was amonstrous lattice of iron bars, hideously interlaced and riveted to thewall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists.
The first minutes passed; when one’s eyes began to grow used to thiscellar-like half-twilight, one tried to pass the grating, but got nofurther than six inches beyond it. There he encountered a barrier ofblack shutters, re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of woodpainted a gingerbread yellow. These shutters were divided into long,narrow slats, and they masked the entire length of the grating. Theywere always closed. At the expiration of a few moments one heard avoice proceeding from behind these shutters, and saying:—
“I am here. What do you wish with me?”

It was a beloved, sometimes an adored, voice. No one was visible.Hardly the sound of a breath was audible. It seemed as though it were aspirit which had been evoked, that was speaking to you across the wallsof the tomb.
If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rareconditions, the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you; theevoked spirit became an apparition. Behind the grating, behind theshutter, one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight, a head,of which only the mouth and the chin were visible; the rest was coveredwith a black veil. One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe, and a formthat was barely defined, covered with a black shroud. That head spokewith you, but did not look at you and never smiled at you.
The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner thatyou saw her in the white, and she saw you in the black. This light wassymbolical.
Nevertheless, your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which wasmade in that place shut off from all glances. A profound vaguenessenveloped that form clad in mourning. Your eyes searched thatvagueness, and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition.At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you couldsee nothing. What you beheld was night, emptiness, shadows, a wintrymist mingled with a vapor from the tomb, a sort of terrible peace, asilence from which you could gather nothing, not even sighs, a gloom inwhich you could distinguish nothing, not even phantoms.
What you beheld was the interior of a cloister.
It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was calledthe Convent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration. The box inwhich you stood was the parlor. The first voice which had addressed youwas that of the portress who always sat motionless and silent, on theother side of the wall, near the square opening, screened by the irongrating and the plate with its thousand holes, as by a double visor.The obscurity which bathed the grated box arose from the fact that theparlor, which had a window on the side of the world, had none on theside of the convent. Profane eyes must see nothing of that sacredplace.
Nevertheless, there was something beyond that shadow; there was alight; there was life in the midst of that death. Although this was themost strictly walled of all convents, we shall endeavor to make our wayinto it, and to take the reader in, and to say, without transgressingthe proper bounds, things which story-tellers have never seen, andhave, therefore, never described.



CHAPTER II—THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA

This convent, which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year inthe Rue Petit-Picpus, was a community of Bernardines of the obedienceof Martin Verga.
These Bernardines were attached, in consequence, not to Clairvaux, likethe Bernardine monks, but to Cîteaux, like the Benedictine monks. Inother words, they were the subjects, not of Saint Bernard, but of SaintBenoît.
Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent knows that MartinVerga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines, withSalamanca for the head of the order, and Alcala as the branchestablishment.
This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholiccountries of Europe.
There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of oneorder on another. To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoît, whichis here in question: there are attached to this order, without countingthe obedience of Martin Verga, four congregations,—two in Italy,Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua; two in France, Cluny andSaint-Maur; and nine orders,—Vallombrosa, Granmont, the Célestins, theCamaldules, the Carthusians, the Humiliés, the Olivateurs, theSilvestrins, and lastly, Cîteaux; for Cîteaux itself, a trunk for otherorders, is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoît. Cîteaux dates from SaintRobert, Abbé de Molesme, in the diocese of Langres, in 1098. Now it wasin 529 that the devil, having retired to the desert of Subiaco—he wasold—had he turned hermit?—was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo,where he dwelt, by Saint-Benoît, then aged seventeen.
After the rule of the Carmelites, who go barefoot, wear a bit of willowon their throats, and never sit down, the harshest rule is that of theBernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga. They are clothed in black,with a guimpe, which, in accordance with the express command ofSaint-Benoît, mounts to the chin. A robe of serge with large sleeves, alarge woollen veil, the guimpe which mounts to the chin cut square onthe breast, the band which descends over their brow to their eyes,—thisis their dress. All is black except the band, which is white. Thenovices wear the same habit, but all in white. The professed nuns alsowear a rosary at their side.
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the PerpetualAdoration, like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament,who, at the beginning of this century, had two houses in Paris,—one atthe Temple, the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève. However, theBernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus, of whom we are speaking,were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament,cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève and at the Temple. Therewere numerous differences in their rule; there were some in theircostume. The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus wore theblack guimpe, and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament and of the RueNeuve-Sainte-Geneviève wore a white one, and had, besides, on theirbreasts, a Holy Sacrament about three inches long, in silver gilt orgilded copper. The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this HolySacrament. The Perpetual Adoration, which was common to the house ofthe Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple, leaves those twoorders perfectly distinct. Their only resemblance lies in this practiceof the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of MartinVerga, just as there existed a similarity in the study and theglorification of all the mysteries relating to the infancy, the life,and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin, between the two orders, whichwere, nevertheless, widely separated, and on occasion even hostile. TheOratory of Italy, established at Florence by Philip de Neri, and theOratory of France, established by Pierre de Bérulle. The Oratory ofFrance claimed the precedence, since Philip de Neri was only a saint,while Bérulle was a cardinal.
Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga.
The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round,abstain from meat, fast in Lent and on many other days which arepeculiar to them, rise from their first sleep, from one to threeo’clock in the morning, to read their breviary and chant matins, sleepin all seasons between serge sheets and on straw, make no use of thebath, never light a fire, scourge themselves every Friday, observe therule of silence, speak to each other only during the recreation hours,which are very brief, and wear drugget chemises for six months in theyear, from September 14th, which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross,until Easter. These six months are a modification: the rule says allthe year, but this drugget chemise, intolerable in the heat of summer,produced fevers and nervous spasms. The use of it had to be restricted.Even with this palliation, when the nuns put on this chemise on the14th of September, they suffer from fever for three or four days.Obedience, poverty, chastity, perseverance in their seclusion,—theseare their vows, which the rule greatly aggravates.
The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers, who are called_mères vocales_ because they have a voice in the chapter. A prioresscan only be re-elected twice, which fixes the longest possible reign ofa prioress at nine years.
They never see the officiating priest, who is always hidden from themby a serge curtain nine feet in height. During the sermon, when thepreacher is in the chapel, they drop their veils over their faces. Theymust always speak low, walk with their eyes on the ground and theirheads bowed. One man only is allowed to enter the convent,—thearchbishop of the diocese.
There is really one other,—the gardener. But he is always an old man,and, in order that he may always be alone in the garden, and that thenuns may be warned to avoid him, a bell is attached to his knee.
Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive. It is thecanonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation. As at thevoice of Christ, _ut voci Christi_, at a gesture, at the first sign,_ad nutum, ad primum signum_, immediately, with cheerfulness, withperseverance, with a certain blind obedience, _prompte, hilariter,perseveranter et cæca quadam obedientia_, as the file in the hand ofthe workman, _quasi limam in manibus fabri_, without power to read orto write without express permission, _legere vel scribere nonaddiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia_.
Each one of them in turn makes what they call _reparation_. Thereparation is the prayer for all the sins, for all the faults, for allthe dissensions, for all the violations, for all the iniquities, forall the crimes committed on earth. For the space of twelve consecutivehours, from four o’clock in the afternoon till four o’clock in themorning, or from four o’clock in the morning until four o’clock in theafternoon, the sister who is making _reparation_ remains on her kneeson the stone before the Holy Sacrament, with hands clasped, a ropearound her neck. When her fatigue becomes unendurable, she prostratesherself flat on her face against the earth, with her arms outstretchedin the form of a cross; this is her only relief. In this attitude sheprays for all the guilty in the universe. This is great to sublimity.
As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle, itis called without distinction, _to make reparation_ or _to be at thepost_. The nuns even prefer, out of humility, this last expression,which contains an idea of torture and abasement.
_To make reparation_ is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed.The sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt to falldirectly behind her.
Besides this, there is always a sister kneeling before the HolySacrament. This station lasts an hour. They relieve each other likesoldiers on guard. This is the Perpetual Adoration.
The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped withpeculiar solemnity, recalling, not the saints and martyrs, but momentsin the life of Jesus Christ: as Mother Nativity, Mother Conception,Mother Presentation, Mother Passion. But the names of saints are notinterdicted.
When one sees them, one never sees anything but their mouths.
All their teeth are yellow. No tooth-brush ever entered that convent.Brushing one’s teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is theloss of one’s soul.
They never say _my_. They possess nothing of their own, and they mustnot attach themselves to anything. They call everything _our_; thus:our veil, our chaplet; if they were speaking of their chemise, theywould say _our chemise_. Sometimes they grow attached to some pettyobject,—to a book of hours, a relic, a medal that has been blessed. Assoon as they become aware that they are growing attached to thisobject, they must give it up. They recall the words of Saint Thérèse,to whom a great lady said, as she was on the point of entering herorder, “Permit me, mother, to send for a Bible to which I am greatlyattached.” “Ah, you are attached to something! In that case, do notenter our order!”

Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up, to have _a placeof her own, a chamber_. They live with their cells open. When theymeet, one says, “Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of thealtar!” The other responds, “Forever.” The same ceremony when one tapsat the other’s door. Hardly has she touched the door when a soft voiceon the other side is heard to say hastily, “Forever!” Like allpractices, this becomes mechanical by force of habit; and one sometimessays _forever_ before the other has had time to say the rather longsentence, “Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar.”

Among the Visitandines the one who enters says: “Ave Maria,” and theone whose cell is entered says, “Gratia plena.” It is their way ofsaying good day, which is in fact full of grace.
At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from thechurch bell of the convent. At this signal prioress, vocal mothers,professed nuns, lay-sisters, novices, postulants, interrupt what theyare saying, what they are doing, or what they are thinking, and all sayin unison if it is five o’clock, for instance, “At five o’clock and atall hours praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar!”If it is eight o’clock, “At eight o’clock and at all hours!” and so on,according to the hour.
This custom, the object of which is to break the thread of thought andto lead it back constantly to God, exists in many communities; theformula alone varies. Thus at The Infant Jesus they say, “At this hourand at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart!” TheBernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga, cloistered fifty years ago atPetit-Picpus, chant the offices to a solemn psalmody, a pure Gregorianchant, and always with full voice during the whole course of theoffice. Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they pause,and say in a low voice, “Jesus-Marie-Joseph.” For the office of thedead they adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardlydescend to such a depth. The effect produced is striking and tragic.
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altarfor the burial of their community. _The Government_, as they say, doesnot permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent whenthey die. This is an affliction to them, and causes them consternationas an infraction of the rules.
They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best,—permission to beinterred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancientVaugirard cemetery, which was made of land which had formerly belongedto their community.
On Fridays the nuns hear high mass, vespers, and all the offices, as onSunday. They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivalsunknown to people of the world, of which the Church of France was soprodigal in the olden days, and of which it is still prodigal in Spainand Italy. Their stations in the chapel are interminable. As for thenumber and duration of their prayers we can convey no better idea ofthem than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them: “The prayersof the postulants are frightful, the prayers of the novices are stillworse, and the prayers of the professed nuns are still worse.”

Once a week the chapter assembles: the prioress presides; the vocalmothers assist. Each sister kneels in turn on the stones, and confessesaloud, in the presence of all, the faults and sins which she hascommitted during the week. The vocal mothers consult after eachconfession and inflict the penance aloud.
Besides this confession in a loud tone, for which all faults in theleast serious are reserved, they have for their venial offences whatthey call the _coulpe. To make one’s coulpe_ means to prostrate one’sself flat on one’s face during the office in front of the prioressuntil the latter, who is never called anything but _our mother_,notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood ofher stall that she can rise. The _coulpe_ or _peccavi_, is made for avery small matter—a broken glass, a torn veil, an involuntary delay ofa few seconds at an office, a false note in church, etc.; thissuffices, and the _coulpe_ is made. The _coulpe_ is entirelyspontaneous; it is the culpable person herself (the word isetymologically in its place here) who judges herself and inflicts it onherself. On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors intone theoffices before a large reading-desk with four places. One day one ofthe mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with _Ecce_, andinstead of _Ecce_ she uttered aloud the three notes _do si sol_; forthis piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a _coulpe_ which lastedduring the whole service: what rendered the fault enormous was the factthat the chapter had laughed.
When a nun is summoned to the parlor, even were it the prioressherself, she drops her veil, as will be remembered, so that only hermouth is visible.
The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers. The otherscan see only their immediate family, and that very rarely. If, bychance, an outsider presents herself to see a nun, or one whom she hasknown and loved in the outer world, a regular series of negotiations isrequired. If it is a woman, the authorization may sometimes be granted;the nun comes, and they talk to her through the shutters, which areopened only for a mother or sister. It is unnecessary to say thatpermission is always refused to men.
Such is the rule of Saint-Benoît, aggravated by Martin Verga.
These nuns are not gay, rosy, and fresh, as the daughters of otherorders often are. They are pale and grave. Between 1825 and 1830 threeof them went mad.



CHAPTER III—AUSTERITIES

One is a postulant for two years at least, often for four; a novice forfour. It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlierthan the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years. TheBernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to theirorder.
In their cells, they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations,of which they must never speak.
On the day when a novice makes her profession, she is dressed in herhandsomest attire, she is crowned with white roses, her hair is brusheduntil it shines, and curled. Then she prostrates herself; a great blackveil is thrown over her, and the office for the dead is sung. Then thenuns separate into two files; one file passes close to her, saying inplaintive accents, “Our sister is dead”; and the other file responds ina voice of ecstasy, “Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ!”

At the epoch when this story takes place, a boarding-school wasattached to the convent—a boarding-school for young girls of noble andmostly wealthy families, among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle deSaint-Aulaire and de Bélissen, and an English girl bearing theillustrious Catholic name of Talbot. These young girls, reared by thesenuns between four walls, grew up with a horror of the world and of theage. One of them said to us one day, “The sight of the street pavementmade me shudder from head to foot.” They were dressed in blue, with awhite cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on theirbreast. On certain grand festival days, particularly Saint Martha’sday, they were permitted, as a high favor and a supreme happiness, todress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice ofSaint-Benoît for a whole day. In the early days the nuns were in thehabit of lending them their black garments. This seemed profane, andthe prioress forbade it. Only the novices were permitted to lend. It isremarkable that these performances, tolerated and encouraged, no doubt,in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order togive these children a foretaste of the holy habit, were a genuinehappiness and a real recreation for the scholars. They simply amusedthemselves with it. _It was new; it gave them a change_. Candid reasonsof childhood, which do not, however, succeed in making us worldlingscomprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one’s handand standing for hours together singing hard enough for four in frontof a reading-desk.
The pupils conformed, with the exception of the austerities, to all thepractices of the convent. There was a certain young woman who enteredthe world, and who after many years of married life had not succeededin breaking herself of the habit of saying in great haste whenever anyone knocked at her door, “forever!” Like the nuns, the pupils saw theirrelatives only in the parlor. Their very mothers did not obtainpermission to embrace them. The following illustrates to what a degreeseverity on that point was carried. One day a young girl received avisit from her mother, who was accompanied by a little sister threeyears of age. The young girl wept, for she wished greatly to embraceher sister. Impossible. She begged that, at least, the child might bepermitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she couldkiss it. This was almost indignantly refused.



CHAPTER IV—GAYETIES

Nonetheless, these young girls filled this grave house with charmingsouvenirs.
At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister. The recreationhour struck. A door swung on its hinges. The birds said, “Good; herecome the children!” An irruption of youth inundated that gardenintersected with a cross like a shroud. Radiant faces, white foreheads,innocent eyes, full of merry light, all sorts of auroras, werescattered about amid these shadows. After the psalmodies, the bells,the peals, and knells and offices, the sound of these little girlsburst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees. The hiveof joy was opened, and each one brought her honey. They played, theycalled to each other, they formed into groups, they ran about; prettylittle white teeth chattered in the corners; the veils superintendedthe laughs from a distance, shades kept watch of the sunbeams, but whatmattered it? Still they beamed and laughed. Those four lugubrious wallshad their moment of dazzling brilliancy. They looked on, vaguelyblanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming ofthe hives. It was like a shower of roses falling athwart this house ofmourning. The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns; thegaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence. Thanks to thesechildren, there was, among so many austere hours, one hour ofingenuousness. The little ones skipped about; the elder ones danced. Inthis cloister play was mingled with heaven. Nothing is so delightfuland so august as all these fresh, expanding young souls. Homer wouldhave come thither to laugh with Perrault; and there was in that blackgarden, youth, health, noise, cries, giddiness, pleasure, happinessenough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses, those ofthe epic as well as those of the fairy-tale, those of the throne aswell as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mère-Grand.
In that house more than anywhere else, perhaps, arise those children’ssayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full ofthoughtfulness. It was between those four gloomy walls that a child offive years exclaimed one day: “Mother! one of the big girls has justtold me that I have only nine years and ten months longer to remainhere. What happiness!”

It was here, too, that this memorable dialogue took place:—
_A Vocal Mother_. Why are you weeping, my child?
_The child_ (aged six). I told Alix that I knew my French history. Shesays that I do not know it, but I do.
_Alix_, the big girl (aged nine). No; she does not know it.
_The Mother_. How is that, my child?
_Alix_. She told me to open the book at random and to ask her anyquestion in the book, and she would answer it.
“Well?”

“She did not answer it.”

“Let us see about it. What did you ask her?”

“I opened the book at random, as she proposed, and I put the firstquestion that I came across.”

“And what was the question?”

“It was, ‘What happened after that?’”

It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedyparoquet which belonged to a lady boarder:—
“How well bred! it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter justlike a person!”

It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was oncepicked up a confession which had been written out in advance, in orderthat she might not forget it, by a sinner of seven years:—
“Father, I accuse myself of having been avaricious.
“Father, I accuse myself of having been an adulteress.
“Father, I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen.”

It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth sixyears of age improvised the following tale, which was listened to byblue eyes aged four and five years:—
“There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were agreat many flowers. They plucked the flowers and put them in theirpockets. After that they plucked the leaves and put them in theirplaythings. There was a wolf in that country; there was a great deal offorest; and the wolf was in the forest; and he ate the little cocks.”

And this other poem:—
“There came a blow with a stick.
“It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat.
“It was not good for her; it hurt her.
“Then a lady put Punchinello in prison.”

It was there that a little abandoned child, a foundling whom theconvent was bringing up out of charity, uttered this sweet andheart-breaking saying. She heard the others talking of their mothers,and she murmured in her corner:—
“As for me, my mother was not there when I was born!”

There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying throughthe corridors with her bunch of keys, and whose name was Sister Agatha.The _big big girls_—those over ten years of age—called her_Agathocles_.
The refectory, a large apartment of an oblong square form, whichreceived no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with thegarden, was dark and damp, and, as the children say, full of beasts.All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects.
Each of its four corners had received, in the language of the pupils, aspecial and expressive name. There was Spider corner, Caterpillarcorner, Wood-louse corner, and Cricket corner.
Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed. It was notso cold there as elsewhere. From the refectory the names had passed tothe boarding-school, and there served as in the old College Mazarin todistinguish four nations. Every pupil belonged to one of these fournations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat atmeals. One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoralvisit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enterthe class-room through which he was passing.
He inquired of another pupil, a charming brunette with rosy cheeks, whostood near him:—
“Who is that?”

“She is a spider, Monseigneur.”

“Bah! And that one yonder?”

“She is a cricket.”

“And that one?”

“She is a caterpillar.”

“Really! and yourself?”

“I am a wood-louse, Monseigneur.”

Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities. At the beginning ofthis century Écouen was one of those strict and graceful places whereyoung girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august. AtÉcouen, in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament,a distinction was made between virgins and florists. There were alsothe “dais” and the “censors,”—the first who held the cords of the dais,and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament. Theflowers belonged by right to the florists. Four “virgins” walked inadvance. On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hearthe question put in the dormitory, “Who is a virgin?”

Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a “little one” of sevenyears, to a “big girl” of sixteen, who took the head of the procession,while she, the little one, remained at the rear, “You are a virgin, butI am not.”




CHAPTER V—DISTRACTIONS

Above the door of the refectory this prayer, which was called the_white Paternoster_, and which possessed the property of bearing peoplestraight to paradise, was inscribed in large black letters:—
“Little white Paternoster, which God made, which God said, which Godplaced in paradise. In the evening, when I went to bed, I found threeangels sitting on my bed, one at the foot, two at the head, the goodVirgin Mary in the middle, who told me to lie down without hesitation.The good God is my father, the good Virgin is my mother, the threeapostles are my brothers, the three virgins are my sisters. The shirtin which God was born envelopes my body; Saint Margaret’s cross iswritten on my breast. Madame the Virgin was walking through themeadows, weeping for God, when she met M. Saint John. ‘Monsieur SaintJohn, whence come you?’ ‘I come from _Ave Salus_.’ ‘You have not seenthe good God; where is he?’ ‘He is on the tree of the Cross, his feethanging, his hands nailed, a little cap of white thorns on his head.’Whoever shall say this thrice at eventide, thrice in the morning, shallwin paradise at the last.”

In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall undera triple coating of daubing paint. At the present time it is finallydisappearing from the memories of several who were young girls then,and who are old women now.
A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of thisrefectory, whose only door, as we think we have mentioned, opened onthe garden. Two narrow tables, each flanked by two wooden benches,formed two long parallel lines from one end to the other of therefectory. The walls were white, the tables were black; these twomourning colors constitute the only variety in convents. The meals wereplain, and the food of the children themselves severe. A single dish ofmeat and vegetables combined, or salt fish—such was their luxury. Thismeagre fare, which was reserved for the pupils alone, was,nevertheless, an exception. The children ate in silence, under the eyeof the mother whose turn it was, who, if a fly took a notion to fly orto hum against the rule, opened and shut a wooden book from time totime. This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints, readaloud from a little pulpit with a desk, which was situated at the footof the crucifix. The reader was one of the big girls, in weekly turn.At regular distances, on the bare tables, there were large, varnishedbowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and knives andforks, and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat orspoiled fish; this was punished. These bowls were called _ronds d’eau_.The child who broke the silence “made a cross with her tongue.” Where?On the ground. She licked the pavement. The dust, that end of all joys,was charged with the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaveswhich had been guilty of chirping.
There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except asa _unique copy_, and which it is forbidden to read. It is the rule ofSaint-Benoît. An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate. _Nemoregulas, seu constitutiones nostras, externis communicabit_.
The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book, andset to reading it with avidity, a reading which was often interruptedby the fear of being caught, which caused them to close the volumeprecipitately.
From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderateamount of pleasure. The most “interesting thing” they found were someunintelligible pages about the sins of young boys.
They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabbyfruit-trees. In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity ofthe punishments administered, when the wind had shaken the trees, theysometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot oran inhabited pear on the sly. I will now cede the privilege of speechto a letter which lies before me, a letter written five and twentyyears ago by an old pupil, now Madame la Duchesse de ——, one of themost elegant women in Paris. I quote literally: “One hides one’s pearor one’s apple as best one may. When one goes upstairs to put the veilon the bed before supper, one stuffs them under one’s pillow and atnight one eats them in bed, and when one cannot do that, one eats themin the closet.” That was one of their greatest luxuries.
Once—it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to theconvent—one of the young girls, Mademoiselle Bouchard, who wasconnected with the Montmorency family, laid a wager that she would askfor a day’s leave of absence—an enormity in so austere a community. Thewager was accepted, but not one of those who bet believed that shewould do it. When the moment came, as the archbishop was passing infront of the pupils, Mademoiselle Bouchard, to the indescribable terrorof her companions, stepped out of the ranks, and said, “Monseigneur, aday’s leave of absence.” Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall, blooming, withthe prettiest little rosy face in the world. M. de Quélen smiled andsaid, “What, my dear child, a day’s leave of absence! Three days if youlike. I grant you three days.” The prioress could do nothing; thearchbishop had spoken. Horror of the convent, but joy of the pupil. Theeffect may be imagined.
This stern cloister was not so well walled off, however, but that thelife of the passions of the outside world, drama, and even romance, didnot make their way in. To prove this, we will confine ourselves torecording here and to briefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact,which, however, bears no reference in itself to, and is not connectedby any thread whatever with the story which we are relating. We mentionthe fact for the sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent inthe reader’s mind.
About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who wasnot a nun, who was treated with great respect, and who was addressed as_Madame Albertine_. Nothing was known about her, save that she was mad,and that in the world she passed for dead. Beneath this history it wassaid there lay the arrangements of fortune necessary for a greatmarriage.
This woman, hardly thirty years of age, of dark complexion andtolerably pretty, had a vague look in her large black eyes. Could shesee? There was some doubt about this. She glided rather than walked,she never spoke; it was not quite known whether she breathed. Hernostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh.To touch her hand was like touching snow. She possessed a strangespectral grace. Wherever she entered, people felt cold. One day asister, on seeing her pass, said to another sister, “She passes for adead woman.” “Perhaps she is one,” replied the other.
A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine. This arose from theeternal curiosity of the pupils. In the chapel there was a gallerycalled _L‘Œil de Bœuf_. It was in this gallery, which had only acircular bay, an _œil de bœuf_, that Madame Albertine listened to theoffices. She always occupied it alone because this gallery, being onthe level of the first story, the preacher or the officiating priestcould be seen, which was interdicted to the nuns. One day the pulpitwas occupied by a young priest of high rank, M. Le Duc de Rohan, peerof France, officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince deLéon, and who died afterward, in 1830, as cardinal and Archbishop ofBesançon. It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at thePetit-Picpus convent. Madame Albertine usually preserved perfectcalmness and complete immobility during the sermons and services. Thatday, as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan, she half rose, andsaid, in a loud voice, amid the silence of the chapel, “Ah! Auguste!”The whole community turned their heads in amazement, the preacherraised his eyes, but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility.A breath from the outer world, a flash of life, had passed for aninstant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished, andthe mad woman had become a corpse again.
Those two words, however, had set every one in the convent who had theprivilege of speech to chattering. How many things were contained inthat “Ah! Auguste!” what revelations! M. de Rohan’s name really wasAuguste. It was evident that Madame Albertine belonged to the veryhighest society, since she knew M. de Rohan, and that her own rankthere was of the highest, since she spoke thus familiarly of so great alord, and that there existed between them some connection, ofrelationship, perhaps, but a very close one in any case, since she knewhis “pet name.”

Two very severe duchesses, Mesdames de Choiseul and de Sérent, oftenvisited the community, whither they penetrated, no doubt, in virtue ofthe privilege _Magnates mulieres_, and caused great consternation inthe boarding-school. When these two old ladies passed by, all the pooryoung girls trembled and dropped their eyes.
Moreover, M. de Rohan, quite unknown to himself, was an object ofattention to the school-girls. At that epoch he had just been made,while waiting for the episcopate, vicar-general of the Archbishop ofParis. It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebratethe offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus. Not one ofthe young recluses could see him, because of the serge curtain, but hehad a sweet and rather shrill voice, which they had come to know and todistinguish. He had been a mousquetaire, and then, he was said to bevery coquettish, that his handsome brown hair was very well dressed ina roll around his head, and that he had a broad girdle of magnificentmoire, and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in theworld. He held a great place in all these imaginations of sixteenyears.
Not a sound from without made its way into the convent. But there wasone year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither. This was anevent, and the girls who were at school there at the time still recallit.
It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood. This flute alwaysplayed the same air, an air which is very far away nowadays,—“MyZétulbé, come reign o’er my soul,”—and it was heard two or three timesa day. The young girls passed hours in listening to it, the vocalmothers were upset by it, brains were busy, punishments descended inshowers. This lasted for several months. The girls were all more orless in love with the unknown musician. Each one dreamed that she wasZétulbé. The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the RueDroit-Mur; and they would have given anything, compromised everything,attempted anything for the sake of seeing, of catching a glance, ifonly for a second, of the “young man” who played that flute sodeliciously, and who, no doubt, played on all these souls at the sametime. There were some who made their escape by a back door, andascended to the third story on the Rue Droit-Mur side, in order toattempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps. Impossible! One even wentso far as to thrust her arm through the grating, and to wave her whitehandkerchief. Two were still bolder. They found means to climb on aroof, and risked their lives there, and succeeded at last in seeing“the young man.” He was an old _émigré_ gentleman, blind and penniless,who was playing his flute in his attic, in order to pass the time.



CHAPTER VI—THE LITTLE CONVENT

In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectlydistinct buildings,—the Great Convent, inhabited by the nuns, theBoarding-school, where the scholars were lodged; and lastly, what wascalled the Little Convent. It was a building with a garden, in whichlived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders, the relics of cloistersdestroyed in the Revolution; a reunion of all the black, gray, andwhite medleys of all communities and all possible varieties; what mightbe called, if such a coupling of words is permissible, a sort ofharlequin convent.
When the Empire was established, all these poor old dispersed andexiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelterunder the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines. The government paidthem a small pension, the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received themcordially. It was a singular pell-mell. Each followed her own rule.Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed, as a greatrecreation, to pay them a visit; the result is, that all those youngmemories have retained among other souvenirs that of MotherSainte-Bazile, Mother Sainte-Scolastique, and Mother Jacob.
One of these refugees found herself almost at home. She was a nun ofSainte-Aure, the only one of her order who had survived. The ancientconvent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied, at the beginning of theeighteenth century, this very house of the Petit-Picpus, which belongedlater to the Benedictines of Martin Verga. This holy woman, too poor towear the magnificent habit of her order, which was a white robe with ascarlet scapulary, had piously put it on a little manikin, which sheexhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at herdeath. In 1824, only one nun of this order remained; to-day, thereremains only a doll.
In addition to these worthy mothers, some old society women hadobtained permission of the prioress, like Madame Albertine, to retireinto the Little Convent. Among the number were Madame Beaufortd’Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne. Another was never known in theconvent except by the formidable noise which she made when she blew hernose. The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini (hubbub).
About 1820 or 1821, Madame de Genlis, who was at that time editing alittle periodical publication called _l’Intrépide_, asked to be allowedto enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident. The Ducd’Orléans recommended her. Uproar in the hive; the vocal-mothers wereall in a flutter; Madame de Genlis had made romances. But she declaredthat she was the first to detest them, and then, she had reached herfierce stage of devotion. With the aid of God, and of the Prince, sheentered. She departed at the end of six or eight months, alleging as areason, that there was no shade in the garden. The nuns were delighted.Although very old, she still played the harp, and did it very well.
When she went away she left her mark in her cell. Madame de Genlis wassuperstitious and a Latinist. These two words furnish a tolerably goodprofile of her. A few years ago, there were still to be seen, pasted inthe inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she locked up hersilverware and her jewels, these five lines in Latin, written with herown hand in red ink on yellow paper, and which, in her opinion,possessed the property of frightening away robbers:—
Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis:Dismas et Gesmas, media est divina potestas;Alta petit Dismas, infelix, infima, Gesmas;Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas.Hos versus dicas, ne tu furto tua perdas.15

These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the twothieves of Calvary were named, as is commonly believed, Dismas andGestas, or Dismas and Gesmas. This orthography might have confoundedthe pretensions put forward in the last century by the Vicomte deGestas, of a descent from the wicked thief. However, the useful virtueattached to these verses forms an article of faith in the order of theHospitallers.
The church of the house, constructed in such a manner as to separatethe Great Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritableintrenchment, was, of course, common to the Boarding-school, the GreatConvent, and the Little Convent. The public was even admitted by a sortof lazaretto entrance on the street. But all was so arranged, that noneof the inhabitants of the cloister could see a face from the outsideworld. Suppose a church whose choir is grasped in a gigantic hand, andfolded in such a manner as to form, not, as in ordinary churches, aprolongation behind the altar, but a sort of hall, or obscure cellar,to the right of the officiating priest; suppose this hall to be shutoff by a curtain seven feet in height, of which we have already spoken;in the shadow of that curtain, pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in thechoir on the left, the school-girls on the right, the lay-sisters andthe novices at the bottom, and you will have some idea of the nuns ofthe Petit-Picpus assisting at divine service. That cavern, which wascalled the choir, communicated with the cloister by a lobby. The churchwas lighted from the garden. When the nuns were present at serviceswhere their rule enjoined silence, the public was warned of theirpresence only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising andfalling.



CHAPTER VII—SOME SILHOUETTES OF THIS DARKNESS

During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825, the prioress of thePetit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur, whose name, in religion, wasMother Innocente. She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur,author of _Lives of the Saints of the Order of Saint-Benoît_. She hadbeen re-elected. She was a woman about sixty years of age, short,thick, “singing like a cracked pot,” says the letter which we havealready quoted; an excellent woman, moreover, and the only merry one inthe whole convent, and for that reason adored. She was learned,erudite, wise, competent, curiously proficient in history, crammed withLatin, stuffed with Greek, full of Hebrew, and more of a Benedictinemonk than a Benedictine nun.
The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun, Mother Cineres, who was almostblind.
The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine;the treasurer, Mother Sainte-Gertrude, the chief mistress of thenovices; Mother-Saint-Ange, the assistant mistress; MotherAnnonciation, the sacristan; Mother Saint-Augustin, the nurse, the onlyone in the convent who was malicious; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde(Mademoiselle Gauvain), very young and with a beautiful voice; Motherdes Anges (Mademoiselle Drouet), who had been in the convent of theFilles-Dieu, and in the convent du Trésor, between Gisors and Magny;Mother Saint-Joseph (Mademoiselle de Cogolludo), Mother Sainte-Adélaide(Mademoiselle d’Auverney), Mother Miséricorde (Mademoiselle deCifuentes, who could not resist austerities), Mother Compassion(Mademoiselle de la Miltière, received at the age of sixty in defianceof the rule, and very wealthy); Mother Providence (Mademoiselle deLaudinière), Mother Présentation (Mademoiselle de Siguenza), who wasprioress in 1847; and finally, Mother Sainte-Céligne (sister of thesculptor Ceracchi), who went mad; Mother Sainte-Chantal (Mademoisellede Suzon), who went mad.
There was also, among the prettiest of them, a charming girl of threeand twenty, who was from the Isle de Bourbon, a descendant of theChevalier Roze, whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze, and who wascalled Mother Assumption.
Mother Sainte-Mechtilde, intrusted with the singing and the choir, wasfond of making use of the pupils in this quarter. She usually took acomplete scale of them, that is to say, seven, from ten to sixteenyears of age, inclusive, of assorted voices and sizes, whom she madesing standing, drawn up in a line, side by side, according to age, fromthe smallest to the largest. This presented to the eye, something inthe nature of a reed-pipe of young girls, a sort of living Pan-pipemade of angels.
Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were SisterEuphrasie, Sister Sainte-Marguérite, Sister Sainte-Marthe, who was inher dotage, and Sister Sainte-Michel, whose long nose made them laugh.
All these women were gentle with the children. The nuns were severeonly towards themselves. No fire was lighted except in the school, andthe food was choice compared to that in the convent. Moreover, theylavished a thousand cares on their scholars. Only, when a child passednear a nun and addressed her, the nun never replied.
This rule of silence had had this effect, that throughout the wholeconvent, speech had been withdrawn from human creatures, and bestowedon inanimate objects. Now it was the church-bell which spoke, now itwas the gardener’s bell. A very sonorous bell, placed beside theportress, and which was audible throughout the house, indicated by itsvaried peals, which formed a sort of acoustic telegraph, all theactions of material life which were to be performed, and summoned tothe parlor, in case of need, such or such an inhabitant of the house.Each person and each thing had its own peal. The prioress had one andone, the sub-prioress one and two. Six-five announced lessons, so thatthe pupils never said “to go to lessons,” but “to go to six-five.”Four-four was Madame de Genlis’s signal. It was very often heard.“C’est le diable a quatre,”—it’s the very deuce—said the uncharitable.Tennine strokes announced a great event. It was the opening of _thedoor of seclusion_, a frightful sheet of iron bristling with boltswhich only turned on its hinges in the presence of the archbishop.
With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener, no man enteredthe convent, as we have already said. The schoolgirls saw two others:one, the chaplain, the Abbé Banés, old and ugly, whom they werepermitted to contemplate in the choir, through a grating; the other thedrawing-master, M. Ansiaux, whom the letter, of which we have perused afew lines, calls _M. Anciot_, and describes as _a frightful oldhunchback_.
It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen.
Such was this curious house.



CHAPTER VIII—POST CORDA LAPIDES

After having sketched its moral face, it will not prove unprofitable topoint out, in a few words, its material configuration. The readeralready has some idea of it.
The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the wholeof the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the RuePolonceau, the Rue Droit-Mur, the Rue Petit-Picpus, and the unusedlane, called Rue Aumarais on old plans. These four streets surroundedthis trapezium like a moat. The convent was composed of severalbuildings and a garden. The principal building, taken in its entirety,was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which, viewed from abird’s-eye view, outlined, with considerable exactness, a gibbet laidflat on the ground. The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole ofthe fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the RuePetit-Picpus and the Rue Polonceau; the lesser arm was a lofty, gray,severe grated façade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus; the carriageentrance No. 62 marked its extremity. Towards the centre of this façadewas a low, arched door, whitened with dust and ashes, where the spiderswove their webs, and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays,and on rare occasions, when the coffin of a nun left the convent. Thiswas the public entrance of the church. The elbow of the gibbet was asquare hall which was used as the servants’ hall, and which the nunscalled _the buttery_. In the main arm were the cells of the mothers,the sisters, and the novices. In the lesser arm lay the kitchens, therefectory, backed up by the cloisters and the church. Between the doorNo. 62 and the corner of the closed Aumarais Lane, was the school,which was not visible from without. The remainder of the trapeziumformed the garden, which was much lower than the level of the RuePolonceau, which caused the walls to be very much higher on the insidethan on the outside. The garden, which was slightly arched, had in itscentre, on the summit of a hillock, a fine pointed and conicalfir-tree, whence ran, as from the peaked boss of a shield, four grandalleys, and, ranged by twos in between the branchings of these, eightsmall ones, so that, if the enclosure had been circular, thegeometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposedon a wheel. As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of thegarden, they were of unequal length. They were bordered with currantbushes. At the bottom, an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins ofthe old convent, which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to thehouse of the Little Convent, which was at the angle of the AumaraisLane. In front of the Little Convent was what was called the littlegarden. To this whole, let the reader add a courtyard, all sorts ofvaried angles formed by the interior buildings, prison walls, the longblack line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue Polonceaufor its sole perspective and neighborhood, and he will be able to formfor himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines ofthe Petit-Picpus was forty years ago. This holy house had been built onthe precise site of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to thesixteenth century, which was called the “tennis-ground of the eleventhousand devils.”

All these streets, moreover, were more ancient than Paris. These names,Droit-Mur and Aumarais, are very ancient; the streets which bear themare very much more ancient still. Aumarais Lane was called MaugoutLane; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Églantiers, for Godopened flowers before man cut stones.



CHAPTER IX—A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE

Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of thePetit-Picpus was in former times, and since we have ventured to open awindow on that discreet retreat, the reader will permit us one otherlittle digression, utterly foreign to this book, but characteristic anduseful, since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures.
In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbeyof Fontevrault. She had even been in society before the Revolution. Shetalked a great deal of M. de Miromesnil, Keeper of the Seals underLouis XVI. and of a Presidentess Duplat, with whom she had been veryintimate. It was her pleasure and her vanity to drag in these names onevery pretext. She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault,—that itwas like a city, and that there were streets in the monastery.
She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils. Every year,she solemnly renewed her vows, and at the moment of taking the oath,she said to the priest, “Monseigneur Saint-François gave it toMonseigneur Saint-Julien, Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it toMonseigneur Saint-Eusebius, Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave it toMonseigneur Saint-Procopius, etc., etc.; and thus I give it to you,father.” And the school-girls would begin to laugh, not in theirsleeves, but under their veils; charming little stifled laughs whichmade the vocal mothers frown.
On another occasion, the centenarian was telling stories. She said that_in her youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as themousquetaires_. It was a century which spoke through her, but it wasthe eighteenth century. She told about the custom of the four wines,which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne. When agreat personage, a marshal of France, a prince, a duke, and a peer,traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne, the city fathers came out toharangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into whichthey had poured four different sorts of wine. On the first goblet thisinscription could be read, _monkey wine_; on the second, _lion wine_;on the third, _sheep wine_; on the fourth, _hog wine_. These fourlegends express the four stages descended by the drunkard; the first,intoxication, which enlivens; the second, that which irritates; thethird, that which dulls; and the fourth, that which brutalizes.
In a cupboard, under lock and key, she kept a mysterious object ofwhich she thought a great deal. The rule of Fontevrault did not forbidthis. She would not show this object to anyone. She shut herself up,which her rule allowed her to do, and hid herself, every time that shedesired to contemplate it. If she heard a footstep in the corridor, sheclosed the cupboard again as hastily as it was possible with her agedhands. As soon as it was mentioned to her, she became silent, she whowas so fond of talking. The most curious were baffled by her silenceand the most tenacious by her obstinacy. Thus it furnished a subject ofcomment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent. Whatcould that treasure of the centenarian be, which was so precious and sosecret? Some holy book, no doubt? Some unique chaplet? Some authenticrelic? They lost themselves in conjectures. When the poor old womandied, they rushed to her cupboard more hastily than was fitting,perhaps, and opened it. They found the object beneath a triple linencloth, like some consecrated paten. It was a Faenza platterrepresenting little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary ladsarmed with enormous syringes. The chase abounds in grimaces and incomical postures. One of the charming little Loves is already fairlyspitted. He is resisting, fluttering his tiny wings, and still makingan effort to fly, but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air.Moral: Love conquered by the colic. This platter, which is verycurious, and which had, possibly, the honor of furnishing Molière withan idea, was still in existence in September, 1845; it was for sale bya bric-à-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais.
This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside_because_, said she, the _parlor is too gloomy_.



CHAPTER X—ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION

However, this almost sepulchral parlor, of which we have sought toconvey an idea, is a purely local trait which is not reproduced withthe same severity in other convents. At the convent of the Rue duTemple, in particular, which belonged, in truth, to another order, theblack shutters were replaced by brown curtains, and the parlor itselfwas a salon with a polished wood floor, whose windows were draped inwhite muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames, aportrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face, painted bouquets, andeven the head of a Turk.
It is in that garden of the Temple convent, that stood that famouschestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest inFrance, and which bore the reputation among the good people of theeighteenth century of being _the father of all the chestnut trees ofthe realm_.
As we have said, this convent of the Temple was occupied byBenedictines of the Perpetual Adoration, Benedictines quite differentfrom those who depended on Cîteaux. This order of the PerpetualAdoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than twohundred years. In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasionsa few days apart, in two churches in Paris, at Saint-Sulpice and atSaint-Jean en Grève, a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the wholetown in an uproar. M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain desPrés ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy, in which the Pope’sNuncio officiated. But this expiation did not satisfy two saintedwomen, Madame Courtin, Marquise de Boucs, and the Comtesse deChâteauvieux. This outrage committed on “the most holy sacrament of thealtar,” though but temporary, would not depart from these holy souls,and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a “PerpetualAdoration” in some female monastery. Both of them, one in 1652, theother in 1653, made donations of notable sums to Mother Catherine deBar, called of the Holy Sacrament, a Benedictine nun, for the purposeof founding, to this pious end, a monastery of the order ofSaint-Benoît; the first permission for this foundation was given toMother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz, Abbé of Saint-Germain, “oncondition that no woman could be received unless she contributed threehundred livres income, which amounts to six thousand livres, to theprincipal.” After the Abbé of Saint-Germain, the king accordedletters-patent; and all the rest, abbatial charter, and royal letters,was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament.
Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment ofthe Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament atParis. Their first convent was “a new building” in the Rue Cassette,out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Châteauvieux.
This order, as it will be seen, was not to be confounded with theBenedictine nuns of Cîteaux. It mounted back to the Abbé ofSaint-Germain des Prés, in the same manner that the ladies of theSacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits, and the sisters ofcharity to the general of the Lazarists.
It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus,whose interior we have just shown. In 1657, Pope Alexander VII. hadauthorized, by a special brief, the Bernardines of the RuePetit-Picpus, to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictinenuns of the Holy Sacrament. But the two orders remained distinctnonetheless.



CHAPTER XI—END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS

At the beginning of the Restoration, the convent of the Petit-Picpuswas in its decay; this forms a part of the general death of the order,which, after the eighteenth century, has been disappearing like all thereligious orders. Contemplation is, like prayer, one of humanity’sneeds; but, like everything which the Revolution touched, it will betransformed, and from being hostile to social progress, it will becomefavorable to it.
The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated. In1840, the Little Convent had disappeared, the school had disappeared.There were no longer any old women, nor young girls; the first weredead, the latter had taken their departure. _Volaverunt_.
The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature that italarms, vocations recoil before it, the order receives no recruits. In1845, it still obtained lay-sisters here and there. But of professednuns, none at all. Forty years ago, the nuns numbered nearly a hundred;fifteen years ago there were not more than twenty-eight of them. Howmany are there to-day? In 1847, the prioress was young, a sign that thecircle of choice was restricted. She was not forty years old. Inproportion as the number diminishes, the fatigue increases, the serviceof each becomes more painful; the moment could then be seen drawingnear when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bearthe heavy rule of Saint-Benoît. The burden is implacable, and remainsthe same for the few as for the many. It weighs down, it crushes. Thusthey die. At the period when the author of this book still lived inParis, two died. One was twenty-five years old, the other twenty-three.This latter can say, like Julia Alpinula: _“Hic jaceo. Vixi annosviginti et tres.” _ It is in consequence of this decay that the conventgave up the education of girls.
We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house withoutentering it, and without introducing the minds which accompany us, andwhich are listening to our tale, to the profit of some, perchance, ofthe melancholy history of Jean Valjean. We have penetrated into thiscommunity, full of those old practices which seem so novel to-day. Itis the closed garden, _hortus conclusus_. We have spoken of thissingular place in detail, but with respect, in so far, at least, asdetail and respect are compatible. We do not understand all, but weinsult nothing. We are equally far removed from the hosanna of Josephde Maistre, who wound up by anointing the executioner, and from thesneer of Voltaire, who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross.
An illogical act on Voltaire’s part, we may remark, by the way; forVoltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas; and even forthose who deny superhuman incarnations, what does the crucifixrepresent? The assassinated sage.
In this nineteenth century, the religious idea is undergoing a crisis.People are unlearning certain things, and they do well, provided that,while unlearning them they learn this: There is no vacuum in the humanheart. Certain demolitions take place, and it is well that they do, buton condition that they are followed by reconstructions.
In the meantime, let us study things which are no more. It is necessaryto know them, if only for the purpose of avoiding them. Thecounterfeits of the past assume false names, and gladly call themselvesthe future. This spectre, this past, is given to falsifying its ownpassport. Let us inform ourselves of the trap. Let us be on our guard.The past has a visage, superstition, and a mask, hypocrisy. Let usdenounce the visage and let us tear off the mask.
As for convents, they present a complex problem,—a question ofcivilization, which condemns them; a question of liberty, whichprotects them.



BOOK SEVENTH—PARENTHESIS



CHAPTER I—THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA

This book is a drama, whose leading personage is the Infinite.
Man is the second.
Such being the case, and a convent having happened to be on our road,it has been our duty to enter it. Why? Because the convent, which iscommon to the Orient as well as to the Occident, to antiquity as wellas to modern times, to paganism, to Buddhism, to Mahometanism, as wellas to Christianity, is one of the optical apparatuses applied by man tothe Infinite.
This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certainideas; nevertheless, while absolutely maintaining our reserves, ourrestrictions, and even our indignations, we must say that every time weencounter man in the Infinite, either well or ill understood, we feelourselves overpowered with respect. There is, in the synagogue, in themosque, in the pagoda, in the wigwam, a hideous side which we execrate,and a sublime side, which we adore. What a contemplation for the mind,and what endless food for thought, is the reverberation of God upon thehuman wall!



CHAPTER II—THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT

From the point of view of history, of reason, and of truth, monasticismis condemned. Monasteries, when they abound in a nation, are clogs inits circulation, cumbrous establishments, centres of idleness wherecentres of labor should exist. Monastic communities are to the greatsocial community what the mistletoe is to the oak, what the wart is tothe human body. Their prosperity and their fatness mean theimpoverishment of the country. The monastic regime, good at thebeginning of civilization, useful in the reduction of the brutal by thespiritual, is bad when peoples have reached their manhood. Moreover,when it becomes relaxed, and when it enters into its period ofdisorder, it becomes bad for the very reasons which rendered itsalutary in its period of purity, because it still continues to set theexample.
Claustration has had its day. Cloisters, useful in the early educationof modern civilization, have embarrassed its growth, and are injuriousto its development. So far as institution and formation with relationto man are concerned, monasteries, which were good in the tenthcentury, questionable in the fifteenth, are detestable in thenineteenth. The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeletontwo wonderful nations, Italy and Spain; the one the light, the otherthe splendor of Europe for centuries; and, at the present day, thesetwo illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce, thanks tothe healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone.
The convent—the ancient female convent in particular, such as it stillpresents itself on the threshold of this century, in Italy, in Austria,in Spain—is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages. Thecloister, that cloister, is the point of intersection of horrors. TheCatholic cloister, properly speaking, is wholly filled with the blackradiance of death.
The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all. There rise, inobscurity, beneath vaults filled with gloom, beneath domes vague withshadow, massive altars of Babel, as high as cathedrals; there immensewhite crucifixes hang from chains in the dark; there are extended, allnude on the ebony, great Christs of ivory; more than bleeding,—bloody;hideous and magnificent, with their elbows displaying the bones, theirknee-pans showing their integuments, their wounds showing their flesh,crowned with silver thorns, nailed with nails of gold, with blood dropsof rubies on their brows, and diamond tears in their eyes. The diamondsand rubies seem wet, and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep,their sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges,their breasts crushed with wicker hurdles, their knees excoriated withprayer; women who think themselves wives, spectres who think themselvesseraphim. Do these women think? No. Have they any will? No. Do theylove? No. Do they live? No. Their nerves have turned to bone; theirbones have turned to stone. Their veil is of woven night. Their breathunder their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration ofdeath. The abbess, a spectre, sanctifies them and terrifies them. Theimmaculate one is there, and very fierce. Such are the ancientmonasteries of Spain. Liars of terrible devotion, caverns of virgins,ferocious places.
Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself. The Spanish conventwas, above all others, the Catholic convent. There was a flavor of theOrient about it. The archbishop, the kislar-aga of heaven, locked upand kept watch over this seraglio of souls reserved for God. The nunwas the odalisque, the priest was the eunuch. The fervent were chosenin dreams and possessed Christ. At night, the beautiful, nude young mandescended from the cross and became the ecstasy of the cloistered one.Lofty walls guarded the mystic sultana, who had the crucified for hersultan, from all living distraction. A glance on the outer world wasinfidelity. The _in pace_ replaced the leather sack. That which wascast into the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West.In both quarters, women wrung their hands; the waves for the first, thegrave for the last; here the drowned, there the buried. Monstrousparallel.
To-day the upholders of the past, unable to deny these things, haveadopted the expedient of smiling at them. There has come into fashion astrange and easy manner of suppressing the revelations of history, ofinvalidating the commentaries of philosophy, of eliding allembarrassing facts and all gloomy questions. _A matter fordeclamations_, say the clever. Declamations, repeat the foolish.Jean-Jacques a declaimer; Diderot a declaimer; Voltaire on Calas,Labarre, and Sirven, declaimers. I know not who has recently discoveredthat Tacitus was a declaimer, that Nero was a victim, and that pity isdecidedly due to “that poor Holofernes.”

Facts, however, are awkward things to disconcert, and they areobstinate. The author of this book has seen, with his own eyes, eightleagues distant from Brussels,—there are relics of the Middle Agesthere which are attainable for everybody,—at the Abbey of Villers, thehole of the oubliettes, in the middle of the field which was formerlythe courtyard of the cloister, and on the banks of the Thil, four stonedungeons, half under ground, half under the water. They were _in pace_.Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door, a vault, and agrated opening which, on the outside, is two feet above the level ofthe river, and on the inside, six feet above the level of the ground.Four feet of river flow past along the outside wall. The ground isalways soaked. The occupant of the _in pace_ had this wet soil for hisbed. In one of these dungeons, there is a fragment of an iron neckletriveted to the wall; in another, there can be seen a square box made offour slabs of granite, too short for a person to lie down in, too lowfor him to stand upright in. A human being was put inside, with acoverlid of stone on top. This exists. It can be seen. It can betouched. These _in pace_, these dungeons, these iron hinges, thesenecklets, that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river’s current,that box of stone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb, with thisdifference, that the dead man here was a living being, that soil whichis but mud, that vault hole, those oozing walls,—what declaimers!



CHAPTER III—ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST

Monasticism, such as it existed in Spain, and such as it still existsin Thibet, is a sort of phthisis for civilization. It stops life short.It simply depopulates. Claustration, castration. It has been thescourge of Europe. Add to this the violence so often done to theconscience, the forced vocations, feudalism bolstered up by thecloister, the right of the first-born pouring the excess of the familyinto monasticism, the ferocities of which we have just spoken, the _inpace_, the closed mouths, the walled-up brains, so many unfortunateminds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows, the taking of the habit,the interment of living souls. Add individual tortures to nationaldegradations, and, whoever you may be, you will shudder before thefrock and the veil,—those two winding-sheets of human devising.Nevertheless, at certain points and in certain places, in spite ofphilosophy, in spite of progress, the spirit of the cloister persistsin the midst of the nineteenth century, and a singular asceticrecrudescence is, at this moment, astonishing the civilized world. Theobstinacy of antiquated institutions in perpetuating themselvesresembles the stubbornness of the rancid perfume which should claim ourhair, the pretensions of the spoiled fish which should persist in beingeaten, the persecution of the child’s garment which should insist onclothing the man, the tenderness of corpses which should return toembrace the living.
“Ingrates!” says the garment, “I protected you in inclement weather.Why will you have nothing to do with me?” “I have just come from thedeep sea,” says the fish. “I have been a rose,” says the perfume. “Ihave loved you,” says the corpse. “I have civilized you,” says theconvent.
To this there is but one reply: “In former days.”

To dream of the indefinite prolongation of defunct things, and of thegovernment of men by embalming, to restore dogmas in a bad condition,to regild shrines, to patch up cloisters, to rebless reliquaries, torefurnish superstitions, to revictual fanaticisms, to put new handleson holy water brushes and militarism, to reconstitute monasticism andmilitarism, to believe in the salvation of society by themultiplication of parasites, to force the past on the present,—thisseems strange. Still, there are theorists who hold such theories. Thesetheorists, who are in other respects people of intelligence, have avery simple process; they apply to the past a glazing which they callsocial order, divine right, morality, family, the respect of elders,antique authority, sacred tradition, legitimacy, religion; and they goabout shouting, “Look! take this, honest people.” This logic was knownto the ancients. The soothsayers practise it. They rubbed a blackheifer over with chalk, and said, “She is white, _Bos cretatus_.”

As for us, we respect the past here and there, and we spare it, aboveall, provided that it consents to be dead. If it insists on beingalive, we attack it, and we try to kill it.
Superstitions, bigotries, affected devotion, prejudices, those forms,all forms as they are, are tenacious of life; they have teeth and nailsin their smoke, and they must be clasped close, body to body, and warmust be made on them, and that without truce; for it is one of thefatalities of humanity to be condemned to eternal combat with phantoms.It is difficult to seize darkness by the throat, and to hurl it to theearth.
A convent in France, in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century,is a college of owls facing the light. A cloister, caught in the veryact of asceticism, in the very heart of the city of ’89 and of 1830 andof 1848, Rome blossoming out in Paris, is an anachronism. In ordinarytimes, in order to dissolve an anachronism and to cause it to vanish,one has only to make it spell out the date. But we are not in ordinarytimes.
Let us fight.
Let us fight, but let us make a distinction. The peculiar property oftruth is never to commit excesses. What need has it of exaggeration?There is that which it is necessary to destroy, and there is that whichit is simply necessary to elucidate and examine. What a force is kindlyand serious examination! Let us not apply a flame where only a light isrequired.
So, given the nineteenth century, we are opposed, as a generalproposition, and among all peoples, in Asia as well as in Europe, inIndia as well as in Turkey, to ascetic claustration. Whoever sayscloister, says marsh. Their putrescence is evident, their stagnation isunhealthy, their fermentation infects people with fever, and etiolatesthem; their multiplication becomes a plague of Egypt. We cannot thinkwithout affright of those lands where fakirs, bonzes, santons, Greekmonks, marabouts, talapoins, and dervishes multiply even like swarms ofvermin.
This said, the religious question remains. This question has certainmysterious, almost formidable sides; may we be permitted to look at itfixedly.



CHAPTER IV—THE CONVENT FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF PRINCIPLES

Men unite themselves and dwell in communities. By virtue of what right?By virtue of the right of association.
They shut themselves up at home. By virtue of what right? By virtue ofthe right which every man has to open or shut his door.
They do not come forth. By virtue of what right? By virtue of the rightto go and come, which implies the right to remain at home.
There, at home, what do they do?
They speak in low tones; they drop their eyes; they toil. They renouncethe world, towns, sensualities, pleasures, vanities, pride, interests.They are clothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen. Not one of thempossesses in his own right anything whatever. On entering there, eachone who was rich makes himself poor. What he has, he gives to all. Hewho was what is called noble, a gentleman and a lord, is the equal ofhim who was a peasant. The cell is identical for all. All undergo thesame tonsure, wear the same frock, eat the same black bread, sleep onthe same straw, die on the same ashes. The same sack on their backs,the same rope around their loins. If the decision has been to gobarefoot, all go barefoot. There may be a prince among them; thatprince is the same shadow as the rest. No titles. Even family nameshave disappeared. They bear only first names. All are bowed beneath theequality of baptismal names. They have dissolved the carnal family, andconstituted in their community a spiritual family. They have no otherrelatives than all men. They succor the poor, they care for the sick.They elect those whom they obey. They call each other “my brother.”

You stop me and exclaim, “But that is the ideal convent!”

It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent, that I shouldtake notice of it.
Thence it results that, in the preceding book, I have spoken of aconvent with respectful accents. The Middle Ages cast aside, Asia castaside, the historical and political question held in reserve, from thepurely philosophical point of view, outside the requirements ofmilitant policy, on condition that the monastery shall be absolutely avoluntary matter and shall contain only consenting parties, I shallalways consider a cloistered community with a certain attentive, and,in some respects, a deferential gravity.
Wherever there is a community, there is a commune; where there is acommune, there is right. The monastery is the product of the formula:Equality, Fraternity. Oh! how grand is liberty! And what a splendidtransfiguration! Liberty suffices to transform the monastery into arepublic.
Let us continue.
But these men, or these women who are behind these four walls. Theydress themselves in coarse woollen, they are equals, they call eachother brothers, that is well; but they do something else?
Yes.
What?
They gaze on the darkness, they kneel, and they clasp their hands.
What does this signify?



CHAPTER V—PRAYER

They pray.
To whom?
To God.
To pray to God,—what is the meaning of these words?
Is there an infinite beyond us? Is that infinite there, inherent,permanent; necessarily substantial, since it is infinite; and because,if it lacked matter it would be bounded; necessarily intelligent, sinceit is infinite, and because, if it lacked intelligence, it would endthere? Does this infinite awaken in us the idea of essence, while wecan attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence? In other terms,is it not the absolute, of which we are only the relative?
At the same time that there is an infinite without us, is there not aninfinite within us? Are not these two infinites (what an alarmingplural!) superposed, the one upon the other? Is not this secondinfinite, so to speak, subjacent to the first? Is it not the latter’smirror, reflection, echo, an abyss which is concentric with anotherabyss? Is this second infinity intelligent also? Does it think? Does itlove? Does it will? If these two infinities are intelligent, each ofthem has a will principle, and there is an _I_ in the upper infinity asthere is an _I_ in the lower infinity. The _I_ below is the soul; the_I_ on high is God.
To place the infinity here below in contact, by the medium of thought,with the infinity on high, is called praying.
Let us take nothing from the human mind; to suppress is bad. We mustreform and transform. Certain faculties in man are directed towards theUnknown; thought, reverie, prayer. The Unknown is an ocean. What isconscience? It is the compass of the Unknown. Thought, reverie,prayer,—these are great and mysterious radiations. Let us respect them.Whither go these majestic irradiations of the soul? Into the shadow;that is to say, to the light.
The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing ofhumanity. Close to the right of the man, beside it, at the least, thereexists the right of the soul.
To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite, such is the law. Letus not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree ofcreation, and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars. Wehave a duty to labor over the human soul, to defend the mystery againstthe miracle, to adore the incomprehensible and reject the absurd, toadmit, as an inexplicable fact, only what is necessary, to purifybelief, to remove superstitions from above religion; to clear God ofcaterpillars.



CHAPTER VI—THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER

With regard to the modes of prayer, all are good, provided that theyare sincere. Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite.
There is, as we know, a philosophy which denies the infinite. There isalso a philosophy, pathologically classified, which denies the sun;this philosophy is called blindness.
To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth, is a fine blindman’s self-sufficiency.
The curious thing is the haughty, superior, and compassionate airswhich this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy whichbeholds God. One fancies he hears a mole crying, “I pity them withtheir sun!”

There are, as we know, powerful and illustrious atheists. At bottom,led back to the truth by their very force, they are not absolutely surethat they are atheists; it is with them only a question of definition,and in any case, if they do not believe in God, being great minds, theyprove God.
We salute them as philosophers, while inexorably denouncing theirphilosophy.
Let us go on.
The remarkable thing about it is, also, their facility in payingthemselves off with words. A metaphysical school of the North,impregnated to some extent with fog, has fancied that it has worked arevolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force with theword Will.
To say: “the plant wills,” instead of: “the plant grows”: this would befecund in results, indeed, if we were to add: “the universe wills.”Why? Because it would come to this: the plant wills, therefore it hasan _I_; the universe wills, therefore it has a God.
As for us, who, however, in contradistinction to this school, rejectnothing _a priori_, a will in the plant, accepted by this school,appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universedenied by it.
To deny the will of the infinite, that is to say, God, is impossible onany other conditions than a denial of the infinite. We havedemonstrated this.
The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism. Everythingbecomes “a mental conception.”

With nihilism, no discussion is possible; for the nihilist logic doubtsthe existence of its interlocutor, and is not quite sure that it existsitself.
From its point of view, it is possible that it may be for itself, only“a mental conception.”

Only, it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits inthe lump, simply by the utterance of the word, mind.
In short, no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes allend in the monosyllable, No.
To No there is only one reply, Yes.
Nihilism has no point.
There is no such thing as nothingness. Zero does not exist. Everythingis something. Nothing is nothing.
Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread.
Even to see and to show does not suffice. Philosophy should be anenergy; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate thecondition of man. Socrates should enter into Adam and produce MarcusAurelius; in other words, the man of wisdom should be made to emergefrom the man of felicity. Eden should be changed into a Lyceum. Scienceshould be a cordial. To enjoy,—what a sad aim, and what a paltryambition! The brute enjoys. To offer thought to the thirst of men, togive them all as an elixir the notion of God, to make conscience andscience fraternize in them, to render them just by this mysteriousconfrontation; such is the function of real philosophy. Morality is ablossoming out of truths. Contemplation leads to action. The absoluteshould be practicable. It is necessary that the ideal should bebreathable, drinkable, and eatable to the human mind. It is the idealwhich has the right to say: _Take, this is my body, this is my blood_.Wisdom is holy communion. It is on this condition that it ceases to bea sterile love of science and becomes the one and sovereign mode ofhuman rallying, and that philosophy herself is promoted to religion.
Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it atits ease, without any other result than that of being convenient tocuriosity.
For our part, adjourning the development of our thought to anotheroccasion, we will confine ourselves to saying that we neitherunderstand man as a point of departure nor progress as an end, withoutthose two forces which are their two motors: faith and love.
Progress is the goal, the ideal is the type.
What is this ideal? It is God.
Ideal, absolute, perfection, infinity: identical words.



CHAPTER VII—PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME

History and philosophy have eternal duties, which are, at the sametime, simple duties; to combat Caiphas the High-priest, Draco theLawgiver, Trimalcion the Legislator, Tiberius the Emperor; this isclear, direct, and limpid, and offers no obscurity.
But the right to live apart, even with its inconveniences and itsabuses, insists on being stated and taken into account. Cenobitism is ahuman problem.
When one speaks of convents, those abodes of error, but of innocence,of aberration but of good-will, of ignorance but of devotion, oftorture but of martyrdom, it always becomes necessary to say either yesor no.
A convent is a contradiction. Its object, salvation; its means thereto,sacrifice. The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supremeabnegation.
To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device ofmonasticism.
In the cloister, one suffers in order to enjoy. One draws a bill ofexchange on death. One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light.In the cloister, hell is accepted in advance as a post obit onparadise.
The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for witheternity.
It does not seem to us, that on such a subject mockery is permissible.All about it is serious, the good as well as the bad.
The just man frowns, but never smiles with a malicious sneer. Weunderstand wrath, but not malice.



CHAPTER VIII—FAITH, LAW

A few words more.
We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues, we despisethe spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal; but we everywherehonor the thoughtful man.
We salute the man who kneels.
A faith; this is a necessity for man. Woe to him who believes nothing.
One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed. There is visible laborand invisible labor.
To contemplate is to labor, to think is to act.
Folded arms toil, clasped hands work. A gaze fixed on heaven is a work.
Thales remained motionless for four years. He founded philosophy.
In our opinion, cenobites are not lazy men, and recluses are notidlers.
To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing.
Without invalidating anything that we have just said, we believe that aperpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living. On this point,the priest and the philosopher agree. _We must die_. The Abbé de laTrappe replies to Horace.
To mingle with one’s life a certain presence of the sepulchre,—this isthe law of the sage; and it is the law of the ascetic. In this respect,the ascetic and the sage converge. There is a material growth; we admitit. There is a moral grandeur; we hold to that. Thoughtless andvivacious spirits say:—
“What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery?What purpose do they serve? What do they do?”

Alas! In the presence of the darkness which environs us, and whichawaits us, in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make ofus, we reply: “There is probably no work more divine than thatperformed by these souls.” And we add: “There is probably no work whichis more useful.”

There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who neverpray at all.
In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought that ismingled with prayer.
Leibnitz praying is grand, Voltaire adoring is fine. _Deo erexitVoltaire_.
We are for religion as against religions.
We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons, andthe sublimity of prayer.
Moreover, at this minute which we are now traversing,—a minute whichwill not, fortunately, leave its impress on the nineteenth century,—atthis hour, when so many men have low brows and souls but littleelevated, among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment,and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter,whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us.
The monastery is a renunciation. Sacrifice wrongly directed is stillsacrifice. To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of itsown.
Taken by itself, and ideally, and in order to examine the truth on allsides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted, the monastery,the female convent in particular,—for in our century it is woman whosuffers the most, and in this exile of the cloister there is somethingof protestation,—the female convent has incontestably a certainmajesty.
This cloistered existence which is so austere, so depressing, a few ofwhose features we have just traced, is not life, for it is not liberty;it is not the tomb, for it is not plenitude; it is the strange placewhence one beholds, as from the crest of a lofty mountain, on one sidethe abyss where we are, on the other, the abyss whither we shall go; itis the narrow and misty frontier separating two worlds, illuminated andobscured by both at the same time, where the ray of life which hasbecome enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death; it is the halfobscurity of the tomb.
We, who do not believe what these women believe, but who, like them,live by faith,—we have never been able to think without a sort oftender and religious terror, without a sort of pity, that is full ofenvy, of those devoted, trembling and trusting creatures, of thesehumble and august souls, who dare to dwell on the very brink of themystery, waiting between the world which is closed and heaven which isnot yet open, turned towards the light which one cannot see, possessingthe sole happiness of thinking that they know where it is, aspiringtowards the gulf, and the unknown, their eyes fixed motionless on thedarkness, kneeling, bewildered, stupefied, shuddering, half lifted, attimes, by the deep breaths of eternity.



BOOK EIGHTH—CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM




CHAPTER I—WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT

It was into this house that Jean Valjean had, as Fauchelevent expressedit, “fallen from the sky.”

He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the RuePolonceau. That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle ofthe night, was the nuns chanting matins; that hall, of which he hadcaught a glimpse in the gloom, was the chapel. That phantom which hehad seen stretched on the ground was the sister who was makingreparation; that bell, the sound of which had so strangely surprisedhim, was the gardener’s bell attached to the knee of FatherFauchelevent.
Cosette once put to bed, Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had, as we havealready seen, supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before agood, crackling fire; then, the only bed in the hut being occupied byCosette, each threw himself on a truss of straw.
Before he shut his eyes, Jean Valjean said: “I must remain herehenceforth.” This remark trotted through Fauchelevent’s head all nightlong.
To tell the truth, neither of them slept.
Jean Valjean, feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on hisscent, understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned toParis. Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had strandedhim in this cloister. Jean Valjean had, henceforth, but one thought,—toremain there. Now, for an unfortunate man in his position, this conventwas both the safest and the most dangerous of places; the mostdangerous, because, as no men might enter there, if he were discovered,it was a flagrant offence, and Jean Valjean would find but one stepintervening between the convent and prison; the safest, because, if hecould manage to get himself accepted there and remain there, who wouldever seek him in such a place? To dwell in an impossible place wassafety.
On his side, Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains. He began bydeclaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter. How hadM. Madeleine got there, when the walls were what they were? Cloisterwalls are not to be stepped over. How did he get there with a child?One cannot scale a perpendicular wall with a child in one’s arms. Whowas that child? Where did they both come from? Since Fauchelevent hadlived in the convent, he had heard nothing of M. sur M., and he knewnothing of what had taken place there. Father Madeleine had an airwhich discouraged questions; and besides, Fauchelevent said to himself:“One does not question a saint.” M. Madeleine had preserved all hisprestige in Fauchelevent’s eyes. Only, from some words which JeanValjean had let fall, the gardener thought he could draw the inferencethat M. Madeleine had probably become bankrupt through the hard times,and that he was pursued by his creditors; or that he had compromisedhimself in some political affair, and was in hiding; which last did notdisplease Fauchelevent, who, like many of our peasants of the North,had an old fund of Bonapartism about him. While in hiding, M. Madeleinehad selected the convent as a refuge, and it was quite simple that heshould wish to remain there. But the inexplicable point, to whichFauchelevent returned constantly and over which he wearied his brain,was that M. Madeleine should be there, and that he should have thatlittle girl with him. Fauchelevent saw them, touched them, spoke tothem, and still did not believe it possible. The incomprehensible hadjust made its entrance into Fauchelevent’s hut. Fauchelevent gropedabout amid conjectures, and could see nothing clearly but this: “M.Madeleine saved my life.” This certainty alone was sufficient anddecided his course. He said to himself: “It is my turn now.” He addedin his conscience: “M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate when it wasa question of thrusting himself under the cart for the purpose ofdragging me out.” He made up his mind to save M. Madeleine.
Nevertheless, he put many questions to himself and made himself diversreplies: “After what he did for me, would I save him if he were athief? Just the same. If he were an assassin, would I save him? Justthe same. Since he is a saint, shall I save him? Just the same.”

But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent!Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimericalundertaking; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder thanhis self-devotion, his good will, and a little of that old rusticcunning, on this occasion enlisted in the service of a generousenterprise, undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister, andthe steep escarpments of the rule of Saint-Benoît. Father Faucheleventwas an old man who had been an egoist all his life, and who, towardsthe end of his days, halt, infirm, with no interest left to him in theworld, found it sweet to be grateful, and perceiving a generous actionto be performed, flung himself upon it like a man, who at the momentwhen he is dying, should find close to his hand a glass of good winewhich he had never tasted, and should swallow it with avidity. We mayadd, that the air which he had breathed for many years in this conventhad destroyed all personality in him, and had ended by rendering a goodaction of some kind absolutely necessary to him.
So he took his resolve: to devote himself to M. Madeleine.
We have just called him a _poor peasant of Picardy_. That descriptionis just, but incomplete. At the point of this story which we have nowreached, a little of Father Fauchelevent’s physiology becomes useful.He was a peasant, but he had been a notary, which added trickery to hiscunning, and penetration to his ingenuousness. Having, through variouscauses, failed in his business, he had descended to the calling of acarter and a laborer. But, in spite of oaths and lashings, which horsesseem to require, something of the notary had lingered in him. He hadsome natural wit; he talked good grammar; he conversed, which is a rarething in a village; and the other peasants said of him: “He talksalmost like a gentleman with a hat.” Fauchelevent belonged, in fact, tothat species, which the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the lastcentury qualified as _demi-bourgeois, demi-lout_, and which themetaphors showered by the château upon the thatched cottage ticketed inthe pigeon-hole of the plebeian: _rather rustic, rather citified;pepper and salt_. Fauchelevent, though sorely tried and harshly used byfate, worn out, a sort of poor, threadbare old soul, was, nevertheless,an impulsive man, and extremely spontaneous in his actions; a preciousquality which prevents one from ever being wicked. His defects and hisvices, for he had some, were all superficial; in short, his physiognomywas of the kind which succeeds with an observer. His aged face had noneof those disagreeable wrinkles at the top of the forehead, whichsignify malice or stupidity.
At daybreak, Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes, after having done anenormous deal of thinking, and beheld M. Madeleine seated on his trussof straw, and watching Cosette’s slumbers. Fauchelevent sat up andsaid:—
“Now that you are here, how are you going to contrive to enter?”

This remark summed up the situation and aroused Jean Valjean from hisreverie.
The two men took counsel together.
“In the first place,” said Fauchelevent, “you will begin by not settingfoot outside of this chamber, either you or the child. One step in thegarden and we are done for.”

“That is true.”

“Monsieur Madeleine,” resumed Fauchelevent, “you have arrived at a veryauspicious moment, I mean to say a very inauspicious moment; one of theladies is very ill. This will prevent them from looking much in ourdirection. It seems that she is dying. The prayers of the forty hoursare being said. The whole community is in confusion. That occupiesthem. The one who is on the point of departure is a saint. In fact, weare all saints here; all the difference between them and me is thatthey say ‘our cell,’ and that I say ‘my cabin.’ The prayers for thedying are to be said, and then the prayers for the dead. We shall be atpeace here for to-day; but I will not answer for to-morrow.”

“Still,” observed Jean Valjean, “this cottage is in the niche of thewall, it is hidden by a sort of ruin, there are trees, it is notvisible from the convent.”

“And I add that the nuns never come near it.”

“Well?” said Jean Valjean.
The interrogation mark which accentuated this “well” signified: “itseems to me that one may remain concealed here?” It was to thisinterrogation point that Fauchelevent responded:—
“There are the little girls.”

“What little girls?” asked Jean Valjean.
Just as Fauchelevent opened his mouth to explain the words which he haduttered, a bell emitted one stroke.
“The nun is dead,” said he. “There is the knell.”

And he made a sign to Jean Valjean to listen.
The bell struck a second time.
“It is the knell, Monsieur Madeleine. The bell will continue to strikeonce a minute for twenty-four hours, until the body is taken from thechurch.—You see, they play. At recreation hours it suffices to have aball roll aside, to send them all hither, in spite of prohibitions, tohunt and rummage for it all about here. Those cherubs are devils.”

“Who?” asked Jean Valjean.
“The little girls. You would be very quickly discovered. They wouldshriek: ‘Oh! a man!’ There is no danger to-day. There will be norecreation hour. The day will be entirely devoted to prayers. You hearthe bell. As I told you, a stroke each minute. It is the death knell.”

“I understand, Father Fauchelevent. There are pupils.”

And Jean Valjean thought to himself:—
“Here is Cosette’s education already provided.”

Fauchelevent exclaimed:—
“Pardine! There are little girls indeed! And they would bawl aroundyou! And they would rush off! To be a man here is to have the plague.You see how they fasten a bell to my paw as though I were a wildbeast.”

Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought.—“This conventwould be our salvation,” he murmured.
Then he raised his voice:—
“Yes, the difficulty is to remain here.”

“No,” said Fauchelevent, “the difficulty is to get out.”

Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart.
“To get out!”

“Yes, Monsieur Madeleine. In order to return here it is first necessaryto get out.”

And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded,Fauchelevent went on:—
“You must not be found here in this fashion. Whence come you? For me,you fall from heaven, because I know you; but the nuns require one toenter by the door.”

All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell.
“Ah!” said Fauchelevent, “they are ringing up the vocal mothers. Theyare going to the chapter. They always hold a chapter when any one dies.She died at daybreak. People generally do die at daybreak. But cannotyou get out by the way in which you entered? Come, I do not ask for thesake of questioning you, but how did you get in?”

Jean Valjean turned pale; the very thought of descending again intothat terrible street made him shudder. You make your way out of aforest filled with tigers, and once out of it, imagine a friendlycounsel that shall advise you to return thither! Jean Valjean picturedto himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in thatquarter, agents on the watch, sentinels everywhere, frightful fistsextended towards his collar, Javert at the corner of the intersectionof the streets perhaps.
“Impossible!” said he. “Father Fauchelevent, say that I fell from thesky.”

“But I believe it, I believe it,” retorted Fauchelevent. “You have noneed to tell me that. The good God must have taken you in his hand forthe purpose of getting a good look at you close to, and then droppedyou. Only, he meant to place you in a man’s convent; he made a mistake.Come, there goes another peal, that is to order the porter to go andinform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view acorpse. All that is the ceremony of dying. These good ladies are not atall fond of that visit. A doctor is a man who does not believe inanything. He lifts the veil. Sometimes he lifts something else too. Howquickly they have had the doctor summoned this time! What is thematter? Your little one is still asleep. What is her name?”

“Cosette.”

“She is your daughter? You are her grandfather, that is?”

“Yes.”

“It will be easy enough for her to get out of here. I have my servicedoor which opens on the courtyard. I knock. The porter opens; I have myvintage basket on my back, the child is in it, I go out. FatherFauchelevent goes out with his basket—that is perfectly natural. Youwill tell the child to keep very quiet. She will be under the cover. Iwill leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend, afruit-seller whom I know in the Rue Chemin-Vert, who is deaf, and whohas a little bed. I will shout in the fruit-seller’s ear, that she is aniece of mine, and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow. Thenthe little one will re-enter with you; for I will contrive to have youre-enter. It must be done. But how will you manage to get out?”

Jean Valjean shook his head.
“No one must see me, the whole point lies there, Father Fauchelevent.Find some means of getting me out in a basket, under cover, likeCosette.”

Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger ofhis left hand, a sign of serious embarrassment.
A third peal created a diversion.
“That is the dead-doctor taking his departure,” said Fauchelevent. “Hehas taken a look and said: ‘She is dead, that is well.’ When the doctorhas signed the passport for paradise, the undertaker’s company sends acoffin. If it is a mother, the mothers lay her out; if she is a sister,the sisters lay her out. After which, I nail her up. That forms a partof my gardener’s duty. A gardener is a bit of a grave-digger. She isplaced in a lower hall of the church which communicates with thestreet, and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead. Idon’t count the undertaker’s men and myself as men. It is in that hallthat I nail up the coffin. The undertaker’s men come and get it, andwhip up, coachman! that’s the way one goes to heaven. They fetch a boxwith nothing in it, they take it away again with something in it.That’s what a burial is like. _De profundis_.”

A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleepingCosette, who lay with her mouth vaguely open, and had the air of anangel drinking in the light. Jean Valjean had fallen to gazing at her.He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent.
That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence. Thegood old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble:—
“The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery. They declare that they aregoing to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery. It is an ancient cemeterywhich is outside the regulations, which has no uniform, and which isgoing to retire. It is a shame, for it is convenient. I have a friendthere, Father Mestienne, the grave-digger. The nuns here possess oneprivilege, it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall. There is aspecial permission from the Prefecture on their behalf. But how manyevents have happened since yesterday! Mother Crucifixion is dead, andFather Madeleine—”

“Is buried,” said Jean Valjean, smiling sadly.
Fauchelevent caught the word.
“Goodness! if you were here for good, it would be a real burial.”

A fourth peal burst out. Fauchelevent hastily detached the belledknee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again.
“This time it is for me. The Mother Prioress wants me. Good, now I ampricking myself on the tongue of my buckle. Monsieur Madeleine, don’tstir from here, and wait for me. Something new has come up. If you arehungry, there is wine, bread and cheese.”

And he hastened out of the hut, crying: “Coming! coming!”

Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as hiscrooked leg would permit, casting a sidelong glance by the way on hismelon patch.
Less than ten minutes later, Father Fauchelevent, whose bell put thenuns in his road to flight, tapped gently at a door, and a gentle voicereplied: _“Forever! Forever!” _ that is to say: _“Enter.” _
The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing thegardener on business. This parlor adjoined the chapter hall. Theprioress, seated on the only chair in the parlor, was waiting forFauchelevent.



CHAPTER II—FAUCHELEVENT IN THE PRESENCE OF A DIFFICULTY

It is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions,notably priests and nuns, to wear a grave and agitated air on criticaloccasions. At the moment when Fauchelevent entered, this double form ofpreoccupation was imprinted on the countenance of the prioress, who wasthat wise and charming Mademoiselle de Blemeur, Mother Innocente, whowas ordinarily cheerful.
The gardener made a timid bow, and remained at the door of the cell.The prioress, who was telling her beads, raised her eyes and said:—
“Ah! it is you, Father Fauvent.”

This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent.
Fauchelevent bowed again.
“Father Fauvent, I have sent for you.”

“Here I am, reverend Mother.”

“I have something to say to you.”

“And so have I,” said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused himinward terror, “I have something to say to the very reverend Mother.”

The prioress stared at him.
“Ah! you have a communication to make to me.”

“A request.”

“Very well, speak.”

Goodman Fauchelevent, the ex-notary, belonged to the category ofpeasants who have assurance. A certain clever ignorance constitutes aforce; you do not distrust it, and you are caught by it. Faucheleventhad been a success during the something more than two years which hehad passed in the convent. Always solitary and busied about hisgardening, he had nothing else to do than to indulge his curiosity. Ashe was at a distance from all those veiled women passing to and fro, hesaw before him only an agitation of shadows. By dint of attention andsharpness he had succeeded in clothing all those phantoms with flesh,and those corpses were alive for him. He was like a deaf man whosesight grows keener, and like a blind man whose hearing becomes moreacute. He had applied himself to riddling out the significance of thedifferent peals, and he had succeeded, so that this taciturn andenigmatical cloister possessed no secrets for him; the sphinx babbledall her secrets in his ear. Fauchelevent knew all and concealed all;that constituted his art. The whole convent thought him stupid. A greatmerit in religion. The vocal mothers made much of Fauchelevent. He wasa curious mute. He inspired confidence. Moreover, he was regular, andnever went out except for well-demonstrated requirements of the orchardand vegetable garden. This discretion of conduct had inured to hiscredit. Nonetheless, he had set two men to chattering: the porter, inthe convent, and he knew the singularities of their parlor, and thegrave-digger, at the cemetery, and he was acquainted with thepeculiarities of their sepulture; in this way, he possessed a doublelight on the subject of these nuns, one as to their life, the other asto their death. But he did not abuse his knowledge. The congregationthought a great deal of him. Old, lame, blind to everything, probably alittle deaf into the bargain,—what qualities! They would have found itdifficult to replace him.
The goodman, with the assurance of a person who feels that he isappreciated, entered into a rather diffuse and very deep rusticharangue to the reverend prioress. He talked a long time about his age,his infirmities, the surcharge of years counting double for himhenceforth, of the increasing demands of his work, of the great size ofthe garden, of nights which must be passed, like the last, forinstance, when he had been obliged to put straw mats over the melonbeds, because of the moon, and he wound up as follows: “That he had abrother”—(the prioress made a movement),—“a brother no longer young”—(asecond movement on the part of the prioress, but one expressive ofreassurance),—“that, if he might be permitted, this brother would comeand live with him and help him, that he was an excellent gardener, thatthe community would receive from him good service, better than his own;that, otherwise, if his brother were not admitted, as he, the elder,felt that his health was broken and that he was insufficient for thework, he should be obliged, greatly to his regret, to go away; and thathis brother had a little daughter whom he would bring with him, whomight be reared for God in the house, and who might, who knows, becomea nun some day.”

When he had finished speaking, the prioress stayed the slipping of herrosary between her fingers, and said to him:—
“Could you procure a stout iron bar between now and this evening?”

“For what purpose?”

“To serve as a lever.”

“Yes, reverend Mother,” replied Fauchelevent.
The prioress, without adding a word, rose and entered the adjoiningroom, which was the hall of the chapter, and where the vocal motherswere probably assembled. Fauchelevent was left alone.



CHAPTER III—MOTHER INNOCENTE

About a quarter of an hour elapsed. The prioress returned and seatedherself once more on her chair.
The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied. We will present astenographic report of the dialogue which then ensued, to the best ofour ability.
“Father Fauvent!”

“Reverend Mother!”

“Do you know the chapel?”

“I have a little cage there, where I hear the mass and the offices.”

“And you have been in the choir in pursuance of your duties?”

“Two or three times.”

“There is a stone to be raised.”

“Heavy?”

“The slab of the pavement which is at the side of the altar.”

“The slab which closes the vault?”

“Yes.”

“It would be a good thing to have two men for it.”

“Mother Ascension, who is as strong as a man, will help you.”

“A woman is never a man.”

“We have only a woman here to help you. Each one does what he can.Because Dom Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles of SaintBernard, while Merlonus Horstius only gives three hundred andsixty-seven, I do not despise Merlonus Horstius.”

“Neither do I.”

“Merit consists in working according to one’s strength. A cloister isnot a dock-yard.”

“And a woman is not a man. But my brother is the strong one, though!”

“And can you get a lever?”

“That is the only sort of key that fits that sort of door.”

“There is a ring in the stone.”

“I will put the lever through it.”

“And the stone is so arranged that it swings on a pivot.”

“That is good, reverend Mother. I will open the vault.”

“And the four Mother Precentors will help you.”

“And when the vault is open?”

“It must be closed again.”

“Will that be all?”

“No.”

“Give me your orders, very reverend Mother.”

“Fauvent, we have confidence in you.”

“I am here to do anything you wish.”

“And to hold your peace about everything!”

“Yes, reverend Mother.”

“When the vault is open—”

“I will close it again.”

“But before that—”

“What, reverend Mother?”

“Something must be lowered into it.”

A silence ensued. The prioress, after a pout of the under lip whichresembled hesitation, broke it.
“Father Fauvent!”

“Reverend Mother!”

“You know that a mother died this morning?”

“No.”

“Did you not hear the bell?”

“Nothing can be heard at the bottom of the garden.”

“Really?”

“I can hardly distinguish my own signal.”

“She died at daybreak.”

“And then, the wind did not blow in my direction this morning.”

“It was Mother Crucifixion. A blessed woman.”

The prioress paused, moved her lips, as though in mental prayer, andresumed:—
“Three years ago, Madame de Béthune, a Jansenist, turned orthodox,merely from having seen Mother Crucifixion at prayer.”

“Ah! yes, now I hear the knell, reverend Mother.”

“The mothers have taken her to the dead-room, which opens on thechurch.”

“I know.”

“No other man than you can or must enter that chamber. See to that. Afine sight it would be, to see a man enter the dead-room!”

“More often!”

“Hey?”

“More often!”

“What do you say?”

“I say more often.”

“More often than what?”

“Reverend Mother, I did not say more often than what, I said moreoften.”

“I don’t understand you. Why do you say more often?”

“In order to speak like you, reverend Mother.”

“But I did not say ‘more often.’”

At that moment, nine o’clock struck.
“At nine o’clock in the morning and at all hours, praised and adored bethe most Holy Sacrament of the altar,” said the prioress.
“Amen,” said Fauchelevent.
The clock struck opportunely. It cut “more often” short. It isprobable, that had it not been for this, the prioress and Faucheleventwould never have unravelled that skein.
Fauchelevent mopped his forehead.
The prioress indulged in another little inward murmur, probably sacred,then raised her voice:—
“In her lifetime, Mother Crucifixion made converts; after her death,she will perform miracles.”

“She will!” replied Father Fauchelevent, falling into step, andstriving not to flinch again.
“Father Fauvent, the community has been blessed in Mother Crucifixion.No doubt, it is not granted to every one to die, like Cardinal deBérulle, while saying the holy mass, and to breathe forth their soulsto God, while pronouncing these words: _Hanc igitur oblationem_. Butwithout attaining to such happiness, Mother Crucifixion’s death wasvery precious. She retained her consciousness to the very last moment.She spoke to us, then she spoke to the angels. She gave us her lastcommands. If you had a little more faith, and if you could have been inher cell, she would have cured your leg merely by touching it. Shesmiled. We felt that she was regaining her life in God. There wassomething of paradise in that death.”

Fauchelevent thought that it was an orison which she was finishing.
“Amen,” said he.
“Father Fauvent, what the dead wish must be done.”

The prioress took off several beads of her chaplet. Fauchelevent heldhis peace.
She went on:—
“I have consulted upon this point many ecclesiastics laboring in OurLord, who occupy themselves in the exercises of the clerical life, andwho bear wonderful fruit.”

“Reverend Mother, you can hear the knell much better here than in thegarden.”

“Besides, she is more than a dead woman, she is a saint.”

“Like yourself, reverend Mother.”

“She slept in her coffin for twenty years, by express permission of ourHoly Father, Pius VII.—”

“The one who crowned the Emp—Buonaparte.”

For a clever man like Fauchelevent, this allusion was an awkward one.Fortunately, the prioress, completely absorbed in her own thoughts, didnot hear it. She continued:—
“Father Fauvent?”

“Reverend Mother?”

“Saint Didorus, Archbishop of Cappadocia, desired that this single wordmight be inscribed on his tomb: _Acarus_, which signifies, a worm ofthe earth; this was done. Is this true?”

“Yes, reverend Mother.”

“The blessed Mezzocane, Abbot of Aquila, wished to be buried beneaththe gallows; this was done.”

“That is true.”

“Saint Terentius, Bishop of Port, where the mouth of the Tiber emptiesinto the sea, requested that on his tomb might be engraved the signwhich was placed on the graves of parricides, in the hope thatpassers-by would spit on his tomb. This was done. The dead must beobeyed.”

“So be it.”

“The body of Bernard Guidonis, born in France near Roche-Abeille, was,as he had ordered, and in spite of the king of Castile, borne to thechurch of the Dominicans in Limoges, although Bernard Guidonis wasBishop of Tuy in Spain. Can the contrary be affirmed?”

“For that matter, no, reverend Mother.”

“The fact is attested by Plantavit de la Fosse.”

Several beads of the chaplet were told off, still in silence. Theprioress resumed:—
“Father Fauvent, Mother Crucifixion will be interred in the coffin inwhich she has slept for the last twenty years.”

“That is just.”

“It is a continuation of her slumber.”

“So I shall have to nail up that coffin?”

“Yes.”

“And we are to reject the undertaker’s coffin?”

“Precisely.”

“I am at the orders of the very reverend community.”

“The four Mother Precentors will assist you.”

“In nailing up the coffin? I do not need them.”

“No. In lowering the coffin.”

“Where?”

“Into the vault.”

“What vault?”

“Under the altar.”

Fauchelevent started.
“The vault under the altar?”

“Under the altar.”

“But—”

“You will have an iron bar.”

“Yes, but—”

“You will raise the stone with the bar by means of the ring.”

“But—”

“The dead must be obeyed. To be buried in the vault under the altar ofthe chapel, not to go to profane earth; to remain there in death whereshe prayed while living; such was the last wish of Mother Crucifixion.She asked it of us; that is to say, commanded us.”

“But it is forbidden.”

“Forbidden by men, enjoined by God.”

“What if it became known?”

“We have confidence in you.”

“Oh! I am a stone in your walls.”

“The chapter assembled. The vocal mothers, whom I have just consultedagain, and who are now deliberating, have decided that MotherCrucifixion shall be buried, according to her wish, in her own coffin,under our altar. Think, Father Fauvent, if she were to work miracleshere! What a glory of God for the community! And miracles issue fromtombs.”

“But, reverend Mother, if the agent of the sanitary commission—”

“Saint Benoît II., in the matter of sepulture, resisted ConstantinePogonatus.”

“But the commissary of police—”

“Chonodemaire, one of the seven German kings who entered among theGauls under the Empire of Constantius, expressly recognized the rightof nuns to be buried in religion, that is to say, beneath the altar.”

“But the inspector from the Prefecture—”

“The world is nothing in the presence of the cross. Martin, theeleventh general of the Carthusians, gave to his order this device:_Stat crux dum volvitur orbis_.”

“Amen,” said Fauchelevent, who imperturbably extricated himself in thismanner from the dilemma, whenever he heard Latin.
Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long. Onthe day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison, bearing inhis body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in, hehalted in front of the first tree which he came to, harangued it andmade very great efforts to convince it. The prioress, who was usuallysubjected to the barrier of silence, and whose reservoir was overfull,rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam which has broken away:—
“I have on my right Benoît and on my left Bernard. Who was Bernard? Thefirst abbot of Clairvaux. Fontaines in Burgundy is a country that isblest because it gave him birth. His father was named Técelin, and hismother Alèthe. He began at Cîteaux, to end in Clairvaux; he wasordained abbot by the bishop of Châlon-sur-Saône, Guillaume deChampeaux; he had seven hundred novices, and founded a hundred andsixty monasteries; he overthrew Abeilard at the council of Sens in1140, and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple, and another sort oferring spirits who were called the Apostolics; he confounded Arnauld deBrescia, darted lightning at the monk Raoul, the murderer of the Jews,dominated the council of Reims in 1148, caused the condemnation ofGilbert de Poréa, Bishop of Poitiers, caused the condemnation of Éon del‘Étoile, arranged the disputes of princes, enlightened King Louis theYoung, advised Pope Eugene III., regulated the Temple, preached thecrusade, performed two hundred and fifty miracles during his lifetime,and as many as thirty-nine in one day. Who was Benoît? He was thepatriarch of Mont-Cassin; he was the second founder of the SaintetéClaustrale, he was the Basil of the West. His order has produced fortypopes, two hundred cardinals, fifty patriarchs, sixteen hundredarchbishops, four thousand six hundred bishops, four emperors, twelveempresses, forty-six kings, forty-one queens, three thousand sixhundred canonized saints, and has been in existence for fourteenhundred years. On one side Saint Bernard, on the other the agent of thesanitary department! On one side Saint Benoît, on the other theinspector of public ways! The state, the road commissioners, the publicundertaker, regulations, the administration, what do we know of allthat? There is not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to seehow we are treated. We have not even the right to give our dust toJesus Christ! Your sanitary department is a revolutionary invention.God subordinated to the commissary of police; such is the age. Silence,Fauvent!”

Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath. The prioresscontinued:—
“No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture. Only fanaticsand those in error deny it. We live in times of terrible confusion. Wedo not know that which it is necessary to know, and we know that whichwe should ignore. We are ignorant and impious. In this age there existpeople who do not distinguish between the very great Saint Bernard andthe Saint Bernard denominated of the poor Catholics, a certain goodecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century. Others are soblasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI. to the cross ofJesus Christ. Louis XVI. was merely a king. Let us beware of God! Thereis no longer just nor unjust. The name of Voltaire is known, but notthe name of César de Bus. Nevertheless, César de Bus is a man ofblessed memory, and Voltaire one of unblessed memory. The lastarch-bishop, the Cardinal de Périgord, did not even know that Charlesde Gondren succeeded to Berulle, and François Bourgoin to Gondren, andJean-François Senault to Bourgoin, and Father Sainte-Marthe toJean-François Senault. The name of Father Coton is known, not becausehe was one of the three who urged the foundation of the Oratorie, butbecause he furnished Henri IV., the Huguenot king, with the materialfor an oath. That which pleases people of the world in Saint Françoisde Sales, is that he cheated at play. And then, religion is attacked.Why? Because there have been bad priests, because Sagittaire, Bishop ofGap, was the brother of Salone, Bishop of Embrun, and because both ofthem followed Mommol. What has that to do with the question? Does thatprevent Martin de Tours from being a saint, and giving half of hiscloak to a beggar? They persecute the saints. They shut their eyes tothe truth. Darkness is the rule. The most ferocious beasts are beastswhich are blind. No one thinks of hell as a reality. Oh! how wickedpeople are! By order of the king signifies to-day, by order of therevolution. One no longer knows what is due to the living or to thedead. A holy death is prohibited. Burial is a civil matter. This ishorrible. Saint Leo II. wrote two special letters, one to PierreNotaire, the other to the king of the Visigoths, for the purpose ofcombating and rejecting, in questions touching the dead, the authorityof the exarch and the supremacy of the Emperor. Gauthier, Bishop ofChâlons, held his own in this matter against Otho, Duke of Burgundy.The ancient magistracy agreed with him. In former times we had voicesin the chapter, even on matters of the day. The Abbot of Cîteaux, thegeneral of the order, was councillor by right of birth to theparliament of Burgundy. We do what we please with our dead. Is not thebody of Saint Benoît himself in France, in the abbey of Fleury, calledSaint Benoît-sur-Loire, although he died in Italy at Mont-Cassin, onSaturday, the 21st of the month of March, of the year 543? All this isincontestable. I abhor psalm-singers, I hate priors, I execrateheretics, but I should detest yet more any one who should maintain thecontrary. One has only to read Arnoul Wion, Gabriel Bucelin, Trithemus,Maurolics, and Dom Luc d’Achery.”

The prioress took breath, then turned to Fauchelevent.
“Is it settled, Father Fauvent?”

“It is settled, reverend Mother.”

“We may depend on you?”

“I will obey.”

“That is well.”

“I am entirely devoted to the convent.”

“That is understood. You will close the coffin. The sisters will carryit to the chapel. The office for the dead will then be said. Then weshall return to the cloister. Between eleven o’clock and midnight, youwill come with your iron bar. All will be done in the most profoundsecrecy. There will be in the chapel only the four Mother Precentors,Mother Ascension and yourself.”

“And the sister at the post?”

“She will not turn round.”

“But she will hear.”

“She will not listen. Besides, what the cloister knows the world learnsnot.”

A pause ensued. The prioress went on:—
“You will remove your bell. It is not necessary that the sister at thepost should perceive your presence.”

“Reverend Mother?”

“What, Father Fauvent?”

“Has the doctor for the dead paid his visit?”

“He will pay it at four o’clock to-day. The peal which orders thedoctor for the dead to be summoned has already been rung. But you donot understand any of the peals?”

“I pay no attention to any but my own.”

“That is well, Father Fauvent.”

“Reverend Mother, a lever at least six feet long will be required.”

“Where will you obtain it?”

“Where gratings are not lacking, iron bars are not lacking. I have myheap of old iron at the bottom of the garden.”

“About three-quarters of an hour before midnight; do not forget.”

“Reverend Mother?”

“What?”

“If you were ever to have any other jobs of this sort, my brother isthe strong man for you. A perfect Turk!”

“You will do it as speedily as possible.”

“I cannot work very fast. I am infirm; that is why I require anassistant. I limp.”

“To limp is no sin, and perhaps it is a blessing. The Emperor HenryII., who combated Antipope Gregory and re-established Benoît VIII., hastwo surnames, the Saint and the Lame.”

“Two surtouts are a good thing,” murmured Fauchelevent, who really wasa little hard of hearing.
“Now that I think of it, Father Fauvent, let us give a whole hour toit. That is not too much. Be near the principal altar, with your ironbar, at eleven o’clock. The office begins at midnight. Everything musthave been completed a good quarter of an hour before that.”

“I will do anything to prove my zeal towards the community. These aremy orders. I am to nail up the coffin. At eleven o’clock exactly, I amto be in the chapel. The Mother Precentors will be there. MotherAscension will be there. Two men would be better. However, never mind!I shall have my lever. We will open the vault, we will lower thecoffin, and we will close the vault again. After which, there will beno trace of anything. The government will have no suspicion. Thus allhas been arranged, reverend Mother?”

“No!”

“What else remains?”

“The empty coffin remains.”

This produced a pause. Fauchelevent meditated. The prioress meditated.
“What is to be done with that coffin, Father Fauvent?”

“It will be given to the earth.”

“Empty?”

Another silence. Fauchelevent made, with his left hand, that sort of agesture which dismisses a troublesome subject.
“Reverend Mother, I am the one who is to nail up the coffin in thebasement of the church, and no one can enter there but myself, and Iwill cover the coffin with the pall.”

“Yes, but the bearers, when they place it in the hearse and lower itinto the grave, will be sure to feel that there is nothing in it.”

“Ah! the de—!” exclaimed Fauchelevent.
The prioress began to make the sign of the cross, and looked fixedly atthe gardener. The _vil_ stuck fast in his throat.
He made haste to improvise an expedient to make her forget the oath.
“I will put earth in the coffin, reverend Mother. That will produce theeffect of a corpse.”

“You are right. Earth, that is the same thing as man. So you willmanage the empty coffin?”

“I will make that my special business.”

The prioress’s face, up to that moment troubled and clouded, grewserene once more. She made the sign of a superior dismissing aninferior to him. Fauchelevent went towards the door. As he was on thepoint of passing out, the prioress raised her voice gently:—
“I am pleased with you, Father Fauvent; bring your brother to meto-morrow, after the burial, and tell him to fetch his daughter.”




CHAPTER IV—IN WHICH JEAN VALJEAN HAS QUITE THE AIR OF HAVING READAUSTIN CASTILLEJO

The strides of a lame man are like the ogling glances of a one-eyedman; they do not reach their goal very promptly. Moreover, Faucheleventwas in a dilemma. He took nearly a quarter of an hour to return to hiscottage in the garden. Cosette had waked up. Jean Valjean had placedher near the fire. At the moment when Fauchelevent entered, JeanValjean was pointing out to her the vintner’s basket on the wall, andsaying to her, “Listen attentively to me, my little Cosette. We must goaway from this house, but we shall return to it, and we shall be veryhappy here. The good man who lives here is going to carry you off onhis back in that. You will wait for me at a lady’s house. I shall cometo fetch you. Obey, and say nothing, above all things, unless you wantMadame Thénardier to get you again!”

Cosette nodded gravely.
Jean Valjean turned round at the noise made by Fauchelevent opening thedoor.
“Well?”

“Everything is arranged, and nothing is,” said Fauchelevent. “I havepermission to bring you in; but before bringing you in you must be gotout. That’s where the difficulty lies. It is easy enough with thechild.”

“You will carry her out?”

“And she will hold her tongue?”

“I answer for that.”

“But you, Father Madeleine?”

And, after a silence, fraught with anxiety, Fauchelevent exclaimed:—
“Why, get out as you came in!”

Jean Valjean, as in the first instance, contented himself with saying,“Impossible.”

Fauchelevent grumbled, more to himself than to Jean Valjean:—
“There is another thing which bothers me. I have said that I would putearth in it. When I come to think it over, the earth instead of thecorpse will not seem like the real thing, it won’t do, it will getdisplaced, it will move about. The men will bear it. You understand,Father Madeleine, the government will notice it.”

Jean Valjean stared him straight in the eye and thought that he wasraving.
Fauchelevent went on:—
“How the de—uce are you going to get out? It must all be done byto-morrow morning. It is to-morrow that I am to bring you in. Theprioress expects you.”

Then he explained to Jean Valjean that this was his recompense for aservice which he, Fauchelevent, was to render to the community. That itfell among his duties to take part in their burials, that he nailed upthe coffins and helped the grave-digger at the cemetery. That the nunwho had died that morning had requested to be buried in the coffinwhich had served her for a bed, and interred in the vault under thealtar of the chapel. That the police regulations forbade this, but thatshe was one of those dead to whom nothing is refused. That the prioressand the vocal mothers intended to fulfil the wish of the deceased. Thatit was so much the worse for the government. That he, Fauchelevent, wasto nail up the coffin in the cell, raise the stone in the chapel, andlower the corpse into the vault. And that, by way of thanks, theprioress was to admit his brother to the house as a gardener, and hisniece as a pupil. That his brother was M. Madeleine, and that his niecewas Cosette. That the prioress had told him to bring his brother on thefollowing evening, after the counterfeit interment in the cemetery. Butthat he could not bring M. Madeleine in from the outside if M.Madeleine was not outside. That that was the first problem. And then,that there was another: the empty coffin.
“What is that empty coffin?” asked Jean Valjean.
Fauchelevent replied:—
“The coffin of the administration.”

“What coffin? What administration?”

“A nun dies. The municipal doctor comes and says, ‘A nun has died.’ Thegovernment sends a coffin. The next day it sends a hearse andundertaker’s men to get the coffin and carry it to the cemetery. Theundertaker’s men will come and lift the coffin; there will be nothingin it.”

“Put something in it.”

“A corpse? I have none.”

“No.”

“What then?”

“A living person.”

“What person?”

“Me!” said Jean Valjean.
Fauchelevent, who was seated, sprang up as though a bomb had burstunder his chair.
“You!”

“Why not?”

Jean Valjean gave way to one of those rare smiles which lighted up hisface like a flash from heaven in the winter.
“You know, Fauchelevent, what you have said: ‘Mother Crucifixion isdead.’ and I add: ‘and Father Madeleine is buried.’”

“Ah! good, you can laugh, you are not speaking seriously.”

“Very seriously, I must get out of this place.”

“Certainly.”

“l have told you to find a basket, and a cover for me also.”

“Well?”

“The basket will be of pine, and the cover a black cloth.”

“In the first place, it will be a white cloth. Nuns are buried inwhite.”

“Let it be a white cloth, then.”

“You are not like other men, Father Madeleine.”

To behold such devices, which are nothing else than the savage anddaring inventions of the galleys, spring forth from the peaceablethings which surrounded him, and mingle with what he called the “pettycourse of life in the convent,” caused Fauchelevent as much amazementas a gull fishing in the gutter of the Rue Saint-Denis would inspire ina passer-by.
Jean Valjean went on:—
“The problem is to get out of here without being seen. This offers themeans. But give me some information, in the first place. How is itmanaged? Where is this coffin?”

“The empty one?”

“Yes.”

“Downstairs, in what is called the dead-room. It stands on twotrestles, under the pall.”

“How long is the coffin?”

“Six feet.”

“What is this dead-room?”

“It is a chamber on the ground floor which has a grated window openingon the garden, which is closed on the outside by a shutter, and twodoors; one leads into the convent, the other into the church.”

“What church?”

“The church in the street, the church which any one can enter.”

“Have you the keys to those two doors?”

“No; I have the key to the door which communicates with the convent;the porter has the key to the door which communicates with the church.”

“When does the porter open that door?”

“Only to allow the undertaker’s men to enter, when they come to get thecoffin. When the coffin has been taken out, the door is closed again.”

“Who nails up the coffin?”

“I do.”

“Who spreads the pall over it?”

“I do.”

“Are you alone?”

“Not another man, except the police doctor, can enter the dead-room.That is even written on the wall.”

“Could you hide me in that room to-night when every one is asleep?”

“No. But I could hide you in a small, dark nook which opens on thedead-room, where I keep my tools to use for burials, and of which Ihave the key.”

“At what time will the hearse come for the coffin to-morrow?”

“About three o’clock in the afternoon. The burial will take place atthe Vaugirard cemetery a little before nightfall. It is not very near.”

“I will remain concealed in your tool-closet all night and all themorning. And how about food? I shall be hungry.”

“I will bring you something.”

“You can come and nail me up in the coffin at two o’clock.”

Fauchelevent recoiled and cracked his finger-joints.
“But that is impossible!”

“Bah! Impossible to take a hammer and drive some nails in a plank?”

What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was, we repeat, a simplematter to Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean had been in worse straits thanthis. Any man who has been a prisoner understands how to contracthimself to fit the diameter of the escape. The prisoner is subject toflight as the sick man is subject to a crisis which saves or kills him.An escape is a cure. What does not a man undergo for the sake of acure? To have himself nailed up in a case and carried off like a baleof goods, to live for a long time in a box, to find air where there isnone, to economize his breath for hours, to know how to stifle withoutdying—this was one of Jean Valjean’s gloomy talents.
Moreover, a coffin containing a living being,—that convict’sexpedient,—is also an imperial expedient. If we are to credit the monkAustin Castillejo, this was the means employed by Charles the Fifth,desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication.
He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery of Saint-Yustein this manner.
Fauchelevent, who had recovered himself a little, exclaimed:—
“But how will you manage to breathe?”

“I will breathe.”

“In that box! The mere thought of it suffocates me.”

“You surely must have a gimlet, you will make a few holes here andthere, around my mouth, and you will nail the top plank on loosely.”

“Good! And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze?”

“A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze.”

And Jean Valjean added:—
“Father Fauchelevent, we must come to a decision: I must either becaught here, or accept this escape through the hearse.”

Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing andlounging between the two leaves of a half-shut door. Who is there whohas not said to a cat, “Do come in!” There are men who, when anincident stands half-open before them, have the same tendency to haltin indecision between two resolutions, at the risk of getting crushedthrough the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate. The over-prudent,cats as they are, and because they are cats, sometimes incur moredanger than the audacious. Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature.But Jean Valjean’s coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself. Hegrumbled:—
“Well, since there is no other means.”

Jean Valjean resumed:—
“The only thing which troubles me is what will take place at thecemetery.”

“That is the very point that is not troublesome,” exclaimedFauchelevent. “If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right, Iam sure of getting you out of the grave. The grave-digger is adrunkard, and a friend of mine. He is Father Mestienne. An old fellowof the old school. The grave-digger puts the corpses in the grave, andI put the grave-digger in my pocket. I will tell you what will takeplace. They will arrive a little before dusk, three-quarters of an hourbefore the gates of the cemetery are closed. The hearse will drivedirectly up to the grave. I shall follow; that is my business. I shallhave a hammer, a chisel, and some pincers in my pocket. The hearsehalts, the undertaker’s men knot a rope around your coffin and loweryou down. The priest says the prayers, makes the sign of the cross,sprinkles the holy water, and takes his departure. I am left alone withFather Mestienne. He is my friend, I tell you. One of two things willhappen, he will either be sober, or he will not be sober. If he is notdrunk, I shall say to him: ‘Come and drink a bout while the _Bon Coing_[the Good Quince] is open.’ I carry him off, I get him drunk,—it doesnot take long to make Father Mestienne drunk, he always has thebeginning of it about him,—I lay him under the table, I take his card,so that I can get into the cemetery again, and I return without him.Then you have no longer any one but me to deal with. If he is drunk, Ishall say to him: ‘Be off; I will do your work for you.’ Off he goes,and I drag you out of the hole.”

Jean Valjean held out his hand, and Fauchelevent precipitated himselfupon it with the touching effusion of a peasant.
“That is settled, Father Fauchelevent. All will go well.”

“Provided nothing goes wrong,” thought Fauchelevent. “In that case, itwould be terrible.”




CHAPTER V—IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BE DRUNK IN ORDER TO BE IMMORTAL

On the following day, as the sun was declining, the very rarepassers-by on the Boulevard du Maine pulled off their hats to anold-fashioned hearse, ornamented with skulls, cross-bones, and tears.This hearse contained a coffin covered with a white cloth over whichspread a large black cross, like a huge corpse with drooping arms. Amourning-coach, in which could be seen a priest in his surplice, and achoir boy in his red cap, followed. Two undertaker’s men in grayuniforms trimmed with black walked on the right and the left of thehearse. Behind it came an old man in the garments of a laborer, wholimped along. The procession was going in the direction of theVaugirard cemetery.
The handle of a hammer, the blade of a cold chisel, and the antennæ ofa pair of pincers were visible, protruding from the man’s pocket.
The Vaugirard cemetery formed an exception among the cemeteries ofParis. It had its peculiar usages, just as it had its carriage entranceand its house door, which old people in the quarter, who clungtenaciously to ancient words, still called the _porte cavalière_ andthe _porte piétonne_.16 The Bernardines-Benedictines of the RuePetit-Picpus had obtained permission, as we have already stated, to beburied there in a corner apart, and at night, the plot of land havingformerly belonged to their community. The grave-diggers being thusbound to service in the evening in summer and at night in winter, inthis cemetery, they were subjected to a special discipline. The gatesof the Paris cemeteries closed, at that epoch, at sundown, and thisbeing a municipal regulation, the Vaugirard cemetery was bound by itlike the rest. The carriage gate and the house door were two contiguousgrated gates, adjoining a pavilion built by the architect Perronet, andinhabited by the door-keeper of the cemetery. These gates, therefore,swung inexorably on their hinges at the instant when the sundisappeared behind the dome of the Invalides. If any grave-digger weredelayed after that moment in the cemetery, there was but one way forhim to get out—his grave-digger’s card furnished by the department ofpublic funerals. A sort of letter-box was constructed in the porter’swindow. The grave-digger dropped his card into this box, the porterheard it fall, pulled the rope, and the small door opened. If the manhad not his card, he mentioned his name, the porter, who was sometimesin bed and asleep, rose, came out and identified the man, and openedthe gate with his key; the grave-digger stepped out, but had to pay afine of fifteen francs.
This cemetery, with its peculiarities outside the regulations,embarrassed the symmetry of the administration. It was suppressed alittle later than 1830. The cemetery of Mont-Parnasse, called theEastern cemetery, succeeded to it, and inherited that famous dram-shopnext to the Vaugirard cemetery, which was surmounted by a quincepainted on a board, and which formed an angle, one side on thedrinkers’ tables, and the other on the tombs, with this sign: _Au BonCoing_.
The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery. It wasfalling into disuse. Dampness was invading it, the flowers weredeserting it. The bourgeois did not care much about being buried in theVaugirard; it hinted at poverty. Père-Lachaise if you please! to beburied in Père-Lachaise is equivalent to having furniture of mahogany.It is recognized as elegant. The Vaugirard cemetery was a venerableenclosure, planted like an old-fashioned French garden. Straightalleys, box, thuya-trees, holly, ancient tombs beneath agedcypress-trees, and very tall grass. In the evening it was tragic there.There were very lugubrious lines about it.
The sun had not yet set when the hearse with the white pall and theblack cross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery. The lame manwho followed it was no other than Fauchelevent.
The interment of Mother Crucifixion in the vault under the altar, theexit of Cosette, the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room,—allhad been executed without difficulty, and there had been no hitch.
Let us remark in passing, that the burial of Mother Crucifixion underthe altar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence in our sight. Itis one of the faults which resemble a duty. The nuns had committed it,not only without difficulty, but even with the applause of their ownconsciences. In the cloister, what is called the “government” is onlyan intermeddling with authority, an interference which is alwaysquestionable. In the first place, the rule; as for the code, we shallsee. Make as many laws as you please, men; but keep them foryourselves. The tribute to Cæsar is never anything but the remnants ofthe tribute to God. A prince is nothing in the presence of a principle.
Fauchelevent limped along behind the hearse in a very contented frameof mind. His twin plots, the one with the nuns, the one for theconvent, the other against it, the other with M. Madeleine, hadsucceeded, to all appearance. Jean Valjean’s composure was one of thosepowerful tranquillities which are contagious. Fauchelevent no longerfelt doubtful as to his success.
What remained to be done was a mere nothing. Within the last two years,he had made good Father Mestienne, a chubby-cheeked person, drunk atleast ten times. He played with Father Mestienne. He did what he likedwith him. He made him dance according to his whim. Mestienne’s headadjusted itself to the cap of Fauchelevent’s will. Fauchelevent’sconfidence was perfect.
At the moment when the convoy entered the avenue leading to thecemetery, Fauchelevent glanced cheerfully at the hearse, and said halfaloud, as he rubbed his big hands:—
“Here’s a fine farce!”

All at once the hearse halted; it had reached the gate. The permissionfor interment must be exhibited. The undertaker’s man addressed himselfto the porter of the cemetery. During this colloquy, which always isproductive of a delay of from one to two minutes, some one, a stranger,came and placed himself behind the hearse, beside Fauchelevent. He wasa sort of laboring man, who wore a waistcoat with large pockets andcarried a mattock under his arm.
Fauchelevent surveyed this stranger.
“Who are you?” he demanded.
“The man replied:—
“The grave-digger.”

If a man could survive the blow of a cannon-ball full in the breast, hewould make the same face that Fauchelevent made.
“The grave-digger?”

“Yes.”

“You?”

“I.”

“Father Mestienne is the grave-digger.”

“He was.”

“What! He was?”

“He is dead.”

Fauchelevent had expected anything but this, that a grave-digger coulddie. It is true, nevertheless, that grave-diggers do die themselves. Bydint of excavating graves for other people, one hollows out one’s own.
Fauchelevent stood there with his mouth wide open. He had hardly thestrength to stammer:—
“But it is not possible!”

“It is so.”

“But,” he persisted feebly, “Father Mestienne is the grave-digger.”

“After Napoleon, Louis XVIII. After Mestienne, Gribier. Peasant, myname is Gribier.”

Fauchelevent, who was deadly pale, stared at this Gribier.
He was a tall, thin, livid, utterly funereal man. He had the air of anunsuccessful doctor who had turned grave-digger.
Fauchelevent burst out laughing.
“Ah!” said he, “what queer things do happen! Father Mestienne is dead,but long live little Father Lenoir! Do you know who little FatherLenoir is? He is a jug of red wine. It is a jug of Surêne, morbigou! ofreal Paris Surêne? Ah! So old Mestienne is dead! I am sorry for it; hewas a jolly fellow. But you are a jolly fellow, too. Are you not,comrade? We’ll go and have a drink together presently.”

The man replied:—
“I have been a student. I passed my fourth examination. I never drink.”

The hearse had set out again, and was rolling up the grand alley of thecemetery.
Fauchelevent had slackened his pace. He limped more out of anxiety thanfrom infirmity.
The grave-digger walked on in front of him.
Fauchelevent passed the unexpected Gribier once more in review.
He was one of those men who, though very young, have the air of age,and who, though slender, are extremely strong.
“Comrade!” cried Fauchelevent.
The man turned round.
“I am the convent grave-digger.”

“My colleague,” said the man.
Fauchelevent, who was illiterate but very sharp, understood that he hadto deal with a formidable species of man, with a fine talker. Hemuttered:
“So Father Mestienne is dead.”

The man replied:—
“Completely. The good God consulted his note-book which shows when thetime is up. It was Father Mestienne’s turn. Father Mestienne died.”

Fauchelevent repeated mechanically: “The good God—”

“The good God,” said the man authoritatively. “According to thephilosophers, the Eternal Father; according to the Jacobins, theSupreme Being.”

“Shall we not make each other’s acquaintance?” stammered Fauchelevent.
“It is made. You are a peasant, I am a Parisian.”

“People do not know each other until they have drunk together. He whoempties his glass empties his heart. You must come and have a drinkwith me. Such a thing cannot be refused.”

“Business first.”

Fauchelevent thought: “I am lost.”

They were only a few turns of the wheel distant from the small alleyleading to the nuns’ corner.
The grave-digger resumed:—
“Peasant, I have seven small children who must be fed. As they musteat, I cannot drink.”

And he added, with the satisfaction of a serious man who is turning aphrase well:—
“Their hunger is the enemy of my thirst.”

The hearse skirted a clump of cypress-trees, quitted the grand alley,turned into a narrow one, entered the waste land, and plunged into athicket. This indicated the immediate proximity of the place ofsepulture. Fauchelevent slackened his pace, but he could not detain thehearse. Fortunately, the soil, which was light and wet with the winterrains, clogged the wheels and retarded its speed.
He approached the grave-digger.
“They have such a nice little Argenteuil wine,” murmured Fauchelevent.
“Villager,” retorted the man, “I ought not be a grave-digger. My fatherwas a porter at the Prytaneum [Town-Hall]. He destined me forliterature. But he had reverses. He had losses on ‘change. I wasobliged to renounce the profession of author. But I am still a publicwriter.”

“So you are not a grave-digger, then?” returned Fauchelevent, clutchingat this branch, feeble as it was.
“The one does not hinder the other. I cumulate.”

Fauchelevent did not understand this last word.
“Come have a drink,” said he.
Here a remark becomes necessary. Fauchelevent, whatever his anguish,offered a drink, but he did not explain himself on one point; who wasto pay? Generally, Fauchelevent offered and Father Mestienne paid. Anoffer of a drink was the evident result of the novel situation createdby the new grave-digger, and it was necessary to make this offer, butthe old gardener left the proverbial quarter of an hour named afterRabelais in the dark, and that not unintentionally. As for himself,Fauchelevent did not wish to pay, troubled as he was.
The grave-digger went on with a superior smile:—
“One must eat. I have accepted Father Mestienne’s reversion. One getsto be a philosopher when one has nearly completed his classes. To thelabor of the hand I join the labor of the arm. I have my scrivener’sstall in the market of the Rue de Sèvres. You know? the UmbrellaMarket. All the cooks of the Red Cross apply to me. I scribble theirdeclarations of love to the raw soldiers. In the morning I write loveletters; in the evening I dig graves. Such is life, rustic.”

The hearse was still advancing. Fauchelevent, uneasy to the lastdegree, was gazing about him on all sides. Great drops of perspirationtrickled down from his brow.
“But,” continued the grave-digger, “a man cannot serve two mistresses.I must choose between the pen and the mattock. The mattock is ruiningmy hand.”

The hearse halted.
The choir boy alighted from the mourning-coach, then the priest.
One of the small front wheels of the hearse had run up a little on apile of earth, beyond which an open grave was visible.
“What a farce this is!” repeated Fauchelevent in consternation.



CHAPTER VI—BETWEEN FOUR PLANKS

Who was in the coffin? The reader knows. Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there, and hecould almost breathe.
It is a strange thing to what a degree security of conscience conferssecurity of the rest. Every combination thought out by Jean Valjean hadbeen progressing, and progressing favorably, since the preceding day.He, like Fauchelevent, counted on Father Mestienne. He had no doubt asto the end. Never was there a more critical situation, never morecomplete composure.
The four planks of the coffin breathe out a kind of terrible peace. Itseemed as though something of the repose of the dead entered into JeanValjean’s tranquillity.
From the depths of that coffin he had been able to follow, and he hadfollowed, all the phases of the terrible drama which he was playingwith death.
Shortly after Fauchelevent had finished nailing on the upper plank,Jean Valjean had felt himself carried out, then driven off. He knew,from the diminution in the jolting, when they left the pavements andreached the earth road. He had divined, from a dull noise, that theywere crossing the bridge of Austerlitz. At the first halt, he hadunderstood that they were entering the cemetery; at the second halt, hesaid to himself:—
“Here is the grave.”

Suddenly, he felt hands seize the coffin, then a harsh grating againstthe planks; he explained it to himself as the rope which was beingfastened round the casket in order to lower it into the cavity.
Then he experienced a giddiness.
The undertaker’s man and the grave-digger had probably allowed thecoffin to lose its balance, and had lowered the head before the foot.He recovered himself fully when he felt himself horizontal andmotionless. He had just touched the bottom.
He had a certain sensation of cold.
A voice rose above him, glacial and solemn. He heard Latin words, whichhe did not understand, pass over him, so slowly that he was able tocatch them one by one:—
_“Qui dormiunt in terræ pulvere, evigilabunt; alii in vitam æternam, etalii in approbrium, ut videant semper.” _
A child’s voice said:—
_“De profundis.” _
The grave voice began again:—
_“Requiem æternam dona ei, Domine.” _
The child’s voice responded:—
_“Et lux perpetua luceat ei.” _
He heard something like the gentle patter of several drops of rain onthe plank which covered him. It was probably the holy water.
He thought: “This will be over soon now. Patience for a little whilelonger. The priest will take his departure. Fauchelevent will takeMestienne off to drink. I shall be left. Then Fauchelevent will returnalone, and I shall get out. That will be the work of a good hour.”

The grave voice resumed
_“Requiescat in pace.” _
And the child’s voice said:—
_“Amen.” _
Jean Valjean strained his ears, and heard something like retreatingfootsteps.
“There, they are going now,” thought he. “I am alone.”

All at once, he heard over his head a sound which seemed to him to be aclap of thunder.
It was a shovelful of earth falling on the coffin.
A second shovelful fell.
One of the holes through which he breathed had just been stopped up.
A third shovelful of earth fell.
Then a fourth.
There are things which are too strong for the strongest man. JeanValjean lost consciousness.



CHAPTER VII—IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE ORIGIN OF THE SAYING: DON’T LOSETHE CARD

This is what had taken place above the coffin in which lay JeanValjean.
When the hearse had driven off, when the priest and the choir boy hadentered the carriage again and taken their departure, Fauchelevent, whohad not taken his eyes from the grave-digger, saw the latter bend overand grasp his shovel, which was sticking upright in the heap of dirt.
Then Fauchelevent took a supreme resolve.
He placed himself between the grave and the grave-digger, crossed hisarms and said:—
“I am the one to pay!”

The grave-digger stared at him in amazement, and replied:—
“What’s that, peasant?”

Fauchelevent repeated:—
“I am the one who pays!”

“What?”

“For the wine.”

“What wine?”

“That Argenteuil wine.”

“Where is the Argenteuil?”

“At the _Bon Coing_.”

“Go to the devil!” said the grave-digger.
And he flung a shovelful of earth on the coffin.
The coffin gave back a hollow sound. Fauchelevent felt himself staggerand on the point of falling headlong into the grave himself. He shoutedin a voice in which the strangling sound of the death rattle began tomingle:—
“Comrade! Before the _Bon Coing_ is shut!”

The grave-digger took some more earth on his shovel. Faucheleventcontinued.
“I will pay.”

And he seized the man’s arm.
“Listen to me, comrade. I am the convent grave-digger, I have come tohelp you. It is a business which can be performed at night. Let usbegin, then, by going for a drink.”

And as he spoke, and clung to this desperate insistence, thismelancholy reflection occurred to him: “And if he drinks, will he getdrunk?”

“Provincial,” said the man, “if you positively insist upon it, Iconsent. We will drink. After work, never before.”

And he flourished his shovel briskly. Fauchelevent held him back.
“It is Argenteuil wine, at six.”

“Oh, come,” said the grave-digger, “you are a bell-ringer. Ding dong,ding dong, that’s all you know how to say. Go hang yourself.”

And he threw in a second shovelful.
Fauchelevent had reached a point where he no longer knew what he wassaying.
“Come along and drink,” he cried, “since it is I who pays the bill.”

“When we have put the child to bed,” said the grave-digger.
He flung in a third shovelful.
Then he thrust his shovel into the earth and added:—
“It’s cold to-night, you see, and the corpse would shriek out after usif we were to plant her there without a coverlet.”

At that moment, as he loaded his shovel, the grave-digger bent over,and the pocket of his waistcoat gaped. Fauchelevent’s wild gaze fellmechanically into that pocket, and there it stopped.
The sun was not yet hidden behind the horizon; there was still lightenough to enable him to distinguish something white at the bottom ofthat yawning pocket.
The sum total of lightning that the eye of a Picard peasant cancontain, traversed Fauchelevent’s pupils. An idea had just occurred tohim.
He thrust his hand into the pocket from behind, without thegrave-digger, who was wholly absorbed in his shovelful of earth,observing it, and pulled out the white object which lay at the bottomof it.
The man sent a fourth shovelful tumbling into the grave.
Just as he turned round to get the fifth, Fauchelevent looked calmly athim and said:—
“By the way, you new man, have you your card?”

The grave-digger paused.
“What card?”

“The sun is on the point of setting.”

“That’s good, it is going to put on its nightcap.”

“The gate of the cemetery will close immediately.”

“Well, what then?”

“Have you your card?”

“Ah! my card?” said the grave-digger.
And he fumbled in his pocket.
Having searched one pocket, he proceeded to search the other. He passedon to his fobs, explored the first, returned to the second.
“Why, no,” said he, “I have not my card. I must have forgotten it.”

“Fifteen francs fine,” said Fauchelevent.
The grave-digger turned green. Green is the pallor of livid people.
“Ah! Jésus-mon-Dieu-bancroche-à-bas-la-lune!”17 he exclaimed. “Fifteenfrancs fine!”

“Three pieces of a hundred sous,” said Fauchelevent.
The grave-digger dropped his shovel.
Fauchelevent’s turn had come.
“Ah, come now, conscript,” said Fauchelevent, “none of this despair.There is no question of committing suicide and benefiting the grave.Fifteen francs is fifteen francs, and besides, you may not be able topay it. I am an old hand, you are a new one. I know all the ropes andthe devices. I will give you some friendly advice. One thing is clear,the sun is on the point of setting, it is touching the dome now, thecemetery will be closed in five minutes more.”

“That is true,” replied the man.
“Five minutes more and you will not have time to fill the grave, it isas hollow as the devil, this grave, and to reach the gate in season topass it before it is shut.”

“That is true.”

“In that case, a fine of fifteen francs.”

“Fifteen francs.”

“But you have time. Where do you live?”

“A couple of steps from the barrier, a quarter of an hour from here.No. 87 Rue de Vaugirard.”

“You have just time to get out by taking to your heels at your bestspeed.”

“That is exactly so.”

“Once outside the gate, you gallop home, you get your card, you return,the cemetery porter admits you. As you have your card, there will benothing to pay. And you will bury your corpse. I’ll watch it for you inthe meantime, so that it shall not run away.”

“I am indebted to you for my life, peasant.”

“Decamp!” said Fauchelevent.
The grave-digger, overwhelmed with gratitude, shook his hand and setoff on a run.
When the man had disappeared in the thicket, Fauchelevent listeneduntil he heard his footsteps die away in the distance, then he leanedover the grave, and said in a low tone:—
“Father Madeleine!”

There was no reply.
Fauchelevent was seized with a shudder. He tumbled rather than climbedinto the grave, flung himself on the head of the coffin and cried:—
“Are you there?”

Silence in the coffin.
Fauchelevent, hardly able to draw his breath for trembling, seized hiscold chisel and his hammer, and pried up the coffin lid.
Jean Valjean’s face appeared in the twilight; it was pale and his eyeswere closed.
Fauchelevent’s hair rose upright on his head, he sprang to his feet,then fell back against the side of the grave, ready to swoon on thecoffin. He stared at Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean lay there pallid and motionless.
Fauchelevent murmured in a voice as faint as a sigh:—
“He is dead!”

And, drawing himself up, and folding his arms with such violence thathis clenched fists came in contact with his shoulders, he cried:—
“And this is the way I save his life!”

Then the poor man fell to sobbing. He soliloquized the while, for it isan error to suppose that the soliloquy is unnatural. Powerful emotionoften talks aloud.
“It is Father Mestienne’s fault. Why did that fool die? What need wasthere for him to give up the ghost at the very moment when no one wasexpecting it? It is he who has killed M. Madeleine. Father Madeleine!He is in the coffin. It is quite handy. All is over. Now, is there anysense in these things? Ah! my God! he is dead! Well! and his littlegirl, what am I to do with her? What will the fruit-seller say? Theidea of its being possible for a man like that to die like this! When Ithink how he put himself under that cart! Father Madeleine! FatherMadeleine! Pardine! He was suffocated, I said so. He wouldn’t believeme. Well! Here’s a pretty trick to play! He is dead, that good man, thevery best man out of all the good God’s good folks! And his littlegirl! Ah! In the first place, I won’t go back there myself. I shallstay here. After having done such a thing as that! What’s the use ofbeing two old men, if we are two old fools! But, in the first place,how did he manage to enter the convent? That was the beginning of itall. One should not do such things. Father Madeleine! Father Madeleine!Father Madeleine! Madeleine! Monsieur Madeleine! Monsieur le Maire! Hedoes not hear me. Now get out of this scrape if you can!”

And he tore his hair.
A grating sound became audible through the trees in the distance. Itwas the cemetery gate closing.
Fauchelevent bent over Jean Valjean, and all at once he bounded backand recoiled so far as the limits of a grave permit.
Jean Valjean’s eyes were open and gazing at him.
To see a corpse is alarming, to behold a resurrection is almost as muchso. Fauchelevent became like stone, pale, haggard, overwhelmed by allthese excesses of emotion, not knowing whether he had to do with aliving man or a dead one, and staring at Jean Valjean, who was gazingat him.

  Enlarge
The Resurrection 2b8-7-resurrection

“I fell asleep,” said Jean Valjean.
And he raised himself to a sitting posture.
Fauchelevent fell on his knees.
“Just, good Virgin! How you frightened me!”

Then he sprang to his feet and cried:—
“Thanks, Father Madeleine!”

Jean Valjean had merely fainted. The fresh air had revived him.
Joy is the ebb of terror. Fauchelevent found almost as much difficultyin recovering himself as Jean Valjean had.
“So you are not dead! Oh! How wise you are! I called you so much thatyou came back. When I saw your eyes shut, I said: ‘Good! there he is,stifled,’ I should have gone raving mad, mad enough for a straitjacket. They would have put me in Bicêtre. What do you suppose I shouldhave done if you had been dead? And your little girl? There’s thatfruit-seller,—she would never have understood it! The child is thrustinto your arms, and then—the grandfather is dead! What a story! goodsaints of paradise, what a tale! Ah! you are alive, that’s the best ofit!”

“I am cold,” said Jean Valjean.
This remark recalled Fauchelevent thoroughly to reality, and there waspressing need of it. The souls of these two men were troubled even whenthey had recovered themselves, although they did not realize it, andthere was about them something uncanny, which was the sinisterbewilderment inspired by the place.
“Let us get out of here quickly,” exclaimed Fauchelevent.
He fumbled in his pocket, and pulled out a gourd with which he hadprovided himself.
“But first, take a drop,” said he.
The flask finished what the fresh air had begun, Jean Valjean swalloweda mouthful of brandy, and regained full possession of his faculties.
He got out of the coffin, and helped Fauchelevent to nail on the lidagain.
Three minutes later they were out of the grave.
Moreover, Fauchelevent was perfectly composed. He took his time. Thecemetery was closed. The arrival of the grave-digger Gribier was not tobe apprehended. That “conscript” was at home busily engaged in lookingfor his card, and at some difficulty in finding it in his lodgings,since it was in Fauchelevent’s pocket. Without a card, he could not getback into the cemetery.
Fauchelevent took the shovel, and Jean Valjean the pick-axe, andtogether they buried the empty coffin.
When the grave was full, Fauchelevent said to Jean Valjean:—
“Let us go. I will keep the shovel; do you carry off the mattock.”

Night was falling.
Jean Valjean experienced some difficulty in moving and in walking. Hehad stiffened himself in that coffin, and had become a little like acorpse. The rigidity of death had seized upon him between those fourplanks. He had, in a manner, to thaw out, from the tomb.
“You are benumbed,” said Fauchelevent. “It is a pity that I have a gameleg, for otherwise we might step out briskly.”

“Bah!” replied Jean Valjean, “four paces will put life into my legsonce more.”

They set off by the alleys through which the hearse had passed. Onarriving before the closed gate and the porter’s pavilion Fauchelevent,who held the grave-digger’s card in his hand, dropped it into the box,the porter pulled the rope, the gate opened, and they went out.
“How well everything is going!” said Fauchelevent; “what a capital ideathat was of yours, Father Madeleine!”

They passed the Vaugirard barrier in the simplest manner in the world.In the neighborhood of the cemetery, a shovel and pick are equal to twopassports.
The Rue Vaugirard was deserted.
“Father Madeleine,” said Fauchelevent as they went along, and raisinghis eyes to the houses, “Your eyes are better than mine. Show me No.87.”

“Here it is,” said Jean Valjean.
“There is no one in the street,” said Fauchelevent. “Give me yourmattock and wait a couple of minutes for me.”

Fauchelevent entered No. 87, ascended to the very top, guided by theinstinct which always leads the poor man to the garret, and knocked inthe dark, at the door of an attic.
A voice replied: “Come in.”

It was Gribier’s voice.
Fauchelevent opened the door. The grave-digger’s dwelling was, like allsuch wretched habitations, an unfurnished and encumbered garret. Apacking-case—a coffin, perhaps—took the place of a commode, abutter-pot served for a drinking-fountain, a straw mattress served fora bed, the floor served instead of tables and chairs. In a corner, on atattered fragment which had been a piece of an old carpet, a thin womanand a number of children were piled in a heap. The whole of thispoverty-stricken interior bore traces of having been overturned. Onewould have said that there had been an earthquake “for one.” The coverswere displaced, the rags scattered about, the jug broken, the motherhad been crying, the children had probably been beaten; traces of avigorous and ill-tempered search. It was plain that the grave-diggerhad made a desperate search for his card, and had made everybody in thegarret, from the jug to his wife, responsible for its loss. He wore anair of desperation.
But Fauchelevent was in too great a hurry to terminate this adventureto take any notice of this sad side of his success.
He entered and said:—
“I have brought you back your shovel and pick.”

Gribier gazed at him in stupefaction.
“Is it you, peasant?”

“And to-morrow morning you will find your card with the porter of thecemetery.”

And he laid the shovel and mattock on the floor.
“What is the meaning of this?” demanded Gribier.
“The meaning of it is, that you dropped your card out of your pocket,that I found it on the ground after you were gone, that I have buriedthe corpse, that I have filled the grave, that I have done your work,that the porter will return your card to you, and that you will nothave to pay fifteen francs. There you have it, conscript.”

“Thanks, villager!” exclaimed Gribier, radiant. “The next time I willpay for the drinks.”




CHAPTER VIII—A SUCCESSFUL INTERROGATORY

An hour later, in the darkness of night, two men and a child presentedthemselves at No. 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. The elder of the men lifted theknocker and rapped.
They were Fauchelevent, Jean Valjean, and Cosette.
The two old men had gone to fetch Cosette from the fruiterer’s in theRue du Chemin-Vert, where Fauchelevent had deposited her on thepreceding day. Cosette had passed these twenty-four hours tremblingsilently and understanding nothing. She trembled to such a degree thatshe wept. She had neither eaten nor slept. The worthy fruit-seller hadplied her with a hundred questions, without obtaining any other replythan a melancholy and unvarying gaze. Cosette had betrayed nothing ofwhat she had seen and heard during the last two days. She divined thatthey were passing through a crisis. She was deeply conscious that itwas necessary to “be good.” Who has not experienced the sovereign powerof those two words, pronounced with a certain accent in the ear of aterrified little being: _Say nothing! _ Fear is mute. Moreover, no oneguards a secret like a child.
But when, at the expiration of these lugubrious twenty-four hours, shebeheld Jean Valjean again, she gave vent to such a cry of joy, that anythoughtful person who had chanced to hear that cry, would have guessedthat it issued from an abyss.
Fauchelevent belonged to the convent and knew the pass-words. All thedoors opened.
Thus was solved the double and alarming problem of how to get out andhow to get in.
The porter, who had received his instructions, opened the littleservant’s door which connected the courtyard with the garden, and whichcould still be seen from the street twenty years ago, in the wall atthe bottom of the court, which faced the carriage entrance.
The porter admitted all three of them through this door, and from thatpoint they reached the inner, reserved parlor where Fauchelevent, onthe preceding day, had received his orders from the prioress.
The prioress, rosary in hand, was waiting for them. A vocal mother,with her veil lowered, stood beside her.
A discreet candle lighted, one might almost say, made a show oflighting the parlor.
The prioress passed Jean Valjean in review. There is nothing whichexamines like a downcast eye.
Then she questioned him:—
“You are the brother?”

“Yes, reverend Mother,” replied Fauchelevent.
“What is your name?”

Fauchelevent replied:—
“Ultime Fauchelevent.”

He really had had a brother named Ultime, who was dead.
“Where do you come from?”

Fauchelevent replied:—
“From Picquigny, near Amiens.”

“What is your age?”

Fauchelevent replied:—
“Fifty.”

“What is your profession?”

Fauchelevent replied:—
“Gardener.”

“Are you a good Christian?”

Fauchelevent replied:—
“Every one is in the family.”

“Is this your little girl?”

Fauchelevent replied:—
“Yes, reverend Mother.”

“You are her father?”

Fauchelevent replied:—
“Her grandfather.”

The vocal mother said to the prioress in a low voice
“He answers well.”

Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word.
The prioress looked attentively at Cosette, and said half aloud to thevocal mother:—
“She will grow up ugly.”

The two mothers consulted for a few moments in very low tones in thecorner of the parlor, then the prioress turned round and said:—
“Father Fauvent, you will get another knee-cap with a bell. Two will berequired now.”

On the following day, therefore, two bells were audible in the garden,and the nuns could not resist the temptation to raise the corner oftheir veils. At the extreme end of the garden, under the trees, twomen, Fauvent and another man, were visible as they dug side by side. Anenormous event. Their silence was broken to the extent of saying toeach other: “He is an assistant gardener.”

The vocal mothers added: “He is a brother of Father Fauvent.”

Jean Valjean was, in fact, regularly installed; he had his belledknee-cap; henceforth he was official. His name was Ultime Fauchelevent.
The most powerful determining cause of his admission had been theprioress’s observation upon Cosette: “She will grow up ugly.”

The prioress, that pronounced prognosticator, immediately took a fancyto Cosette and gave her a place in the school as a charity pupil.
There is nothing that is not strictly logical about this.
It is in vain that mirrors are banished from the convent, women areconscious of their faces; now, girls who are conscious of their beautydo not easily become nuns; the vocation being voluntary in inverseproportion to their good looks, more is to be hoped from the ugly thanfrom the pretty. Hence a lively taste for plain girls.
The whole of this adventure increased the importance of good, oldFauchelevent; he won a triple success; in the eyes of Jean Valjean,whom he had saved and sheltered; in those of grave-digger Gribier, whosaid to himself: “He spared me that fine”; with the convent, which,being enabled, thanks to him, to retain the coffin of MotherCrucifixion under the altar, eluded Cæsar and satisfied God. There wasa coffin containing a body in the Petit-Picpus, and a coffin without abody in the Vaugirard cemetery, public order had no doubt been deeplydisturbed thereby, but no one was aware of it.
As for the convent, its gratitude to Fauchelevent was very great.Fauchelevent became the best of servitors and the most precious ofgardeners. Upon the occasion of the archbishop’s next visit, theprioress recounted the affair to his Grace, making something of aconfession at the same time, and yet boasting of her deed. On leavingthe convent, the archbishop mentioned it with approval, and in awhisper to M. de Latil, Monsieur’s confessor, afterwards Archbishop ofReims and Cardinal. This admiration for Fauchelevent became widespread,for it made its way to Rome. We have seen a note addressed by the thenreigning Pope, Leo XII., to one of his relatives, a Monsignor in theNuncio’s establishment in Paris, and bearing, like himself, the name ofDella Genga; it contained these lines: “It appears that there is in aconvent in Paris an excellent gardener, who is also a holy man, namedFauvent.” Nothing of this triumph reached Fauchelevent in his hut; hewent on grafting, weeding, and covering up his melon beds, without inthe least suspecting his excellences and his sanctity. Neither did hesuspect his glory, any more than a Durham or Surrey bull whose portraitis published in the _London Illustrated News_, with this inscription:“Bull which carried off the prize at the Cattle Show.”




CHAPTER IX—CLOISTERED

Cosette continued to hold her tongue in the convent.
It was quite natural that Cosette should think herself Jean Valjean’sdaughter. Moreover, as she knew nothing, she could say nothing, andthen, she would not have said anything in any case. As we have justobserved, nothing trains children to silence like unhappiness. Cosettehad suffered so much, that she feared everything, even to speak or tobreathe. A single word had so often brought down an avalanche upon her.She had hardly begun to regain her confidence since she had been withJean Valjean. She speedily became accustomed to the convent. Only sheregretted Catherine, but she dared not say so. Once, however, she didsay to Jean Valjean: “Father, if I had known, I would have brought heraway with me.”

Cosette had been obliged, on becoming a scholar in the convent, to donthe garb of the pupils of the house. Jean Valjean succeeded in gettingthem to restore to him the garments which she laid aside. This was thesame mourning suit which he had made her put on when she had quittedthe Thénardiers’ inn. It was not very threadbare even now. Jean Valjeanlocked up these garments, plus the stockings and the shoes, with aquantity of camphor and all the aromatics in which convents abound, ina little valise which he found means of procuring. He set this valiseon a chair near his bed, and he always carried the key about hisperson. “Father,” Cosette asked him one day, “what is there in that boxwhich smells so good?”

Father Fauchelevent received other recompense for his good action, inaddition to the glory which we just mentioned, and of which he knewnothing; in the first place it made him happy; next, he had much lesswork, since it was shared. Lastly, as he was very fond of snuff, hefound the presence of M. Madeleine an advantage, in that he used threetimes as much as he had done previously, and that in an infinitely moreluxurious manner, seeing that M. Madeleine paid for it.
The nuns did not adopt the name of Ultime; they called Jean Valjean_the other Fauvent_.
If these holy women had possessed anything of Javert’s glance, theywould eventually have noticed that when there was any errand to be doneoutside in the behalf of the garden, it was always the elderFauchelevent, the old, the infirm, the lame man, who went, and neverthe other; but whether it is that eyes constantly fixed on God know nothow to spy, or whether they were, by preference, occupied in keepingwatch on each other, they paid no heed to this.
Moreover, it was well for Jean Valjean that he kept close and did notstir out. Javert watched the quarter for more than a month.
This convent was for Jean Valjean like an island surrounded by gulfs.Henceforth, those four walls constituted his world. He saw enough ofthe sky there to enable him to preserve his serenity, and Cosetteenough to remain happy.
A very sweet life began for him.
He inhabited the old hut at the end of the garden, in company withFauchelevent. This hovel, built of old rubbish, which was still inexistence in 1845, was composed, as the reader already knows, of threechambers, all of which were utterly bare and had nothing beyond thewalls. The principal one had been given up, by force, for Jean Valjeanhad opposed it in vain, to M. Madeleine, by Father Fauchelevent. Thewalls of this chamber had for ornament, in addition to the two nailswhereon to hang the knee-cap and the basket, a Royalist bank-note of’93, applied to the wall over the chimney-piece, and of which thefollowing is an exact facsimile:—


Royalist Bank-note  2b8-9-banknote

This specimen of Vendean paper money had been nailed to the wall by thepreceding gardener, an old Chouan, who had died in the convent, andwhose place Fauchelevent had taken.
Jean Valjean worked in the garden every day and made himself veryuseful. He had formerly been a pruner of trees, and he gladly foundhimself a gardener once more. It will be remembered that he knew allsorts of secrets and receipts for agriculture. He turned these toadvantage. Almost all the trees in the orchard were ungrafted, andwild. He budded them and made them produce excellent fruit.
Cosette had permission to pass an hour with him every day. As thesisters were melancholy and he was kind, the child made comparisons andadored him. At the appointed hour she flew to the hut. When she enteredthe lowly cabin, she filled it with paradise. Jean Valjean blossomedout and felt his happiness increase with the happiness which heafforded Cosette. The joy which we inspire has this charming property,that, far from growing meagre, like all reflections, it returns to usmore radiant than ever. At recreation hours, Jean Valjean watched herrunning and playing in the distance, and he distinguished her laughfrom that of the rest.
For Cosette laughed now.
Cosette’s face had even undergone a change, to a certain extent. Thegloom had disappeared from it. A smile is the same as sunshine; itbanishes winter from the human countenance.
Recreation over, when Cosette went into the house again, Jean Valjeangazed at the windows of her class-room, and at night he rose to look atthe windows of her dormitory.
God has his own ways, moreover; the convent contributed, like Cosette,to uphold and complete the Bishop’s work in Jean Valjean. It is certainthat virtue adjoins pride on one side. A bridge built by the devilexists there. Jean Valjean had been, unconsciously, perhaps, tolerablynear that side and that bridge, when Providence cast his lot in theconvent of the Petit-Picpus; so long as he had compared himself only tothe Bishop, he had regarded himself as unworthy and had remainedhumble; but for some time past he had been comparing himself to men ingeneral, and pride was beginning to spring up. Who knows? He might haveended by returning very gradually to hatred.
The convent stopped him on that downward path.
This was the second place of captivity which he had seen. In his youth,in what had been for him the beginning of his life, and later on, quiterecently again, he had beheld another,—a frightful place, a terribleplace, whose severities had always appeared to him the iniquity ofjustice, and the crime of the law. Now, after the galleys, he saw thecloister; and when he meditated how he had formed a part of thegalleys, and that he now, so to speak, was a spectator of the cloister,he confronted the two in his own mind with anxiety.
Sometimes he crossed his arms and leaned on his hoe, and slowlydescended the endless spirals of reverie.
He recalled his former companions: how wretched they were; they rose atdawn, and toiled until night; hardly were they permitted to sleep; theylay on camp beds, where nothing was tolerated but mattresses two inchesthick, in rooms which were heated only in the very harshest months ofthe year; they were clothed in frightful red blouses; they wereallowed, as a great favor, linen trousers in the hottest weather, and awoollen carter’s blouse on their backs when it was very cold; theydrank no wine, and ate no meat, except when they went on “fatigueduty.” They lived nameless, designated only by numbers, and converted,after a manner, into ciphers themselves, with downcast eyes, withlowered voices, with shorn heads, beneath the cudgel and in disgrace.
Then his mind reverted to the beings whom he had under his eyes.
These beings also lived with shorn heads, with downcast eyes, withlowered voices, not in disgrace, but amid the scoffs of the world, notwith their backs bruised with the cudgel, but with their shoulderslacerated with their discipline. Their names, also, had vanished fromamong men; they no longer existed except under austere appellations.They never ate meat and they never drank wine; they often remaineduntil evening without food; they were attired, not in a red blouse, butin a black shroud, of woollen, which was heavy in summer and thin inwinter, without the power to add or subtract anything from it; withouthaving even, according to the season, the resource of the linen garmentor the woollen cloak; and for six months in the year they wore sergechemises which gave them fever. They dwelt, not in rooms warmed onlyduring rigorous cold, but in cells where no fire was ever lighted; theyslept, not on mattresses two inches thick, but on straw. And finally,they were not even allowed their sleep; every night, after a day oftoil, they were obliged, in the weariness of their first slumber, atthe moment when they were falling sound asleep and beginning to getwarm, to rouse themselves, to rise and to go and pray in an ice-coldand gloomy chapel, with their knees on the stones.
On certain days each of these beings in turn had to remain for twelvesuccessive hours in a kneeling posture, or prostrate, with face uponthe pavement, and arms outstretched in the form of a cross.
The others were men; these were women.
What had those men done? They had stolen, violated, pillaged, murdered,assassinated. They were bandits, counterfeiters, poisoners,incendiaries, murderers, parricides. What had these women done? Theyhad done nothing whatever.
On the one hand, highway robbery, fraud, deceit, violence, sensuality,homicide, all sorts of sacrilege, every variety of crime; on the other,one thing only, innocence.
Perfect innocence, almost caught up into heaven in a mysteriousassumption, attached to the earth by virtue, already possessingsomething of heaven through holiness.
On the one hand, confidences over crimes, which are exchanged inwhispers; on the other, the confession of faults made aloud. And whatcrimes! And what faults!
On the one hand, miasms; on the other, an ineffable perfume. On the onehand, a moral pest, guarded from sight, penned up under the range ofcannon, and literally devouring its plague-stricken victims; on theother, the chaste flame of all souls on the same hearth. There,darkness; here, the shadow; but a shadow filled with gleams of light,and of gleams full of radiance.
Two strongholds of slavery; but in the first, deliverance possible, alegal limit always in sight, and then, escape. In the second,perpetuity; the sole hope, at the distant extremity of the future, thatfaint light of liberty which men call death.
In the first, men are bound only with chains; in the other, chained byfaith.
What flowed from the first? An immense curse, the gnashing of teeth,hatred, desperate viciousness, a cry of rage against human society, asarcasm against heaven.
What results flowed from the second? Blessings and love.
And in these two places, so similar yet so unlike, these two species ofbeings who were so very unlike, were undergoing the same work,expiation.
Jean Valjean understood thoroughly the expiation of the former; thatpersonal expiation, the expiation for one’s self. But he did notunderstand that of these last, that of creatures without reproach andwithout stain, and he trembled as he asked himself: The expiation ofwhat? What expiation?
A voice within his conscience replied: “The most divine of humangenerosities, the expiation for others.”

Here all personal theory is withheld; we are only the narrator; weplace ourselves at Jean Valjean’s point of view, and we translate hisimpressions.
Before his eyes he had the sublime summit of abnegation, the highestpossible pitch of virtue; the innocence which pardons men their faults,and which expiates in their stead; servitude submitted to, tortureaccepted, punishment claimed by souls which have not sinned, for thesake of sparing it to souls which have fallen; the love of humanityswallowed up in the love of God, but even there preserving its distinctand mediatorial character; sweet and feeble beings possessing themisery of those who are punished and the smile of those who arerecompensed.
And he remembered that he had dared to murmur!
Often, in the middle of the night, he rose to listen to the gratefulsong of those innocent creatures weighed down with severities, and theblood ran cold in his veins at the thought that those who were justlychastised raised their voices heavenward only in blasphemy, and thathe, wretch that he was, had shaken his fist at God.
There was one striking thing which caused him to meditate deeply, likea warning whisper from Providence itself: the scaling of that wall, thepassing of those barriers, the adventure accepted even at the risk ofdeath, the painful and difficult ascent, all those efforts even, whichhe had made to escape from that other place of expiation, he had madein order to gain entrance into this one. Was this a symbol of hisdestiny? This house was a prison likewise and bore a melancholyresemblance to that other one whence he had fled, and yet he had neverconceived an idea of anything similar.
Again he beheld gratings, bolts, iron bars—to guard whom? Angels.
These lofty walls which he had seen around tigers, he now beheld oncemore around lambs.
This was a place of expiation, and not of punishment; and yet, it wasstill more austere, more gloomy, and more pitiless than the other.
These virgins were even more heavily burdened than the convicts. Acold, harsh wind, that wind which had chilled his youth, traversed thebarred and padlocked grating of the vultures; a still harsher and morebiting breeze blew in the cage of these doves.
Why?
When he thought on these things, all that was within him was lost inamazement before this mystery of sublimity.
In these meditations, his pride vanished. He scrutinized his own heartin all manner of ways; he felt his pettiness, and many a time he wept.All that had entered into his life for the last six months had led himback towards the Bishop’s holy injunctions; Cosette through love, theconvent through humility.
Sometimes at eventide, in the twilight, at an hour when the garden wasdeserted, he could be seen on his knees in the middle of the walk whichskirted the chapel, in front of the window through which he had gazedon the night of his arrival, and turned towards the spot where, as heknew, the sister was making reparation, prostrated in prayer. Thus heprayed as he knelt before the sister.
It seemed as though he dared not kneel directly before God.
Everything that surrounded him, that peaceful garden, those fragrantflowers, those children who uttered joyous cries, those grave andsimple women, that silent cloister, slowly permeated him, and little bylittle, his soul became compounded of silence like the cloister, ofperfume like the flowers, of simplicity like the women, of joy like thechildren. And then he reflected that these had been two houses of Godwhich had received him in succession at two critical moments in hislife: the first, when all doors were closed and when human societyrejected him; the second, at a moment when human society had again setout in pursuit of him, and when the galleys were again yawning; andthat, had it not been for the first, he should have relapsed intocrime, and had it not been for the second, into torment.
His whole heart melted in gratitude, and he loved more and more.
Many years passed in this manner; Cosette was growing up.
[THE END OF VOLUME II “COSETTE”]



VOLUME III—MARIUS


  Enlarge
Frontispiece Volume Three  3frontispiece


  Enlarge
Titlepage Volume Three  3titlepage



BOOK FIRST—PARIS STUDIED IN ITS ATOM



CHAPTER I—PARVULUS

Paris has a child, and the forest has a bird; the bird is called thesparrow; the child is called the gamin.
Couple these two ideas which contain, the one all the furnace, theother all the dawn; strike these two sparks together, Paris, childhood;there leaps out from them a little being. _Homuncio_, Plautus wouldsay.
This little being is joyous. He has not food every day, and he goes tothe play every evening, if he sees good. He has no shirt on his body,no shoes on his feet, no roof over his head; he is like the flies ofheaven, who have none of these things. He is from seven to thirteenyears of age, he lives in bands, roams the streets, lodges in the openair, wears an old pair of trousers of his father’s, which descend belowhis heels, an old hat of some other father, which descends below hisears, a single suspender of yellow listing; he runs, lies in wait,rummages about, wastes time, blackens pipes, swears like a convict,haunts the wine-shop, knows thieves, calls gay women _thou_, talksslang, sings obscene songs, and has no evil in his heart. This isbecause he has in his heart a pearl, innocence; and pearls are not tobe dissolved in mud. So long as man is in his childhood, God wills thathe shall be innocent.
If one were to ask that enormous city: “What is this?” she would reply:“It is my little one.”




CHAPTER II—SOME OF HIS PARTICULAR CHARACTERISTICS

The gamin—the street Arab—of Paris is the dwarf of the giant.
Let us not exaggerate, this cherub of the gutter sometimes has a shirt,but, in that case, he owns but one; he sometimes has shoes, but thenthey have no soles; he sometimes has a lodging, and he loves it, for hefinds his mother there; but he prefers the street, because there hefinds liberty. He has his own games, his own bits of mischief, whosefoundation consists of hatred for the bourgeois; his peculiarmetaphors: to be dead is _to eat dandelions by the root_; his ownoccupations, calling hackney-coaches, letting down carriage-steps,establishing means of transit between the two sides of a street inheavy rains, which he calls _making the bridge of arts_, cryingdiscourses pronounced by the authorities in favor of the French people,cleaning out the cracks in the pavement; he has his own coinage, whichis composed of all the little morsels of worked copper which are foundon the public streets. This curious money, which receives the name of_loques_—rags—has an invariable and well-regulated currency in thislittle Bohemia of children.
Lastly, he has his own fauna, which he observes attentively in thecorners; the lady-bird, the death’s-head plant-louse, thedaddy-long-legs, “the devil,” a black insect, which menaces by twistingabout its tail armed with two horns. He has his fabulous monster, whichhas scales under its belly, but is not a lizard, which has pustules onits back, but is not a toad, which inhabits the nooks of old lime-kilnsand wells that have run dry, which is black, hairy, sticky, whichcrawls sometimes slowly, sometimes rapidly, which has no cry, but whichhas a look, and is so terrible that no one has ever beheld it; he callsthis monster “the deaf thing.” The search for these “deaf things” amongthe stones is a joy of formidable nature. Another pleasure consists insuddenly prying up a paving-stone, and taking a look at the wood-lice.Each region of Paris is celebrated for the interesting treasures whichare to be found there. There are ear-wigs in the timber-yards of theUrsulines, there are millepeds in the Pantheon, there are tadpoles inthe ditches of the Champs-de-Mars.
As far as sayings are concerned, this child has as many of them asTalleyrand. He is no less cynical, but he is more honest. He is endowedwith a certain indescribable, unexpected joviality; he upsets thecomposure of the shopkeeper with his wild laughter. He ranges boldlyfrom high comedy to farce.
A funeral passes by. Among those who accompany the dead there is adoctor. “Hey there!” shouts some street Arab, “how long has it beencustomary for doctors to carry home their own work?”

Another is in a crowd. A grave man, adorned with spectacles andtrinkets, turns round indignantly: “You good-for-nothing, you haveseized my wife’s waist!”—“I, sir? Search me!”




CHAPTER III—HE IS AGREEABLE

In the evening, thanks to a few sous, which he always finds means toprocure, the _homuncio_ enters a theatre. On crossing that magicthreshold, he becomes transfigured; he was the street Arab, he becomesthe titi.18 Theatres are a sort of ship turned upside down with thekeel in the air. It is in that keel that the titi huddle together. Thetiti is to the gamin what the moth is to the larva; the same beingendowed with wings and soaring. It suffices for him to be there, withhis radiance of happiness, with his power of enthusiasm and joy, withhis hand-clapping, which resembles a clapping of wings, to confer onthat narrow, dark, fetid, sordid, unhealthy, hideous, abominable keel,the name of Paradise.
Bestow on an individual the useless and deprive him of the necessary,and you have the gamin.
The gamin is not devoid of literary intuition. His tendency, and we sayit with the proper amount of regret, would not constitute classictaste. He is not very academic by nature. Thus, to give an example, thepopularity of Mademoiselle Mars among that little audience of stormychildren was seasoned with a touch of irony. The gamin called her_Mademoiselle Muche_—“hide yourself.”

This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights, has rags like ababy and tatters like a philosopher, fishes in the sewer, hunts in thecesspool, extracts mirth from foulness, whips up the squares with hiswit, grins and bites, whistles and sings, shouts, and shrieks, tempersAlleluia with Matanturlurette, chants every rhythm from the DeProfundis to the Jack-pudding, finds without seeking, knows what he isignorant of, is a Spartan to the point of thieving, is mad to wisdom,is lyrical to filth, would crouch down on Olympus, wallows in thedunghill and emerges from it covered with stars. The gamin of Paris isRabelais in this youth.
He is not content with his trousers unless they have a watch-pocket.
He is not easily astonished, he is still less easily terrified, hemakes songs on superstitions, he takes the wind out of exaggerations,he twits mysteries, he thrusts out his tongue at ghosts, he takes thepoetry out of stilted things, he introduces caricature into epicextravaganzas. It is not that he is prosaic; far from that; but hereplaces the solemn vision by the farcical phantasmagoria. If Adamastorwere to appear to him, the street Arab would say: “Hi there! Thebugaboo!”




CHAPTER IV—HE MAY BE OF USE

Paris begins with the lounger and ends with the street Arab, two beingsof which no other city is capable; the passive acceptance, whichcontents itself with gazing, and the inexhaustible initiative;Prudhomme and Fouillou. Paris alone has this in its natural history.The whole of the monarchy is contained in the lounger; the whole ofanarchy in the gamin.
This pale child of the Parisian faubourgs lives and develops, makesconnections, “grows supple” in suffering, in the presence of socialrealities and of human things, a thoughtful witness. He thinks himselfheedless; and he is not. He looks and is on the verge of laughter; heis on the verge of something else also. Whoever you may be, if yourname is Prejudice, Abuse, Ignorance, Oppression, Iniquity, Despotism,Injustice, Fanaticism, Tyranny, beware of the gaping gamin.
The little fellow will grow up.
Of what clay is he made? Of the first mud that comes to hand. A handfulof dirt, a breath, and behold Adam. It suffices for a God to pass by. AGod has always passed over the street Arab. Fortune labors at this tinybeing. By the word “fortune” we mean chance, to some extent. That pigmykneaded out of common earth, ignorant, unlettered, giddy, vulgar, low.Will that become an Ionian or a Bœotian? Wait, _currit rota_, theSpirit of Paris, that demon which creates the children of chance andthe men of destiny, reversing the process of the Latin potter, makes ofa jug an amphora.



CHAPTER V—HIS FRONTIERS

The gamin loves the city, he also loves solitude, since he hassomething of the sage in him. _Urbis amator_, like Fuscus; _rurisamator_, like Flaccus.
To roam thoughtfully about, that is to say, to lounge, is a fineemployment of time in the eyes of the philosopher; particularly in thatrather illegitimate species of campaign, which is tolerably ugly butodd and composed of two natures, which surrounds certain great cities,notably Paris. To study the suburbs is to study the amphibious animal.End of the trees, beginning of the roofs; end of the grass, beginningof the pavements; end of the furrows, beginning of the shops, end ofthe wheel-ruts, beginning of the passions; end of the divine murmur,beginning of the human uproar; hence an extraordinary interest.
Hence, in these not very attractive places, indelibly stamped by thepassing stroller with the epithet: _melancholy_, the apparentlyobjectless promenades of the dreamer.
He who writes these lines has long been a prowler about the barriers ofParis, and it is for him a source of profound souvenirs. Thatclose-shaven turf, those pebbly paths, that chalk, those pools, thoseharsh monotonies of waste and fallow lands, the plants of earlymarket-garden suddenly springing into sight in a bottom, that mixtureof the savage and the citizen, those vast desert nooks where thegarrison drums practise noisily, and produce a sort of lisping ofbattle, those hermits by day and cut-throats by night, that clumsy millwhich turns in the wind, the hoisting-wheels of the quarries, thetea-gardens at the corners of the cemeteries; the mysterious charm ofgreat, sombre walls squarely intersecting immense, vague stretches ofland inundated with sunshine and full of butterflies,—all thisattracted him.
There is hardly any one on earth who is not acquainted with thosesingular spots, the Glacière, the Cunette, the hideous wall of Grenelleall speckled with balls, Mont-Parnasse, the Fosse-aux-Loups, Aubiers onthe bank of the Marne, Mont-Souris, the Tombe-Issoire, the Pierre-Platede Châtillon, where there is an old, exhausted quarry which no longerserves any purpose except to raise mushrooms, and which is closed, on alevel with the ground, by a trap-door of rotten planks. The campagna ofRome is one idea, the banlieue of Paris is another; to behold nothingbut fields, houses, or trees in what a stretch of country offers us, isto remain on the surface; all aspects of things are thoughts of God.The spot where a plain effects its junction with a city is alwaysstamped with a certain piercing melancholy. Nature and humanity bothappeal to you at the same time there. Local originalities there maketheir appearance.
Any one who, like ourselves, has wandered about in these solitudescontiguous to our faubourgs, which may be designated as the limbos ofParis, has seen here and there, in the most desert spot, at the mostunexpected moment, behind a meagre hedge, or in the corner of alugubrious wall, children grouped tumultuously, fetid, muddy, dusty,ragged, dishevelled, playing hide-and-seek, and crowned withcorn-flowers. All of them are little ones who have made their escapefrom poor families. The outer boulevard is their breathing space; thesuburbs belong to them. There they are eternally playing truant. Therethey innocently sing their repertory of dirty songs. There they are, orrather, there they exist, far from every eye, in the sweet light of Mayor June, kneeling round a hole in the ground, snapping marbles withtheir thumbs, quarrelling over half-farthings, irresponsible, volatile,free and happy; and, no sooner do they catch sight of you than theyrecollect that they have an industry, and that they must earn theirliving, and they offer to sell you an old woollen stocking filled withcockchafers, or a bunch of lilacs. These encounters with strangechildren are one of the charming and at the same time poignant gracesof the environs of Paris.
Sometimes there are little girls among the throng of boys,—are theytheir sisters?—who are almost young maidens, thin, feverish, withsunburnt hands, covered with freckles, crowned with poppies and ears ofrye, gay, haggard, barefooted. They can be seen devouring cherriesamong the wheat. In the evening they can be heard laughing. Thesegroups, warmly illuminated by the full glow of midday, or indistinctlyseen in the twilight, occupy the thoughtful man for a very long time,and these visions mingle with his dreams.
Paris, centre, banlieue, circumference; this constitutes all the earthto those children. They never venture beyond this. They can no moreescape from the Parisian atmosphere than fish can escape from thewater. For them, nothing exists two leagues beyond the barriers: Ivry,Gentilly, Arcueil, Belleville, Aubervilliers, Ménilmontant,Choisy-le-Roi, Billancourt, Meudon, Issy, Vanvre, Sèvres, Puteaux,Neuilly, Gennevilliers, Colombes, Romainville, Chatou, Asnières,Bougival, Nanterre, Enghien, Noisy-le-Sec, Nogent, Gournay, Drancy,Gonesse; the universe ends there.



CHAPTER VI—A BIT OF HISTORY

At the epoch, nearly contemporary by the way, when the action of thisbook takes place, there was not, as there is to-day, a policeman at thecorner of every street (a benefit which there is no time to discusshere); stray children abounded in Paris. The statistics give an averageof two hundred and sixty homeless children picked up annually at thatperiod, by the police patrols, in unenclosed lands, in houses inprocess of construction, and under the arches of the bridges. One ofthese nests, which has become famous, produced “the swallows of thebridge of Arcola.” This is, moreover, the most disastrous of socialsymptoms. All crimes of the man begin in the vagabondage of the child.
Let us make an exception in favor of Paris, nevertheless. In a relativemeasure, and in spite of the souvenir which we have just recalled, theexception is just. While in any other great city the vagabond child isa lost man, while nearly everywhere the child left to itself is, insome sort, sacrificed and abandoned to a kind of fatal immersion in thepublic vices which devour in him honesty and conscience, the street boyof Paris, we insist on this point, however defaced and injured on thesurface, is almost intact on the interior. It is a magnificent thing toput on record, and one which shines forth in the splendid probity ofour popular revolutions, that a certain incorruptibility results fromthe idea which exists in the air of Paris, as salt exists in the waterof the ocean. To breathe Paris preserves the soul.
What we have just said takes away nothing of the anguish of heart whichone experiences every time that one meets one of these children aroundwhom one fancies that he beholds floating the threads of a brokenfamily. In the civilization of the present day, incomplete as it stillis, it is not a very abnormal thing to behold these fractured familiespouring themselves out into the darkness, not knowing clearly what hasbecome of their children, and allowing their own entrails to fall onthe public highway. Hence these obscure destinies. This is called, forthis sad thing has given rise to an expression, “to be cast on thepavements of Paris.”

Let it be said by the way, that this abandonment of children was notdiscouraged by the ancient monarchy. A little of Egypt and Bohemia inthe lower regions suited the upper spheres, and compassed the aims ofthe powerful. The hatred of instruction for the children of the peoplewas a dogma. What is the use of “half-lights”? Such was thecountersign. Now, the erring child is the corollary of the ignorantchild.
Besides this, the monarchy sometimes was in need of children, and inthat case it skimmed the streets.
Under Louis XIV., not to go any further back, the king rightly desiredto create a fleet. The idea was a good one. But let us consider themeans. There can be no fleet, if, beside the sailing ship, thatplaything of the winds, and for the purpose of towing it, in case ofnecessity, there is not the vessel which goes where it pleases, eitherby means of oars or of steam; the galleys were then to the marine whatsteamers are to-day. Therefore, galleys were necessary; but the galleyis moved only by the galley-slave; hence, galley-slaves were required.Colbert had the commissioners of provinces and the parliaments make asmany convicts as possible. The magistracy showed a great deal ofcomplaisance in the matter. A man kept his hat on in the presence of aprocession—it was a Huguenot attitude; he was sent to the galleys. Achild was encountered in the streets; provided that he was fifteenyears of age and did not know where he was to sleep, he was sent to thegalleys. Grand reign; grand century.
Under Louis XV. children disappeared in Paris; the police carried themoff, for what mysterious purpose no one knew. People whispered withterror monstrous conjectures as to the king’s baths of purple. Barbierspeaks ingenuously of these things. It sometimes happened that theexempts of the guard, when they ran short of children, took those whohad fathers. The fathers, in despair, attacked the exempts. In thatcase, the parliament intervened and had some one hung. Who? Theexempts? No, the fathers.



CHAPTER VII—THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OFINDIA

The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste. One mightalmost say: Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so.
This word _gamin_ was printed for the first time, and reached popularspeech through the literary tongue, in 1834. It is in a little workentitled _Claude Gueux_ that this word made its appearance. The horrorwas lively. The word passed into circulation.
The elements which constitute the consideration of the gamins for eachother are very various. We have known and associated with one who wasgreatly respected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fallfrom the top of the tower of Notre-Dame; another, because he hadsucceeded in making his way into the rear courtyard where the statuesof the dome of the Invalides had been temporarily deposited, and had“prigged” some lead from them; a third, because he had seen a diligencetip over; still another, because he “knew” a soldier who came nearputting out the eye of a citizen.
This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin, a profoundepiphonema, which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending,—_Dieu de Dieu! What ill-luck I do have! to think that I have never yetseen anybody tumble from a fifth-story window! _ (_I have_ pronounced_I’ave_ and _fifth_ pronounced _fift’_.)
Surely, this saying of a peasant is a fine one: “Father So-and-So, yourwife has died of her malady; why did you not send for the doctor?”“What would you have, sir, we poor folks _die of ourselves_.” But ifthe peasant’s whole passivity lies in this saying, the whole of thefree-thinking anarchy of the brat of the faubourgs is, assuredly,contained in this other saying. A man condemned to death is listeningto his confessor in the tumbrel. The child of Paris exclaims: “He istalking to his black cap! Oh, the sneak!”

A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin. To bestrong-minded is an important item.
To be present at executions constitutes a duty. He shows himself at theguillotine, and he laughs. He calls it by all sorts of pet names: TheEnd of the Soup, The Growler, The Mother in the Blue (the sky), TheLast Mouthful, etc., etc. In order not to lose anything of the affair,he scales the walls, he hoists himself to balconies, he ascends trees,he suspends himself to gratings, he clings fast to chimneys. The gaminis born a tiler as he is born a mariner. A roof inspires him with nomore fear than a mast. There is no festival which comes up to anexecution on the Place de Grève. Samson and the Abbé Montès are thetruly popular names. They hoot at the victim in order to encourage him.They sometimes admire him. Lacenaire, when a gamin, on seeing thehideous Dautin die bravely, uttered these words which contain a future:“I was jealous of him.” In the brotherhood of gamins Voltaire is notknown, but Papavoine is. “Politicians” are confused with assassins inthe same legend. They have a tradition as to everybody’s last garment.It is known that Tolleron had a fireman’s cap, Avril an otter cap,Losvel a round hat, that old Delaporte was bald and bareheaded, thatCastaing was all ruddy and very handsome, that Bories had a romanticsmall beard, that Jean Martin kept on his suspenders, that Lecouffé andhis mother quarrelled. “Don’t reproach each other for your basket,”shouted a gamin to them. Another, in order to get a look at Debacker ashe passed, and being too small in the crowd, caught sight of thelantern on the quay and climbed it. A gendarme stationed oppositefrowned. “Let me climb up, m’sieu le gendarme,” said the gamin. And, tosoften the heart of the authorities he added: “I will not fall.” “Idon’t care if you do,” retorted the gendarme.
In the brotherhood of gamins, a memorable accident counts for a greatdeal. One reaches the height of consideration if one chances to cutone’s self very deeply, “to the very bone.”

The fist is no mediocre element of respect. One of the things that thegamin is fondest of saying is: “I am fine and strong, come now!” To beleft-handed renders you very enviable. A squint is highly esteemed.



CHAPTER VIII—IN WHICH THE READER WILL FIND A CHARMING SAYING OF THELAST KING

In summer, he metamorphoses himself into a frog; and in the evening,when night is falling, in front of the bridges of Austerlitz and Jena,from the tops of coal wagons, and the washerwomen’s boats, he hurlshimself headlong into the Seine, and into all possible infractions ofthe laws of modesty and of the police. Nevertheless the police keep aneye on him, and the result is a highly dramatic situation which oncegave rise to a fraternal and memorable cry; that cry which wascelebrated about 1830, is a strategic warning from gamin to gamin; itscans like a verse from Homer, with a notation as inexpressible as theeleusiac chant of the Panathenæa, and in it one encounters again theancient Evohe. Here it is: “Ohé, Titi, ohééé! Here comes the bobby,here comes the p’lice, pick up your duds and be off, through the sewerwith you!”

Sometimes this gnat—that is what he calls himself—knows how to read;sometimes he knows how to write; he always knows how to daub. He doesnot hesitate to acquire, by no one knows what mysterious mutualinstruction, all the talents which can be of use to the public; from1815 to 1830, he imitated the cry of the turkey; from 1830 to 1848, hescrawled pears on the walls. One summer evening, when Louis Philippewas returning home on foot, he saw a little fellow, no higher than hisknee, perspiring and climbing up to draw a gigantic pear in charcoal onone of the pillars of the gate of Neuilly; the King, with thatgood-nature which came to him from Henry IV., helped the gamin,finished the pear, and gave the child a louis, saying: “The pear is onthat also."19 The gamin loves uproar. A certain state of violencepleases him. He execrates “the curés.” One day, in the Rue del’Université, one of these scamps was putting his thumb to his nose atthe carriage gate of No. 69. “Why are you doing that at the gate?” apasser-by asked. The boy replied: “There is a curé there.” It wasthere, in fact, that the Papal Nuncio lived.
Nevertheless, whatever may be the Voltairianism of the small gamin, ifthe occasion to become a chorister presents itself, it is quitepossible that he will accept, and in that case he serves the masscivilly. There are two things to which he plays Tantalus, and which healways desires without ever attaining them: to overthrow thegovernment, and to get his trousers sewed up again.
The gamin in his perfect state possesses all the policemen of Paris,and can always put the name to the face of any one which he chances tomeet. He can tell them off on the tips of his fingers. He studies theirhabits, and he has special notes on each one of them. He reads thesouls of the police like an open book. He will tell you fluently andwithout flinching: “Such an one is a _traitor_; such another is very_malicious_; such another is _great_; such another is _ridiculous_.”(All these words: traitor, malicious, great, ridiculous, have aparticular meaning in his mouth.) That one imagines that he owns thePont-Neuf, and he prevents _people_ from walking on the cornice outsidethe parapet; that other has a mania for pulling _person’s_ ears; etc.,etc.



CHAPTER IX—THE OLD SOUL OF GAUL

There was something of that boy in Poquelin, the son of thefish-market; Beaumarchais had something of it. Gaminerie is a shade ofthe Gallic spirit. Mingled with good sense, it sometimes adds force tothe latter, as alcohol does to wine. Sometimes it is a defect. Homerrepeats himself eternally, granted; one may say that Voltaire plays thegamin. Camille Desmoulins was a native of the faubourgs. Championnet,who treated miracles brutally, rose from the pavements of Paris; hehad, when a small lad, inundated the porticos of Saint-Jean deBeauvais, and of Saint-Étienne du Mont; he had addressed the shrine ofSainte-Geneviève familiarly to give orders to the phial of SaintJanuarius.
The gamin of Paris is respectful, ironical, and insolent. He hasvillainous teeth, because he is badly fed and his stomach suffers, andhandsome eyes because he has wit. If Jehovah himself were present, hewould go hopping up the steps of paradise on one foot. He is strong onboxing. All beliefs are possible to him. He plays in the gutter, andstraightens himself up with a revolt; his effrontery persists even inthe presence of grape-shot; he was a scapegrace, he is a hero; like thelittle Theban, he shakes the skin from the lion; Barra the drummer-boywas a gamin of Paris; he Shouts: “Forward!” as the horse of Scripturesays “Vah!” and in a moment he has passed from the small brat to thegiant.
This child of the puddle is also the child of the ideal. Measure thatspread of wings which reaches from Molière to Barra.
To sum up the whole, and in one word, the gamin is a being who amuseshimself, because he is unhappy.



CHAPTER X—ECCE PARIS, ECCE HOMO

To sum it all up once more, the Paris gamin of to-day, like the_græculus_ of Rome in days gone by, is the infant populace with thewrinkle of the old world on his brow.
The gamin is a grace to the nation, and at the same time a disease; adisease which must be cured, how? By light.
Light renders healthy.
Light kindles.
All generous social irradiations spring from science, letters, arts,education. Make men, make men. Give them light that they may warm you.Sooner or later the splendid question of universal education willpresent itself with the irresistible authority of the absolute truth;and then, those who govern under the superintendence of the French ideawill have to make this choice; the children of France or the gamins ofParis; flames in the light or will-o’-the-wisps in the gloom.
The gamin expresses Paris, and Paris expresses the world.
For Paris is a total. Paris is the ceiling of the human race. The wholeof this prodigious city is a foreshortening of dead manners and livingmanners. He who sees Paris thinks he sees the bottom of all historywith heaven and constellations in the intervals. Paris has a capital,the Town-Hall, a Parthenon, Notre-Dame, a Mount Aventine, the FaubourgSaint-Antoine, an Asinarium, the Sorbonne, a Pantheon, the Pantheon, aVia Sacra, the Boulevard des Italiens, a temple of the winds, opinion;and it replaces the Gemoniæ by ridicule. Its _majo_ is called “faraud,”its Transteverin is the man of the faubourgs, its _hammal_ is themarket-porter, its lazzarone is the pègre, its cockney is the native ofGhent. Everything that exists elsewhere exists at Paris. The fishwomanof Dumarsais can retort on the herb-seller of Euripides, the discobolsVejanus lives again in the Forioso, the tight-rope dancer.Therapontigonus Miles could walk arm in arm with Vadeboncœur thegrenadier, Damasippus the second-hand dealer would be happy amongbric-à-brac merchants, Vincennes could grasp Socrates in its fist asjust as Agora could imprison Diderot, Grimod de la Reynière discoveredlarded roast beef, as Curtillus invented roast hedgehog, we see thetrapeze which figures in Plautus reappear under the vault of the Arc ofl’Etoile, the sword-eater of Pœcilus encountered by Apuleius is asword-swallower on the Pont-Neuf, the nephew of Rameau and Curculio theparasite make a pair, Ergasilus could get himself presented toCambacères by d’Aigrefeuille; the four dandies of Rome: Alcesimarchus,Phœdromus, Diabolus, and Argyrippus, descend from Courtille inLabatut’s posting-chaise; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in frontof Congrio than would Charles Nodier in front of Punchinello; Marto isnot a tigress, but Pardalisca was not a dragon; Pantolabus the wagjeers in the Café Anglais at Nomentanus the fast liver, Hermogenus is atenor in the Champs-Élysées, and round him, Thracius the beggar, cladlike Bobèche, takes up a collection; the bore who stops you by thebutton of your coat in the Tuileries makes you repeat after a lapse oftwo thousand years Thesprion’s apostrophe: _Quis properantem meprehendit pallio? _ The wine on Surêne is a parody of the wine of Alba,the red border of Desaugiers forms a balance to the great cutting ofBalatro, Père-Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains the same gleamsas the Esquiliæ, and the grave of the poor bought for five years, iscertainly the equivalent of the slave’s hived coffin.
Seek something that Paris has not. The vat of Trophonius containsnothing that is not in Mesmer’s tub; Ergaphilas lives again inCagliostro; the Brahmin Vâsaphantâ become incarnate in the Comte deSaint-Germain; the cemetery of Saint-Médard works quite as goodmiracles as the Mosque of Oumoumié at Damascus.
Paris has an Æsop-Mayeux, and a Canidia, Mademoiselle Lenormand. It isterrified, like Delphos at the fulgurating realities of the vision; itmakes tables turn as Dodona did tripods. It places the grisette on thethrone, as Rome placed the courtesan there; and, taking it altogether,if Louis XV. is worse than Claudian, Madame Dubarry is better thanMessalina. Paris combines in an unprecedented type, which has existedand which we have elbowed, Grecian nudity, the Hebraic ulcer, and theGascon pun. It mingles Diogenes, Job, and Jack-pudding, dresses up aspectre in old numbers of the _Constitutional_, and makes ChodrucDuclos.
Although Plutarch says: _the tyrant never grows old_, Rome, under Syllaas under Domitian, resigned itself and willingly put water in its wine.The Tiber was a Lethe, if the rather doctrinary eulogium made of it byVarus Vibiscus is to be credited: _Contra Gracchos Tiberim habemus,Bibere Tiberim, id est seditionem oblivisci_. Paris drinks a millionlitres of water a day, but that does not prevent it from occasionallybeating the general alarm and ringing the tocsin.
With that exception, Paris is amiable. It accepts everything royally;it is not too particular about its Venus; its Callipyge is Hottentot;provided that it is made to laugh, it condones; ugliness cheers it,deformity provokes it to laughter, vice diverts it; be eccentric andyou may be an eccentric; even hypocrisy, that supreme cynicism, doesnot disgust it; it is so literary that it does not hold its nose beforeBasile, and is no more scandalized by the prayer of Tartuffe thanHorace was repelled by the “hiccup” of Priapus. No trait of theuniversal face is lacking in the profile of Paris. The bal Mabile isnot the polymnia dance of the Janiculum, but the dealer in ladies’wearing apparel there devours the lorette with her eyes, exactly as theprocuress Staphyla lay in wait for the virgin Planesium. The Barrièredu Combat is not the Coliseum, but people are as ferocious there asthough Cæsar were looking on. The Syrian hostess has more grace thanMother Saguet, but, if Virgil haunted the Roman wine-shop, Davidd’Angers, Balzac and Charlet have sat at the tables of Parisiantaverns. Paris reigns. Geniuses flash forth there, the red tailsprosper there. Adonaï passes on his chariot with its twelve wheels ofthunder and lightning; Silenus makes his entry there on his ass. ForSilenus read Ramponneau.
Paris is the synonym of Cosmos, Paris is Athens, Sybaris, Jerusalem,Pantin. All civilizations are there in an abridged form, all barbarismsalso. Paris would greatly regret it if it had not a guillotine.
A little of the Place de Grève is a good thing. What would all thateternal festival be without this seasoning? Our laws are wiselyprovided, and thanks to them, this blade drips on this Shrove Tuesday.



CHAPTER XI—TO SCOFF, TO REIGN

There is no limit to Paris. No city has had that domination whichsometimes derides those whom it subjugates. To please you, O Athenians!exclaimed Alexander. Paris makes more than the law, it makes thefashion; Paris sets more than the fashion, it sets the routine. Parismay be stupid, if it sees fit; it sometimes allows itself this luxury;then the universe is stupid in company with it; then Paris awakes, rubsits eyes, says: “How stupid I am!” and bursts out laughing in the faceof the human race. What a marvel is such a city! it is a strange thingthat this grandioseness and this burlesque should be amicableneighbors, that all this majesty should not be thrown into disorder byall this parody, and that the same mouth can to-day blow into the trumpof the Judgment Day, and to-morrow into the reed-flute! Paris has asovereign joviality. Its gayety is of the thunder and its farce holds asceptre.
Its tempest sometimes proceeds from a grimace. Its explosions, itsdays, its masterpieces, its prodigies, its epics, go forth to thebounds of the universe, and so also do its cock-and-bull stories. Itslaugh is the mouth of a volcano which spatters the whole earth. Itsjests are sparks. It imposes its caricatures as well as its ideal onpeople; the highest monuments of human civilization accept its ironiesand lend their eternity to its mischievous pranks. It is superb; it hasa prodigious 14th of July, which delivers the globe; it forces allnations to take the oath of tennis; its night of the 4th of Augustdissolves in three hours a thousand years of feudalism; it makes of itslogic the muscle of unanimous will; it multiplies itself under allsorts of forms of the sublime; it fills with its light Washington,Kosciusko, Bolivar, Bozzaris, Riego, Bem, Manin, Lopez, John Brown,Garibaldi; it is everywhere where the future is being lighted up, atBoston in 1779, at the Isle de Léon in 1820, at Pesth in 1848, atPalermo in 1860, it whispers the mighty countersign: Liberty, in theear of the American abolitionists grouped about the boat at Harper’sFerry, and in the ear of the patriots of Ancona assembled in theshadow, to the Archi before the Gozzi inn on the seashore; it createsCanaris; it creates Quiroga; it creates Pisacane; it irradiates thegreat on earth; it was while proceeding whither its breath urge them,that Byron perished at Missolonghi, and that Mazet died at Barcelona;it is the tribune under the feet of Mirabeau, and a crater under thefeet of Robespierre; its books, its theatre, its art, its science, itsliterature, its philosophy, are the manuals of the human race; it hasPascal, Régnier, Corneille, Descartes, Jean-Jacques: Voltaire for allmoments, Molière for all centuries; it makes its language to be talkedby the universal mouth, and that language becomes the word; itconstructs in all minds the idea of progress, the liberating dogmaswhich it forges are for the generations trusty friends, and it is withthe soul of its thinkers and its poets that all heroes of all nationshave been made since 1789; this does not prevent vagabondism, and thatenormous genius which is called Paris, while transfiguring the world byits light, sketches in charcoal Bouginier’s nose on the wall of thetemple of Theseus and writes _Credeville the thief_ on the Pyramids.
Paris is always showing its teeth; when it is not scolding it islaughing.
Such is Paris. The smoke of its roofs forms the ideas of the universe.A heap of mud and stone, if you will, but, above all, a moral being. Itis more than great, it is immense. Why? Because it is daring.
To dare; that is the price of progress.
All sublime conquests are, more or less, the prizes of daring. In orderthat the Revolution should take place, it does not suffice thatMontesquieu should foresee it, that Diderot should preach it, thatBeaumarchais should announce it, that Condorcet should calculate it,that Arouet should prepare it, that Rousseau should premeditate it; itis necessary that Danton should dare it.
The cry: _Audacity! _ is a _Fiat lux_. It is necessary, for the sake ofthe forward march of the human race, that there should be proud lessonsof courage permanently on the heights. Daring deeds dazzle history andare one of man’s great sources of light. The dawn dares when it rises.To attempt, to brave, to persist, to persevere, to be faithful to one’sself, to grasp fate bodily, to astound catastrophe by the small amountof fear that it occasions us, now to affront unjust power, again toinsult drunken victory, to hold one’s position, to stand one’s ground;that is the example which nations need, that is the light whichelectrifies them. The same formidable lightning proceeds from the torchof Prometheus to Cambronne’s short pipe.



CHAPTER XII—THE FUTURE LATENT IN THE PEOPLE

As for the Parisian populace, even when a man grown, it is always thestreet Arab; to paint the child is to paint the city; and it is forthat reason that we have studied this eagle in this arrant sparrow. Itis in the faubourgs, above all, we maintain, that the Parisian raceappears; there is the pure blood; there is the true physiognomy; therethis people toils and suffers, and suffering and toil are the two facesof man. There exist there immense numbers of unknown beings, among whomswarm types of the strangest, from the porter of la Râpée to theknacker of Montfaucon. _Fex urbis_, exclaims Cicero; _mob_, adds Burke,indignantly; rabble, multitude, populace. These are words and quicklyuttered. But so be it. What does it matter? What is it to me if they dogo barefoot! They do not know how to read; so much the worse. Would youabandon them for that? Would you turn their distress into amalediction? Cannot the light penetrate these masses? Let us return tothat cry: Light! and let us obstinately persist therein! Light! Light!Who knows whether these opacities will not become transparent? Are notrevolutions transfigurations? Come, philosophers, teach, enlighten,light up, think aloud, speak aloud, hasten joyously to the great sun,fraternize with the public place, announce the good news, spend youralphabets lavishly, proclaim rights, sing the Marseillaises, sowenthusiasms, tear green boughs from the oaks. Make a whirlwind of theidea. This crowd may be rendered sublime. Let us learn how to make useof that vast conflagration of principles and virtues, which sparkles,bursts forth and quivers at certain hours. These bare feet, these barearms, these rags, these ignorances, these abjectnesses, thesedarknesses, may be employed in the conquest of the ideal. Gaze past thepeople, and you will perceive truth. Let that vile sand which youtrample under foot be cast into the furnace, let it melt and seethethere, it will become a splendid crystal, and it is thanks to it thatGalileo and Newton will discover stars.



CHAPTER XIII—LITTLE GAVROCHE


  Enlarge
Little Gavroche  3b1-13-gavroche

Eight or nine years after the events narrated in the second part ofthis story, people noticed on the Boulevard du Temple, and in theregions of the Château-d’Eau, a little boy eleven or twelve years ofage, who would have realized with tolerable accuracy that ideal of thegamin sketched out above, if, with the laugh of his age on his lips, hehad not had a heart absolutely sombre and empty. This child was wellmuffled up in a pair of man’s trousers, but he did not get them fromhis father, and a woman’s chemise, but he did not get it from hismother. Some people or other had clothed him in rags out of charity.Still, he had a father and a mother. But his father did not think ofhim, and his mother did not love him.
He was one of those children most deserving of pity, among all, one ofthose who have father and mother, and who are orphans nevertheless.
This child never felt so well as when he was in the street. Thepavements were less hard to him than his mother’s heart.
His parents had despatched him into life with a kick.
He simply took flight.
He was a boisterous, pallid, nimble, wide-awake, jeering, lad, with avivacious but sickly air. He went and came, sang, played at hopscotch,scraped the gutters, stole a little, but, like cats and sparrows, gaylylaughed when he was called a rogue, and got angry when called a thief.He had no shelter, no bread, no fire, no love; but he was merry becausehe was free.
When these poor creatures grow to be men, the millstones of the socialorder meet them and crush them, but so long as they are children, theyescape because of their smallness. The tiniest hole saves them.
Nevertheless, abandoned as this child was, it sometimes happened, everytwo or three months, that he said, “Come, I’ll go and see mamma!” Thenhe quitted the boulevard, the Cirque, the Porte Saint-Martin, descendedto the quays, crossed the bridges, reached the suburbs, arrived at theSalpêtrière, and came to a halt, where? Precisely at that double number50-52 with which the reader is acquainted—at the Gorbeau hovel.
At that epoch, the hovel 50-52 generally deserted and eternallydecorated with the placard: “Chambers to let,” chanced to be, a rarething, inhabited by numerous individuals who, however, as is always thecase in Paris, had no connection with each other. All belonged to thatindigent class which begins to separate from the lowest of pettybourgeoisie in straitened circumstances, and which extends from miseryto misery into the lowest depths of society down to those two beings inwhom all the material things of civilization end, the sewer-man whosweeps up the mud, and the rag-picker who collects scraps.
The “principal lodger” of Jean Valjean’s day was dead and had beenreplaced by another exactly like her. I know not what philosopher hassaid: “Old women are never lacking.”

This new old woman was named Madame Bourgon, and had nothing remarkableabout her life except a dynasty of three paroquets, who had reigned insuccession over her soul.
The most miserable of those who inhabited the hovel were a family offour persons, consisting of father, mother, and two daughters, alreadywell grown, all four of whom were lodged in the same attic, one of thecells which we have already mentioned.
At first sight, this family presented no very special feature exceptits extreme destitution; the father, when he hired the chamber, hadstated that his name was Jondrette. Some time after his moving in,which had borne a singular resemblance to _the entrance of nothing atall_, to borrow the memorable expression of the principal tenant, thisJondrette had said to the woman, who, like her predecessor, was at thesame time portress and stair-sweeper: “Mother So-and-So, if any oneshould chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian, or even aSpaniard, perchance, it is I.”

This family was that of the merry barefoot boy. He arrived there andfound distress, and, what is still sadder, no smile; a cold hearth andcold hearts. When he entered, he was asked: “Whence come you?” Hereplied: “From the street.” When he went away, they asked him: “Whitherare you going?” He replied: “Into the streets.” His mother said to him:“What did you come here for?”

This child lived, in this absence of affection, like the pale plantswhich spring up in cellars. It did not cause him suffering, and heblamed no one. He did not know exactly how a father and mother shouldbe.
Nevertheless, his mother loved his sisters.
We have forgotten to mention, that on the Boulevard du Temple thischild was called Little Gavroche. Why was he called Little Gavroche?
Probably because his father’s name was Jondrette.
It seems to be the instinct of certain wretched families to break thethread.
The chamber which the Jondrettes inhabited in the Gorbeau hovel was thelast at the end of the corridor. The cell next to it was occupied by avery poor young man who was called M. Marius.
Let us explain who this M. Marius was.



BOOK SECOND—THE GREAT BOURGEOIS



CHAPTER I—NINETY YEARS AND THIRTY-TWO TEETH

In the Rue Boucherat, Rue de Normandie and the Rue de Saintonge therestill exist a few ancient inhabitants who have preserved the memory ofa worthy man named M. Gillenormand, and who mention him withcomplaisance. This good man was old when they were young. Thissilhouette has not yet entirely disappeared—for those who regard withmelancholy that vague swarm of shadows which is called the past—fromthe labyrinth of streets in the vicinity of the Temple to which, underLouis XIV., the names of all the provinces of France were appendedexactly as in our day, the streets of the new Tivoli quarter havereceived the names of all the capitals of Europe; a progression, by theway, in which progress is visible.
M. Gillenormand, who was as much alive as possible in 1831, was one ofthose men who had become curiosities to be viewed, simply because theyhave lived a long time, and who are strange because they formerlyresembled everybody, and now resemble nobody. He was a peculiar oldman, and in very truth, a man of another age, the real, complete andrather haughty bourgeois of the eighteenth century, who wore his good,old bourgeoisie with the air with which marquises wear theirmarquisates. He was over ninety years of age, his walk was erect, hetalked loudly, saw clearly, drank neat, ate, slept, and snored. He hadall thirty-two of his teeth. He only wore spectacles when he read. Hewas of an amorous disposition, but declared that, for the last tenyears, he had wholly and decidedly renounced women. He could no longerplease, he said; he did not add: “I am too old,” but: “I am too poor.”He said: “If I were not ruined—Héée!” All he had left, in fact, was anincome of about fifteen thousand francs. His dream was to come into aninheritance and to have a hundred thousand livres income formistresses. He did not belong, as the reader will perceive, to thatpuny variety of octogenaries who, like M. de Voltaire, have been dyingall their life; his was no longevity of a cracked pot; this jovial oldman had always had good health. He was superficial, rapid, easilyangered. He flew into a passion at everything, generally quite contraryto all reason. When contradicted, he raised his cane; he beat people ashe had done in the great century. He had a daughter over fifty years ofage, and unmarried, whom he chastised severely with his tongue, when ina rage, and whom he would have liked to whip. She seemed to him to beeight years old. He boxed his servants’ ears soundly, and said: “Ah!carogne!” One of his oaths was: “By the pantoufloche of thepantouflochade!” He had singular freaks of tranquillity; he had himselfshaved every day by a barber who had been mad and who detested him,being jealous of M. Gillenormand on account of his wife, a pretty andcoquettish barberess. M. Gillenormand admired his own discernment inall things, and declared that he was extremely sagacious; here is oneof his sayings: “I have, in truth, some penetration; I am able to saywhen a flea bites me, from what woman it came.”

The words which he uttered the most frequently were: _the sensibleman_, and _nature_. He did not give to this last word the grandacceptation which our epoch has accorded to it, but he made it enter,after his own fashion, into his little chimney-corner satires:“Nature,” he said, “in order that civilization may have a little ofeverything, gives it even specimens of its amusing barbarism. Europepossesses specimens of Asia and Africa on a small scale. The cat is adrawing-room tiger, the lizard is a pocket crocodile. The dancers atthe opera are pink female savages. They do not eat men, they crunchthem; or, magicians that they are, they transform them into oysters andswallow them. The Caribbeans leave only the bones, they leave only theshell. Such are our morals. We do not devour, we gnaw; we do notexterminate, we claw.”




CHAPTER II—LIKE MASTER, LIKE HOUSE

He lived in the Marais, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6. He owned thehouse. This house has since been demolished and rebuilt, and the numberhas probably been changed in those revolutions of numeration which thestreets of Paris undergo. He occupied an ancient and vast apartment onthe first floor, between street and gardens, furnished to the veryceilings with great Gobelins and Beauvais tapestries representingpastoral scenes; the subjects of the ceilings and the panels wererepeated in miniature on the armchairs. He enveloped his bed in a vast,nine-leaved screen of Coromandel lacquer. Long, full curtains hung fromthe windows, and formed great, broken folds that were very magnificent.The garden situated immediately under his windows was attached to thatone of them which formed the angle, by means of a staircase twelve orfifteen steps long, which the old gentleman ascended and descended withgreat agility. In addition to a library adjoining his chamber, he had aboudoir of which he thought a great deal, a gallant and elegantretreat, with magnificent hangings of straw, with a pattern of flowersand fleurs-de-lys made on the galleys of Louis XIV. and ordered of hisconvicts by M. de Vivonne for his mistress. M. Gillenormand hadinherited it from a grim maternal great-aunt, who had died acentenarian. He had had two wives. His manners were something betweenthose of the courtier, which he had never been, and the lawyer, whichhe might have been. He was gay, and caressing when he had a mind. Inhis youth he had been one of those men who are always deceived by theirwives and never by their mistresses, because they are, at the sametime, the most sullen of husbands and the most charming of lovers inexistence. He was a connoisseur of painting. He had in his chamber amarvellous portrait of no one knows whom, painted by Jordaens, executedwith great dashes of the brush, with millions of details, in a confusedand hap-hazard manner. M. Gillenormand’s attire was not the habit ofLouis XIV. nor yet that of Louis XVI.; it was that of the Incroyablesof the Directory. He had thought himself young up to that period andhad followed the fashions. His coat was of light-weight cloth withvoluminous revers, a long swallow-tail and large steel buttons. Withthis he wore knee-breeches and buckle shoes. He always thrust his handsinto his fobs. He said authoritatively: “The French Revolution is aheap of blackguards.”




CHAPTER III—LUC-ESPRIT

At the age of sixteen, one evening at the opera, he had had the honorto be stared at through opera-glasses by two beauties at the sametime—ripe and celebrated beauties then, and sung by Voltaire, theCamargo and the Sallé. Caught between two fires, he had beaten a heroicretreat towards a little dancer, a young girl named Nahenry, who wassixteen like himself, obscure as a cat, and with whom he was in love.He abounded in memories. He was accustomed to exclaim: “How pretty shewas—that Guimard-Guimardini-Guimardinette, the last time I saw her atLongchamps, her hair curled in sustained sentiments, with hercome-and-see of turquoises, her gown of the color of persons newlyarrived, and her little agitation muff!” He had worn in his youngmanhood a waistcoat of Nain-Londrin, which he was fond of talking abouteffusively. “I was dressed like a Turk of the Levant Levantin,” saidhe. Madame de Boufflers, having seen him by chance when he was twenty,had described him as “a charming fool.” He was horrified by all thenames which he saw in politics and in power, regarding them as vulgarand bourgeois. He read the journals, the _newspapers, the gazettes_ ashe said, stifling outbursts of laughter the while. “Oh!” he said, “whatpeople these are! Corbière! Humann! Casimir Périer! There’s a ministerfor you! I can imagine this in a journal: ‘M. Gillenorman, minister!’that would be a farce. Well! They are so stupid that it would pass”; hemerrily called everything by its name, whether decent or indecent, anddid not restrain himself in the least before ladies. He uttered coarsespeeches, obscenities, and filth with a certain tranquillity and lackof astonishment which was elegant. It was in keeping with theunceremoniousness of his century. It is to be noted that the age ofperiphrase in verse was the age of crudities in prose. His god-fatherhad predicted that he would turn out a man of genius, and had bestowedon him these two significant names: Luc-Esprit.



CHAPTER IV—A CENTENARIAN ASPIRANT

He had taken prizes in his boyhood at the College of Moulins, where hewas born, and he had been crowned by the hand of the Duc de Nivernais,whom he called the Duc de Nevers. Neither the Convention, nor the deathof Louis XVI., nor the Napoleon, nor the return of the Bourbons, noranything else had been able to efface the memory of this crowning. _TheDuc de Nevers_ was, in his eyes, the great figure of the century. “Whata charming grand seigneur,” he said, “and what a fine air he had withhis blue ribbon!”

In the eyes of M. Gillenormand, Catherine the Second had madereparation for the crime of the partition of Poland by purchasing, forthree thousand roubles, the secret of the elixir of gold, fromBestucheff. He grew animated on this subject: “The elixir of gold,” heexclaimed, “the yellow dye of Bestucheff, General Lamotte’s drops, inthe eighteenth century,—this was the great remedy for the catastrophesof love, the panacea against Venus, at one louis the half-ounce phial.Louis XV. sent two hundred phials of it to the Pope.” He would havebeen greatly irritated and thrown off his balance, had any one told himthat the elixir of gold is nothing but the perchloride of iron. M.Gillenormand adored the Bourbons, and had a horror of 1789; he wasforever narrating in what manner he had saved himself during theTerror, and how he had been obliged to display a vast deal of gayetyand cleverness in order to escape having his head cut off. If any youngman ventured to pronounce an eulogium on the Republic in his presence,he turned purple and grew so angry that he was on the point ofswooning. He sometimes alluded to his ninety years, and said, “I hopethat I shall not see ninety-three twice.” On these occasions, he hintedto people that he meant to live to be a hundred.



CHAPTER V—BASQUE AND NICOLETTE

He had theories. Here is one of them: “When a man is passionately fondof women, and when he has himself a wife for whom he cares but little,who is homely, cross, legitimate, with plenty of rights, perched on thecode, and jealous at need, there is but one way of extricating himselffrom the quandry and of procuring peace, and that is to let his wifecontrol the purse-strings. This abdication sets him free. Then his wifebusies herself, grows passionately fond of handling coin, gets herfingers covered with verdigris in the process, undertakes the educationof half-share tenants and the training of farmers, convokes lawyers,presides over notaries, harangues scriveners, visits limbs of the law,follows lawsuits, draws up leases, dictates contracts, feels herselfthe sovereign, sells, buys, regulates, promises and compromises, bindsfast and annuls, yields, concedes and retrocedes, arranges,disarranges, hoards, lavishes; she commits follies, a supreme andpersonal delight, and that consoles her. While her husband disdainsher, she has the satisfaction of ruining her husband.” This theory M.Gillenormand had himself applied, and it had become his history. Hiswife—the second one—had administered his fortune in such a manner that,one fine day, when M. Gillenormand found himself a widower, thereremained to him just sufficient to live on, by sinking nearly the wholeof it in an annuity of fifteen thousand francs, three-quarters of whichwould expire with him. He had not hesitated on this point, not beinganxious to leave a property behind him. Besides, he had noticed thatpatrimonies are subject to adventures, and, for instance, become_national property_; he had been present at the avatars of consolidatedthree per cents, and he had no great faith in the Great Book of thePublic Debt. “All that’s the Rue Quincampois!” he said. His house inthe Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire belonged to him, as we have alreadystated. He had two servants, “a male and a female.” When a servantentered his establishment, M. Gillenormand re-baptized him. He bestowedon the men the name of their province: Nîmois, Comtois, Poitevin,Picard. His last valet was a big, foundered, short-winded fellow offifty-five, who was incapable of running twenty paces; but, as he hadbeen born at Bayonne, M. Gillenormand called him _Basque_. All thefemale servants in his house were called Nicolette (even the Magnon, ofwhom we shall hear more farther on). One day, a haughty cook, a cordonbleu, of the lofty race of porters, presented herself. “How much wagesdo you want a month?” asked M. Gillenormand. “Thirty francs.” “What isyour name?” “Olympie.” “You shall have fifty francs, and you shall becalled Nicolette.”




CHAPTER VI—IN WHICH MAGNON AND HER TWO CHILDREN ARE SEEN

With M. Gillenormand, sorrow was converted into wrath; he was furiousat being in despair. He had all sorts of prejudices and took all sortsof liberties. One of the facts of which his exterior relief and hisinternal satisfaction was composed, was, as we have just hinted, thathe had remained a brisk spark, and that he passed energetically forsuch. This he called having “royal renown.” This royal renown sometimesdrew down upon him singular windfalls. One day, there was brought tohim in a basket, as though it had been a basket of oysters, a stout,newly born boy, who was yelling like the deuce, and duly wrapped inswaddling-clothes, which a servant-maid, dismissed six monthspreviously, attributed to him. M. Gillenormand had, at that time, fullycompleted his eighty-fourth year. Indignation and uproar in theestablishment. And whom did that bold hussy think she could persuade tobelieve that? What audacity! What an abominable calumny! M.Gillenormand himself was not at all enraged. He gazed at the brat withthe amiable smile of a good man who is flattered by the calumny, andsaid in an aside: “Well, what now? What’s the matter? You are finelytaken aback, and really, you are excessively ignorant. M. le Ducd’Angoulême, the bastard of his Majesty Charles IX., married a sillyjade of fifteen when he was eighty-five; M. Virginal, Marquis d’Alluye,brother to the Cardinal de Sourdis, Archbishop of Bordeaux, had, at theage of eighty-three, by the maid of Madame la Présidente Jacquin, ason, a real child of love, who became a Chevalier of Malta and acounsellor of state; one of the great men of this century, the AbbéTabaraud, is the son of a man of eighty-seven. There is nothing out ofthe ordinary in these things. And then, the Bible! Upon that I declarethat this little gentleman is none of mine. Let him be taken care of.It is not his fault.” This manner of procedure was good-tempered. Thewoman, whose name was Magnon, sent him another parcel in the followingyear. It was a boy again. Thereupon, M. Gillenormand capitulated. Hesent the two brats back to their mother, promising to pay eighty francsa month for their maintenance, on the condition that the said motherwould not do so any more. He added: “I insist upon it that the mothershall treat them well. I shall go to see them from time to time.” Andthis he did. He had had a brother who was a priest, and who had beenrector of the Academy of Poitiers for three and thirty years, and haddied at seventy-nine. “I lost him young,” said he. This brother, ofwhom but little memory remains, was a peaceable miser, who, being apriest, thought himself bound to bestow alms on the poor whom he met,but he never gave them anything except bad or demonetized sous, therebydiscovering a means of going to hell by way of paradise. As for M.Gillenormand the elder, he never haggled over his alms-giving, but gavegladly and nobly. He was kindly, abrupt, charitable, and if he had beenrich, his turn of mind would have been magnificent. He desired that allwhich concerned him should be done in a grand manner, even hisrogueries. One day, having been cheated by a business man in a matterof inheritance, in a gross and apparent manner, he uttered this solemnexclamation: “That was indecently done! I am really ashamed of thispilfering. Everything has degenerated in this century, even therascals. Morbleu! this is not the way to rob a man of my standing. I amrobbed as though in a forest, but badly robbed. _Silvæ sint consuledignæ! _” He had had two wives, as we have already mentioned; by thefirst he had had a daughter, who had remained unmarried, and by thesecond another daughter, who had died at about the age of thirty, whohad wedded, through love, or chance, or otherwise, a soldier of fortunewho had served in the armies of the Republic and of the Empire, who hadwon the cross at Austerlitz and had been made colonel at Waterloo. _“Heis the disgrace of my family,” _ said the old bourgeois. He took animmense amount of snuff, and had a particularly graceful manner ofplucking at his lace ruffle with the back of one hand. He believed verylittle in God.



CHAPTER VII—RULE: RECEIVE NO ONE EXCEPT IN THE EVENING

Such was M. Luc-Esprit Gillenormand, who had not lost his hair,—whichwas gray rather than white,—and which was always dressed in “dog’sears.” To sum up, he was venerable in spite of all this.
He had something of the eighteenth century about him; frivolous andgreat.
In 1814 and during the early years of the Restoration, M. Gillenormand,who was still young,—he was only seventy-four,—lived in the FaubourgSaint Germain, Rue Servandoni, near Saint-Sulpice. He had only retiredto the Marais when he quitted society, long after attaining the age ofeighty.
And, on abandoning society, he had immured himself in his habits. Theprincipal one, and that which was invariable, was to keep his doorabsolutely closed during the day, and never to receive any one whateverexcept in the evening. He dined at five o’clock, and after that hisdoor was open. That had been the fashion of his century, and he wouldnot swerve from it. “The day is vulgar,” said he, “and deserves only aclosed shutter. Fashionable people only light up their minds when thezenith lights up its stars.” And he barricaded himself against everyone, even had it been the king himself. This was the antiquatedelegance of his day.



CHAPTER VIII—TWO DO NOT MAKE A PAIR

We have just spoken of M. Gillenormand’s two daughters. They had comeinto the world ten years apart. In their youth they had borne verylittle resemblance to each other, either in character or countenance,and had also been as little like sisters to each other as possible. Theyoungest had a charming soul, which turned towards all that belongs tothe light, was occupied with flowers, with verses, with music, whichfluttered away into glorious space, enthusiastic, ethereal, and waswedded from her very youth, in ideal, to a vague and heroic figure. Theelder had also her chimera; she espied in the azure some very wealthypurveyor, a contractor, a splendidly stupid husband, a million mademan, or even a prefect; the receptions of the Prefecture, an usher inthe antechamber with a chain on his neck, official balls, the haranguesof the town-hall, to be “Madame la Préfète,”—all this had created awhirlwind in her imagination. Thus the two sisters strayed, each in herown dream, at the epoch when they were young girls. Both had wings, theone like an angel, the other like a goose.
No ambition is ever fully realized, here below at least. No paradisebecomes terrestrial in our day. The younger wedded the man of herdreams, but she died. The elder did not marry at all.
At the moment when she makes her entrance into this history which weare relating, she was an antique virtue, an incombustible prude, withone of the sharpest noses, and one of the most obtuse minds that it ispossible to see. A characteristic detail; outside of her immediatefamily, no one had ever known her first name. She was called_Mademoiselle Gillenormand, the elder_.
In the matter of _cant_, Mademoiselle Gillenormand could have givenpoints to a miss. Her modesty was carried to the other extreme ofblackness. She cherished a frightful memory of her life; one day, a manhad beheld her garter.
Age had only served to accentuate this pitiless modesty. Her guimpe wasnever sufficiently opaque, and never ascended sufficiently high. Shemultiplied clasps and pins where no one would have dreamed of looking.The peculiarity of prudery is to place all the more sentinels inproportion as the fortress is the less menaced.
Nevertheless, let him who can explain these antique mysteries ofinnocence, she allowed an officer of the Lancers, her grand nephew,named Théodule, to embrace her without displeasure.
In spite of this favored Lancer, the label: _Prude_, under which wehave classed her, suited her to absolute perfection. MademoiselleGillenormand was a sort of twilight soul. Prudery is a demi-virtue anda demi-vice.
To prudery she added bigotry, a well-assorted lining. She belonged tothe society of the Virgin, wore a white veil on certain festivals,mumbled special orisons, revered “the holy blood,” venerated “thesacred heart,” remained for hours in contemplation before arococo-jesuit altar in a chapel which was inaccessible to the rank andfile of the faithful, and there allowed her soul to soar among littleclouds of marble, and through great rays of gilded wood.
She had a chapel friend, an ancient virgin like herself, namedMademoiselle Vaubois, who was a positive blockhead, and beside whomMademoiselle Gillenormand had the pleasure of being an eagle. Beyondthe Agnus Dei and Ave Maria, Mademoiselle Vaubois had no knowledge ofanything except of the different ways of making preserves. MademoiselleVaubois, perfect in her style, was the ermine of stupidity without asingle spot of intelligence.
Let us say it plainly, Mademoiselle Gillenormand had gained rather thanlost as she grew older. This is the case with passive natures. She hadnever been malicious, which is relative kindness; and then, years wearaway the angles, and the softening which comes with time had come toher. She was melancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did notherself know the secret. There breathed from her whole person thestupor of a life that was finished, and which had never had abeginning.
She kept house for her father. M. Gillenormand had his daughter nearhim, as we have seen that Monseigneur Bienvenu had his sister with him.These households comprised of an old man and an old spinster are notrare, and always have the touching aspect of two weaknesses leaning oneach other for support.
There was also in this house, between this elderly spinster and thisold man, a child, a little boy, who was always trembling and mute inthe presence of M. Gillenormand. M. Gillenormand never addressed thischild except in a severe voice, and sometimes, with uplifted cane:“Here, sir! rascal, scoundrel, come here!—Answer me, you scamp! Justlet me see you, you good-for-nothing!” etc., etc. He idolized him.
This was his grandson. We shall meet with this child again later on.



BOOK THIRD—THE GRANDFATHER AND THE GRANDSON



CHAPTER I—AN ANCIENT SALON

When M. Gillenormand lived in the Rue Servandoni, he had frequentedmany very good and very aristocratic salons. Although a bourgeois, M.Gillenormand was received in society. As he had a double measure ofwit, in the first place, that which was born with him, and secondly,that which was attributed to him, he was even sought out and made muchof. He never went anywhere except on condition of being the chiefperson there. There are people who will have influence at any price,and who will have other people busy themselves over them; when theycannot be oracles, they turn wags. M. Gillenormand was not of thisnature; his domination in the Royalist salons which he frequented costhis self-respect nothing. He was an oracle everywhere. It had happenedto him to hold his own against M. de Bonald, and even against M.Bengy-Puy-Vallée.
About 1817, he invariably passed two afternoons a week in a house inhis own neighborhood, in the Rue Férou, with Madame la Baronne de T., aworthy and respectable person, whose husband had been Ambassador ofFrance to Berlin under Louis XVI. Baron de T., who, during hislifetime, had gone very passionately into ecstasies and magneticvisions, had died bankrupt, during the emigration, leaving, as hisentire fortune, some very curious Memoirs about Mesmer and his tub, inten manuscript volumes, bound in red morocco and gilded on the edges.Madame de T. had not published the memoirs, out of pride, andmaintained herself on a meagre income which had survived no one knewhow.
Madame de T. lived far from the Court; “a very mixed society,” as shesaid, in a noble isolation, proud and poor. A few friends assembledtwice a week about her widowed hearth, and these constituted a purelyRoyalist salon. They sipped tea there, and uttered groans or cries ofhorror at the century, the charter, the Bonapartists, the prostitutionof the blue ribbon, or the Jacobinism of Louis XVIII., according as thewind veered towards elegy or dithyrambs; and they spoke in low tones ofthe hopes which were presented by Monsieur, afterwards Charles X.
The songs of the fishwomen, in which Napoleon was called _Nicolas_,were received there with transports of joy. Duchesses, the mostdelicate and charming women in the world, went into ecstasies overcouplets like the following, addressed to “the federates”:—
Refoncez dans vos culottesLe bout d’ chemis’ qui vous pend.Qu’on n’ dis’ pas qu’ les patriotesOnt arboré l’ drapeau blanc?20

There they amused themselves with puns which were considered terrible,with innocent plays upon words which they supposed to be venomous, withquatrains, with distiches even; thus, upon the Dessolles ministry, amoderate cabinet, of which MM. Decazes and Deserre were members:—
Pour raffermir le trône ébranlé sur sa base,Il faut changer de sol, et de serre et de case.21

Or they drew up a list of the chamber of peers, “an abominably Jacobinchamber,” and from this list they combined alliances of names, in sucha manner as to form, for example, phrases like the following: _Damas.Sabran. Gouvion-Saint-Cyr_.—All this was done merrily. In that society,they parodied the Revolution. They used I know not what desires to givepoint to the same wrath in inverse sense. They sang their little _Çaira: _—
Ah! ça ira ça ira ça ira!Les Bonapartistes à la lanterne!

Songs are like the guillotine; they chop away indifferently, to-daythis head, to-morrow that. It is only a variation.
In the Fualdès affair, which belongs to this epoch, 1816, they tookpart for Bastide and Jausion, because Fualdès was “a Buonapartist.”They designated the liberals as f_riends and brothers_; thisconstituted the most deadly insult.
Like certain church towers, Madame de T.‘s salon had two cocks. One ofthem was M. Gillenormand, the other was Comte de Lamothe-Valois, ofwhom it was whispered about, with a sort of respect: “Do you know? Thatis the Lamothe of the affair of the necklace.” These singular amnestiesdo occur in parties.
Let us add the following: in the bourgeoisie, honored situations decaythrough too easy relations; one must beware whom one admits; in thesame way that there is a loss of caloric in the vicinity of those whoare cold, there is a diminution of consideration in the approach ofdespised persons. The ancient society of the upper classes heldthemselves above this law, as above every other. Marigny, the brotherof the Pompadour, had his entry with M. le Prince de Soubise. In spiteof? No, because. Du Barry, the god-father of the Vaubernier, was verywelcome at the house of M. le Maréchal de Richelieu. This society isOlympus. Mercury and the Prince de Guémenée are at home there. A thiefis admitted there, provided he be a god.
The Comte de Lamothe, who, in 1815, was an old man seventy-five yearsof age, had nothing remarkable about him except his silent andsententious air, his cold and angular face, his perfectly polishedmanners, his coat buttoned up to his cravat, and his long legs alwayscrossed in long, flabby trousers of the hue of burnt sienna. His facewas the same color as his trousers.
This M. de Lamothe was “held in consideration” in this salon on accountof his “celebrity” and, strange to say, though true, because of hisname of Valois.
As for M. Gillenormand, his consideration was of absolutely first-ratequality. He had, in spite of his levity, and without its interfering inany way with his dignity, a certain manner about him which wasimposing, dignified, honest, and lofty, in a bourgeois fashion; and hisgreat age added to it. One is not a century with impunity. The yearsfinally produce around a head a venerable dishevelment.
In addition to this, he said things which had the genuine sparkle ofthe old rock. Thus, when the King of Prussia, after having restoredLouis XVIII., came to pay the latter a visit under the name of theCount de Ruppin, he was received by the descendant of Louis XIV.somewhat as though he had been the Marquis de Brandebourg, and with themost delicate impertinence. M. Gillenormand approved: “All kings whoare not the King of France,” said he, “are provincial kings.” One day,the following question was put and the following answer returned in hispresence: “To what was the editor of the _Courrier Français_condemned?” “To be suspended.” “_Sus_ is superfluous,” observed M.Gillenormand.22 Remarks of this nature found a situation.
At the Te Deum on the anniversary of the return of the Bourbons, hesaid, on seeing M. de Talleyrand pass by: “There goes his Excellencythe Evil One.”

M. Gillenormand was always accompanied by his daughter, that tallmademoiselle, who was over forty and looked fifty, and by a handsomelittle boy of seven years, white, rosy, fresh, with happy and trustingeyes, who never appeared in that salon without hearing voices murmuraround him: “How handsome he is! What a pity! Poor child!” This childwas the one of whom we dropped a word a while ago. He was called “poorchild,” because he had for a father “a brigand of the Loire.”

This brigand of the Loire was M. Gillenormand’s son-in-law, who hasalready been mentioned, and whom M. Gillenormand called “the disgraceof his family.”




CHAPTER II—ONE OF THE RED SPECTRES OF THAT EPOCH

Any one who had chanced to pass through the little town of Vernon atthis epoch, and who had happened to walk across that fine monumentalbridge, which will soon be succeeded, let us hope, by some hideous ironcable bridge, might have observed, had he dropped his eyes over theparapet, a man about fifty years of age wearing a leather cap, andtrousers and a waistcoat of coarse gray cloth, to which somethingyellow which had been a red ribbon, was sewn, shod with wooden sabots,tanned by the sun, his face nearly black and his hair nearly white, alarge scar on his forehead which ran down upon his cheek, bowed, bent,prematurely aged, who walked nearly every day, hoe and sickle in hand,in one of those compartments surrounded by walls which abut on thebridge, and border the left bank of the Seine like a chain of terraces,charming enclosures full of flowers of which one could say, were theymuch larger: “these are gardens,” and were they a little smaller:“these are bouquets.” All these enclosures abut upon the river at oneend, and on a house at the other. The man in the waistcoat and thewooden shoes of whom we have just spoken, inhabited the smallest ofthese enclosures and the most humble of these houses about 1817. Helived there alone and solitary, silently and poorly, with a woman whowas neither young nor old, neither homely nor pretty, neither a peasantnor a bourgeoise, who served him. The plot of earth which he called hisgarden was celebrated in the town for the beauty of the flowers whichhe cultivated there. These flowers were his occupation.
By dint of labor, of perseverance, of attention, and of buckets ofwater, he had succeeded in creating after the Creator, and he hadinvented certain tulips and certain dahlias which seemed to have beenforgotten by nature. He was ingenious; he had forestalled SoulangeBodin in the formation of little clumps of earth of heath mould, forthe cultivation of rare and precious shrubs from America and China. Hewas in his alleys from the break of day, in summer, planting, cutting,hoeing, watering, walking amid his flowers with an air of kindness,sadness, and sweetness, sometimes standing motionless and thoughtfulfor hours, listening to the song of a bird in the trees, the babble ofa child in a house, or with his eyes fixed on a drop of dew at the tipof a spear of grass, of which the sun made a carbuncle. His table wasvery plain, and he drank more milk than wine. A child could make himgive way, and his servant scolded him. He was so timid that he seemedshy, he rarely went out, and he saw no one but the poor people whotapped at his pane and his curé, the Abbé Mabeuf, a good old man.Nevertheless, if the inhabitants of the town, or strangers, or anychance comers, curious to see his tulips, rang at his little cottage,he opened his door with a smile. He was the “brigand of the Loire.”

Any one who had, at the same time, read military memoirs, biographies,the _Moniteur_, and the bulletins of the grand army, would have beenstruck by a name which occurs there with tolerable frequency, the nameof Georges Pontmercy. When very young, this Georges Pontmercy had beena soldier in Saintonge’s regiment. The revolution broke out.Saintonge’s regiment formed a part of the army of the Rhine; for theold regiments of the monarchy preserved their names of provinces evenafter the fall of the monarchy, and were only divided into brigades in1794. Pontmercy fought at Spire, at Worms, at Neustadt, at Turkheim, atAlzey, at Mayence, where he was one of the two hundred who formedHouchard’s rearguard. It was the twelfth to hold its ground against thecorps of the Prince of Hesse, behind the old rampart of Andernach, andonly rejoined the main body of the army when the enemy’s cannon hadopened a breach from the cord of the parapet to the foot of the glacis.He was under Kléber at Marchiennes and at the battle of Mont-Palissel,where a ball from a biscaïen broke his arm. Then he passed to thefrontier of Italy, and was one of the thirty grenadiers who defendedthe Col de Tende with Joubert. Joubert was appointed itsadjutant-general, and Pontmercy sub-lieutenant. Pontmercy was byBerthier’s side in the midst of the grape-shot of that day at Lodiwhich caused Bonaparte to say: “Berthier has been cannoneer, cavalier,and grenadier.” He beheld his old general, Joubert, fall at Novi, atthe moment when, with uplifted sabre, he was shouting: “Forward!”Having been embarked with his company in the exigencies of thecampaign, on board a pinnace which was proceeding from Genoa to someobscure port on the coast, he fell into a wasps’-nest of seven or eightEnglish vessels. The Genoese commander wanted to throw his cannon intothe sea, to hide the soldiers between decks, and to slip along in thedark as a merchant vessel. Pontmercy had the colors hoisted to thepeak, and sailed proudly past under the guns of the British frigates.Twenty leagues further on, his audacity having increased, he attackedwith his pinnace, and captured a large English transport which wascarrying troops to Sicily, and which was so loaded down with men andhorses that the vessel was sunk to the level of the sea. In 1805 he wasin that Malher division which took Günzberg from the ArchdukeFerdinand. At Weltingen he received into his arms, beneath a storm ofbullets, Colonel Maupetit, mortally wounded at the head of the 9thDragoons. He distinguished himself at Austerlitz in that admirablemarch in echelons effected under the enemy’s fire. When the cavalry ofthe Imperial Russian Guard crushed a battalion of the 4th of the line,Pontmercy was one of those who took their revenge and overthrew theGuard. The Emperor gave him the cross. Pontmercy saw Wurmser at Mantua,Mélas, and Alexandria, Mack at Ulm, made prisoners in succession. Heformed a part of the eighth corps of the grand army which Mortiercommanded, and which captured Hamburg. Then he was transferred to the55th of the line, which was the old regiment of Flanders. At Eylau hewas in the cemetery where, for the space of two hours, the heroicCaptain Louis Hugo, the uncle of the author of this book, sustainedalone with his company of eighty-three men every effort of the hostilearmy. Pontmercy was one of the three who emerged alive from thatcemetery. He was at Friedland. Then he saw Moscow. Then La Bérésina,then Lutzen, Bautzen, Dresden, Wachau, Leipzig, and the defiles ofGelenhausen; then Montmirail, Château-Thierry, Craon, the banks of theMarne, the banks of the Aisne, and the redoubtable position of Laon. AtArnay-Le-Duc, being then a captain, he put ten Cossacks to the sword,and saved, not his general, but his corporal. He was well slashed up onthis occasion, and twenty-seven splinters were extracted from his leftarm alone. Eight days before the capitulation of Paris he had justexchanged with a comrade and entered the cavalry. He had what wascalled under the old regime, _the double hand_, that is to say, anequal aptitude for handling the sabre or the musket as a soldier, or asquadron or a battalion as an officer. It is from this aptitude,perfected by a military education, which certain special branches ofthe service arise, the dragoons, for example, who are both cavalry-menand infantry at one and the same time. He accompanied Napoleon to theIsland of Elba. At Waterloo, he was chief of a squadron of cuirassiers,in Dubois’ brigade. It was he who captured the standard of theLunenburg battalion. He came and cast the flag at the Emperor’s feet.He was covered with blood. While tearing down the banner he hadreceived a sword-cut across his face. The Emperor, greatly pleased,shouted to him: “You are a colonel, you are a baron, you are an officerof the Legion of Honor!” Pontmercy replied: “Sire, I thank you for mywidow.” An hour later, he fell in the ravine of Ohain. Now, who wasthis Georges Pontmercy? He was this same “brigand of the Loire.”

We have already seen something of his history. After Waterloo,Pontmercy, who had been pulled out of the hollow road of Ohain, as itwill be remembered, had succeeded in joining the army, and had draggedhimself from ambulance to ambulance as far as the cantonments of theLoire.
The Restoration had placed him on half-pay, then had sent him intoresidence, that is to say, under surveillance, at Vernon. King LouisXVIII., regarding all that which had taken place during the HundredDays as not having occurred at all, did not recognize his quality as anofficer of the Legion of Honor, nor his grade of colonel, nor his titleof baron. He, on his side, neglected no occasion of signing himself“Colonel Baron Pontmercy.” He had only an old blue coat, and he neverwent out without fastening to it his rosette as an officer of theLegion of Honor. The Attorney for the Crown had him warned that theauthorities would prosecute him for “illegal” wearing of thisdecoration. When this notice was conveyed to him through an officiousintermediary, Pontmercy retorted with a bitter smile: “I do not knowwhether I no longer understand French, or whether you no longer speakit; but the fact is that I do not understand.” Then he went out foreight successive days with his rosette. They dared not interfere withhim. Two or three times the Minister of War and the general in commandof the department wrote to him with the following address: _“A Monsieurle Commandant Pontmercy.” _ He sent back the letters with the sealsunbroken. At the same moment, Napoleon at Saint Helena was treating inthe same fashion the missives of Sir Hudson Lowe addressed to _GeneralBonaparte_. Pontmercy had ended, may we be pardoned the expression, byhaving in his mouth the same saliva as his Emperor.
In the same way, there were at Rome Carthaginian prisoners who refusedto salute Flaminius, and who had a little of Hannibal’s spirit.
One day he encountered the district-attorney in one of the streets ofVernon, stepped up to him, and said: “Mr. Crown Attorney, am Ipermitted to wear my scar?”

He had nothing save his meagre half-pay as chief of squadron. He hadhired the smallest house which he could find at Vernon. He lived therealone, we have just seen how. Under the Empire, between two wars, hehad found time to marry Mademoiselle Gillenormand. The old bourgeois,thoroughly indignant at bottom, had given his consent with a sigh,saying: “The greatest families are forced into it.” In 1815, MadamePontmercy, an admirable woman in every sense, by the way, lofty insentiment and rare, and worthy of her husband, died, leaving a child.This child had been the colonel’s joy in his solitude; but thegrandfather had imperatively claimed his grandson, declaring that ifthe child were not given to him he would disinherit him. The father hadyielded in the little one’s interest, and had transferred his love toflowers.
Moreover, he had renounced everything, and neither stirred up mischiefnor conspired. He shared his thoughts between the innocent things whichhe was then doing and the great things which he had done. He passed histime in expecting a pink or in recalling Austerlitz.
M. Gillenormand kept up no relations with his son-in-law. The colonelwas “a bandit” to him. M. Gillenormand never mentioned the colonel,except when he occasionally made mocking allusions to “his Baronship.”It had been expressly agreed that Pontmercy should never attempt to seehis son nor to speak to him, under penalty of having the latter handedover to him disowned and disinherited. For the Gillenormands, Pontmercywas a man afflicted with the plague. They intended to bring up thechild in their own way. Perhaps the colonel was wrong to accept theseconditions, but he submitted to them, thinking that he was doing rightand sacrificing no one but himself.
The inheritance of Father Gillenormand did not amount to much; but theinheritance of Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder was considerable.This aunt, who had remained unmarried, was very rich on the maternalside, and her sister’s son was her natural heir. The boy, whose namewas Marius, knew that he had a father, but nothing more. No one openedhis mouth to him about it. Nevertheless, in the society into which hisgrandfather took him, whispers, innuendoes, and winks, had eventuallyenlightened the little boy’s mind; he had finally understood somethingof the case, and as he naturally took in the ideas and opinions whichwere, so to speak, the air he breathed, by a sort of infiltration andslow penetration, he gradually came to think of his father only withshame and with a pain at his heart.
While he was growing up in this fashion, the colonel slipped away everytwo or three months, came to Paris on the sly, like a criminal breakinghis ban, and went and posted himself at Saint-Sulpice, at the hour whenAunt Gillenormand led Marius to the mass. There, trembling lest theaunt should turn round, concealed behind a pillar, motionless, notdaring to breathe, he gazed at his child. The scarred veteran wasafraid of that old spinster.
From this had arisen his connection with the curé of Vernon, M. l’AbbéMabeuf.
That worthy priest was the brother of a warden of Saint-Sulpice, whohad often observed this man gazing at his child, and the scar on hischeek, and the large tears in his eyes. That man, who had so manly anair, yet who was weeping like a woman, had struck the warden. That facehad clung to his mind. One day, having gone to Vernon to see hisbrother, he had encountered Colonel Pontmercy on the bridge, and hadrecognized the man of Saint-Sulpice. The warden had mentioned thecircumstance to the curé, and both had paid the colonel a visit, onsome pretext or other. This visit led to others. The colonel, who hadbeen extremely reserved at first, ended by opening his heart, and thecuré and the warden finally came to know the whole history, and howPontmercy was sacrificing his happiness to his child’s future. Thiscaused the curé to regard him with veneration and tenderness, and thecolonel, on his side, became fond of the curé. And moreover, when bothare sincere and good, no men so penetrate each other, and so amalgamatewith each other, as an old priest and an old soldier. At bottom, theman is the same. The one has devoted his life to his country herebelow, the other to his country on high; that is the only difference.
Twice a year, on the first of January and on St. George’s day, Mariuswrote duty letters to his father, which were dictated by his aunt, andwhich one would have pronounced to be copied from some formula; thiswas all that M. Gillenormand tolerated; and the father answered themwith very tender letters which the grandfather thrust into his pocketunread.



CHAPTER III—REQUIESCANT

Madame de T.‘s salon was all that Marius Pontmercy knew of the world.It was the only opening through which he could get a glimpse of life.This opening was sombre, and more cold than warmth, more night thanday, came to him through this skylight. This child, who had been alljoy and light on entering this strange world, soon became melancholy,and, what is still more contrary to his age, grave. Surrounded by allthose singular and imposing personages, he gazed about him with seriousamazement. Everything conspired to increase this astonishment in him.There were in Madame de T.‘s salon some very noble ladies named Mathan,Noé, Lévis,—which was pronounced Lévi,—Cambis, pronounced Cambyse.These antique visages and these Biblical names mingled in the child’smind with the Old Testament which he was learning by heart, and whenthey were all there, seated in a circle around a dying fire, sparelylighted by a lamp shaded with green, with their severe profiles, theirgray or white hair, their long gowns of another age, whose lugubriouscolors could not be distinguished, dropping, at rare intervals, wordswhich were both majestic and severe, little Marius stared at them withfrightened eyes, in the conviction that he beheld not women, butpatriarchs and magi, not real beings, but phantoms.
With these phantoms, priests were sometimes mingled, frequenters ofthis ancient salon, and some gentlemen; the Marquis de Sass****,private secretary to Madame de Berry, the Vicomte de Val***, whopublished, under the pseudonym of _Charles-Antoine_, monorhymed odes,the Prince de Beauff*******, who, though very young, had a gray headand a pretty and witty wife, whose very low-necked toilettes of scarletvelvet with gold torsades alarmed these shadows, the Marquis de C*****d’E******, the man in all France who best understood “proportionedpoliteness,” the Comte d’Am*****, the kindly man with the amiable chin,and the Chévalier de Port-de-Guy, a pillar of the library of theLouvre, called the King’s cabinet, M. de Port-de-Guy, bald, and ratheraged than old, was wont to relate that in 1793, at the age of sixteen,he had been put in the galleys as refractory and chained with anoctogenarian, the Bishop of Mirepoix, also refractory, but as a priest,while he was so in the capacity of a soldier. This was at Toulon. Theirbusiness was to go at night and gather up on the scaffold the heads andbodies of the persons who had been guillotined during the day; theybore away on their backs these dripping corpses, and their redgalley-slave blouses had a clot of blood at the back of the neck, whichwas dry in the morning and wet at night. These tragic tales abounded inMadame de T.‘s salon, and by dint of cursing Marat, they applaudedTrestaillon. Some deputies of the undiscoverable variety played theirwhist there; M. Thibord du Chalard, M. Lemarchant de Gomicourt, and thecelebrated scoffer of the right, M. Cornet-Dincourt. The bailiff deFerrette, with his short breeches and his thin legs, sometimestraversed this salon on his way to M. de Talleyrand. He had been M. leComte d’Artois’ companion in pleasures and unlike Aristotle crouchingunder Campaspe, he had made the Guimard crawl on all fours, and in thatway he had exhibited to the ages a philosopher avenged by a bailiff. Asfor the priests, there was the Abbé Halma, the same to whom M. Larose,his collaborator on _la Foudre_, said: “Bah! Who is there who is notfifty years old? a few greenhorns perhaps?” The Abbé Letourneur,preacher to the King, the Abbé Frayssinous, who was not, as yet, eithercount, or bishop, or minister, or peer, and who wore an old cassockwhose buttons were missing, and the Abbé Keravenant, Curé ofSaint-Germain-des-Prés; also the Pope’s Nuncio, then Monsignor Macchi,Archbishop of Nisibi, later on Cardinal, remarkable for his long,pensive nose, and another Monsignor, entitled thus: Abbate Palmieri,domestic prelate, one of the seven participant prothonotaries of theHoly See, Canon of the illustrious Liberian basilica, Advocate of thesaints, _Postulatore dei Santi_, which refers to matters ofcanonization, and signifies very nearly: Master of Requests of thesection of Paradise. Lastly, two cardinals, M. de la Luzerne, and M. deCl****** T*******. The Cardinal of Luzerne was a writer and wasdestined to have, a few years later, the honor of signing in the_Conservateur_ articles side by side with Chateaubriand; M. de Cl******T******* was Archbishop of Toul****, and often made trips to Paris, tohis nephew, the Marquis de T*******, who was Minister of Marine andWar. The Cardinal of Cl****** T******* was a merry little man, whodisplayed his red stockings beneath his tucked-up cassock; hisspecialty was a hatred of the Encyclopædia, and his desperate play atbilliards, and persons who, at that epoch, passed through the RueM***** on summer evenings, where the hotel de Cl****** T******* thenstood, halted to listen to the shock of the balls and the piercingvoice of the Cardinal shouting to his conclavist, Monseigneur Cotiret,Bishop _in partibus_ of Caryste: “Mark, Abbé, I make a cannon.” TheCardinal de Cl****** T******* had been brought to Madame de T.‘s by hismost intimate friend, M. de Roquelaure, former Bishop of Senlis, andone of the Forty. M. de Roquelaure was notable for his lofty figure andhis assiduity at the Academy; through the glass door of the neighboringhall of the library where the French Academy then held its meetings,the curious could, on every Tuesday, contemplate the Ex-Bishop ofSenlis, usually standing erect, freshly powdered, in violet hose, withhis back turned to the door, apparently for the purpose of allowing abetter view of his little collar. All these ecclesiastics, though forthe most part as much courtiers as churchmen, added to the gravity ofthe T. salon, whose seigniorial aspect was accentuated by five peers ofFrance, the Marquis de Vib****, the Marquis de Tal***, the Marquis deHerb*******, the Vicomte Damb***, and the Duc de Val********. This Ducde Val********, although Prince de Mon***, that is to say a reigningprince abroad, had so high an idea of France and its peerage, that heviewed everything through their medium. It was he who said: “TheCardinals are the peers of France of Rome; the lords are the peers ofFrance of England.” Moreover, as it is indispensable that theRevolution should be everywhere in this century, this feudal salon was,as we have said, dominated by a bourgeois. M. Gillenormand reignedthere.
There lay the essence and quintessence of the Parisian white society.There reputations, even Royalist reputations, were held in quarantine.There is always a trace of anarchy in renown. Chateaubriand, had heentered there, would have produced the effect of Père Duchêne. Some ofthe scoffed-at did, nevertheless, penetrate thither on sufferance.Comte Beug*** was received there, subject to correction.
The “noble” salons of the present day no longer resemble those salons.The Faubourg Saint-Germain reeks of the fagot even now. The Royalistsof to-day are demagogues, let us record it to their credit.
At Madame de T.‘s the society was superior, taste was exquisite andhaughty, under the cover of a great show of politeness. Manners thereadmitted of all sorts of involuntary refinements which were the oldrégime itself, buried but still alive. Some of these habits, especiallyin the matter of language, seem eccentric. Persons but superficiallyacquainted with them would have taken for provincial that which wasonly antique. A woman was called _Madame la Générale. Madame laColonelle_ was not entirely disused. The charming Madame de Léon, inmemory, no doubt, of the Duchesses de Longueville and de Chevreuse,preferred this appellation to her title of Princesse. The Marquise deCréquy was also called _Madame la Colonelle_.
It was this little high society which invented at the Tuileries therefinement of speaking to the King in private as _the King_, in thethird person, and never as _Your Majesty_, the designation of _YourMajesty_ having been “soiled by the usurper.”

Men and deeds were brought to judgment there. They jeered at the age,which released them from the necessity of understanding it. Theyabetted each other in amazement. They communicated to each other thatmodicum of light which they possessed. Methuselah bestowed informationon Epimenides. The deaf man made the blind man acquainted with thecourse of things. They declared that the time which had elapsed sinceCoblentz had not existed. In the same manner that Louis XVIII. was bythe grace of God, in the five and twentieth year of his reign, theemigrants were, by rights, in the five and twentieth year of theiradolescence.
All was harmonious; nothing was too much alive; speech hardly amountedto a breath; the newspapers, agreeing with the salons, seemed apapyrus. There were some young people, but they were rather dead. Theliveries in the antechamber were antiquated. These utterly obsoletepersonages were served by domestics of the same stamp.
They all had the air of having lived a long time ago, and ofobstinately resisting the sepulchre. Nearly the whole dictionaryconsisted of _Conserver, Conservation, Conservateur; to be in goododor_,—that was the point. There are, in fact, aromatics in theopinions of these venerable groups, and their ideas smelled of it. Itwas a mummified society. The masters were embalmed, the servants werestuffed with straw.
A worthy old marquise, an _emigrée_ and ruined, who had but a solitarymaid, continued to say: “My people.”

What did they do in Madame de T.‘s salon? They were ultra.
To be ultra; this word, although what it represents may not havedisappeared, has no longer any meaning at the present day. Let usexplain it.
To be ultra is to go beyond. It is to attack the sceptre in the name ofthe throne, and the mitre in the name of the altar; it is to ill-treatthe thing which one is dragging, it is to kick over the traces; it isto cavil at the fagot on the score of the amount of cooking received byheretics; it is to reproach the idol with its small amount of idolatry;it is to insult through excess of respect; it is to discover that thePope is not sufficiently papish, that the King is not sufficientlyroyal, and that the night has too much light; it is to be discontentedwith alabaster, with snow, with the swan and the lily in the name ofwhiteness; it is to be a partisan of things to the point of becomingtheir enemy; it is to be so strongly for, as to be against.
The ultra spirit especially characterizes the first phase of theRestoration.
Nothing in history resembles that quarter of an hour which begins in1814 and terminates about 1820, with the advent of M. de Villèle, thepractical man of the Right. These six years were an extraordinarymoment; at one and the same time brilliant and gloomy, smiling andsombre, illuminated as by the radiance of dawn and entirely covered, atthe same time, with the shadows of the great catastrophes which stillfilled the horizon and were slowly sinking into the past. There existedin that light and that shadow, a complete little new and old world,comic and sad, juvenile and senile, which was rubbing its eyes; nothingresembles an awakening like a return; a group which regarded Francewith ill-temper, and which France regarded with irony; good old owls ofmarquises by the streetful, who had returned, and of ghosts, the“former” subjects of amazement at everything, brave and noble gentlemenwho smiled at being in France but wept also, delighted to behold theircountry once more, in despair at not finding their monarchy; thenobility of the Crusades treating the nobility of the Empire, that isto say, the nobility of the sword, with scorn; historic races who hadlost the sense of history; the sons of the companions of Charlemagnedisdaining the companions of Napoleon. The swords, as we have justremarked, returned the insult; the sword of Fontenoy was laughable andnothing but a scrap of rusty iron; the sword of Marengo was odious andwas only a sabre. Former days did not recognize Yesterday. People nolonger had the feeling for what was grand. There was some one whocalled Bonaparte Scapin. This Society no longer exists. Nothing of it,we repeat, exists to-day. When we select from it some one figure atrandom, and attempt to make it live again in thought, it seems asstrange to us as the world before the Deluge. It is because it, too, asa matter of fact, has been engulfed in a deluge. It has disappearedbeneath two Revolutions. What billows are ideas! How quickly they coverall that it is their mission to destroy and to bury, and how promptlythey create frightful gulfs!
Such was the physiognomy of the salons of those distant and candidtimes when M. Martainville had more wit than Voltaire.
These salons had a literature and politics of their own. They believedin Fiévée. M. Agier laid down the law in them. They commentated M.Colnet, the old bookseller and publicist of the Quay Malaquais.Napoleon was to them thoroughly the Corsican Ogre. Later on theintroduction into history of M. le Marquis de Bonaparte,Lieutenant-General of the King’s armies, was a concession to the spiritof the age.
These salons did not long preserve their purity. Beginning with 1818,doctrinarians began to spring up in them, a disturbing shade. Their waywas to be Royalists and to excuse themselves for being so. Where theultras were very proud, the doctrinarians were rather ashamed. They hadwit; they had silence; their political dogma was suitably impregnatedwith arrogance; they should have succeeded. They indulged, and usefullytoo, in excesses in the matter of white neckties and tightly buttonedcoats. The mistake or the misfortune of the doctrinarian party was tocreate aged youth. They assumed the poses of wise men. They dreamed ofengrafting a temperate power on the absolute and excessive principle.They opposed, and sometimes with rare intelligence, conservativeliberalism to the liberalism which demolishes. They were heard to say:“Thanks for Royalism! It has rendered more than one service. It hasbrought back tradition, worship, religion, respect. It is faithful,brave, chivalric, loving, devoted. It has mingled, though with regret,the secular grandeurs of the monarchy with the new grandeurs of thenation. Its mistake is not to understand the Revolution, the Empire,glory, liberty, young ideas, young generations, the age. But thismistake which it makes with regard to us,—have we not sometimes beenguilty of it towards them? The Revolution, whose heirs we are, ought tobe intelligent on all points. To attack Royalism is a misconstructionof liberalism. What an error! And what blindness! Revolutionary Franceis wanting in respect towards historic France, that is to say, towardsits mother, that is to say, towards itself. After the 5th of September,the nobility of the monarchy is treated as the nobility of the Empirewas treated after the 5th of July. They were unjust to the eagle, weare unjust to the fleur-de-lys. It seems that we must always havesomething to proscribe! Does it serve any purpose to ungild the crownof Louis XIV., to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV.? We scoff at M.de Vaublanc for erasing the N’s from the bridge of Jena! What was itthat he did? What are we doing? Bouvines belongs to us as well asMarengo. The fleurs-de-lys are ours as well as the N’s. That is ourpatrimony. To what purpose shall we diminish it? We must not deny ourcountry in the past any more than in the present. Why not accept thewhole of history? Why not love the whole of France?”

It is thus that doctrinarians criticised and protected Royalism, whichwas displeased at criticism and furious at protection.
The ultras marked the first epoch of Royalism, congregationcharacterized the second. Skill follows ardor. Let us confine ourselveshere to this sketch.
In the course of this narrative, the author of this book hasencountered in his path this curious moment of contemporary history; hehas been forced to cast a passing glance upon it, and to trace oncemore some of the singular features of this society which is unknownto-day. But he does it rapidly and without any bitter or derisive idea.Souvenirs both respectful and affectionate, for they touch his mother,attach him to this past. Moreover, let us remark, this same petty worldhad a grandeur of its own. One may smile at it, but one can neitherdespise nor hate it. It was the France of former days.
Marius Pontmercy pursued some studies, as all children do. When heemerged from the hands of Aunt Gillenormand, his grandfather confidedhim to a worthy professor of the most purely classic innocence. Thisyoung soul which was expanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant.
Marius went through his years of college, then he entered the lawschool. He was a Royalist, fanatical and severe. He did not love hisgrandfather much, as the latter’s gayety and cynicism repelled him, andhis feelings towards his father were gloomy.
He was, on the whole, a cold and ardent, noble, generous, proud,religious, enthusiastic lad; dignified to harshness, pure to shyness.



CHAPTER IV—END OF THE BRIGAND

The conclusion of Marius’ classical studies coincided with M.Gillenormand’s departure from society. The old man bade farewell to theFaubourg Saint-Germain and to Madame de T.‘s salon, and establishedhimself in the Marais, in his house of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire.There he had for servants, in addition to the porter, that chambermaid,Nicolette, who had succeeded to Magnon, and that short-breathed andpursy Basque, who have been mentioned above.
In 1827, Marius had just attained his seventeenth year. One evening, onhis return home, he saw his grandfather holding a letter in his hand.
“Marius,” said M. Gillenormand, “you will set out for Vernonto-morrow.”

“Why?” said Marius.
“To see your father.”

Marius was seized with a trembling fit. He had thought of everythingexcept this—that he should one day be called upon to see his father.Nothing could be more unexpected, more surprising, and, let us admitit, more disagreeable to him. It was forcing estrangement intoreconciliation. It was not an affliction, but it was an unpleasantduty.
Marius, in addition to his motives of political antipathy, wasconvinced that his father, _the slasher_, as M. Gillenormand called himon his amiable days, did not love him; this was evident, since he hadabandoned him to others. Feeling that he was not beloved, he did notlove. “Nothing is more simple,” he said to himself.
He was so astounded that he did not question M. Gillenormand. Thegrandfather resumed:—
“It appears that he is ill. He demands your presence.”

And after a pause, he added:—
“Set out to-morrow morning. I think there is a coach which leaves theCour des Fontaines at six o’clock, and which arrives in the evening.Take it. He says that here is haste.”

Then he crushed the letter in his hand and thrust it into his pocket.Marius might have set out that very evening and have been with hisfather on the following morning. A diligence from the Rue du Bouloitook the trip to Rouen by night at that date, and passed throughVernon. Neither Marius nor M. Gillenormand thought of making inquiriesabout it.
The next day, at twilight, Marius reached Vernon. People were justbeginning to light their candles. He asked the first person whom he metfor “M. Pontmercy’s house.” For in his own mind, he agreed with theRestoration, and like it, did not recognize his father’s claim to thetitle of either colonel or baron.
The house was pointed out to him. He rang; a woman with a little lampin her hand opened the door.
“M. Pontmercy?” said Marius.
The woman remained motionless.
“Is this his house?” demanded Marius.
The woman nodded affirmatively.
“Can I speak with him?”

The woman shook her head.
“But I am his son!” persisted Marius. “He is expecting me.”

“He no longer expects you,” said the woman.
Then he perceived that she was weeping.
She pointed to the door of a room on the ground floor; he entered.
In that room, which was lighted by a tallow candle standing on thechimney-piece, there were three men, one standing erect, anotherkneeling, and one lying at full length, on the floor in his shirt. Theone on the floor was the colonel.
The other two were the doctor, and the priest, who was engaged inprayer.
The colonel had been attacked by brain fever three days previously. Ashe had a foreboding of evil at the very beginning of his illness, hehad written to M. Gillenormand to demand his son. The malady had grownworse. On the very evening of Marius’ arrival at Vernon, the colonelhad had an attack of delirium; he had risen from his bed, in spite ofthe servant’s efforts to prevent him, crying: “My son is not coming! Ishall go to meet him!” Then he ran out of his room and fell prostrateon the floor of the antechamber. He had just expired.
The doctor had been summoned, and the curé. The doctor had arrived toolate. The son had also arrived too late.
By the dim light of the candle, a large tear could be distinguished onthe pale and prostrate colonel’s cheek, where it had trickled from hisdead eye. The eye was extinguished, but the tear was not yet dry. Thattear was his son’s delay.
Marius gazed upon that man whom he beheld for the first time, on thatvenerable and manly face, on those open eyes which saw not, on thosewhite locks, those robust limbs, on which, here and there, brown lines,marking sword-thrusts, and a sort of red stars, which indicatedbullet-holes, were visible. He contemplated that gigantic sear whichstamped heroism on that countenance upon which God had imprintedgoodness. He reflected that this man was his father, and that this manwas dead, and a chill ran over him.
The sorrow which he felt was the sorrow which he would have felt in thepresence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched outin death.
Anguish, poignant anguish, was in that chamber. The servant-woman waslamenting in a corner, the curé was praying, and his sobs were audible,the doctor was wiping his eyes; the corpse itself was weeping.
The doctor, the priest, and the woman gazed at Marius in the midst oftheir affliction without uttering a word; he was the stranger there.Marius, who was far too little affected, felt ashamed and embarrassedat his own attitude; he held his hat in his hand; and he dropped it onthe floor, in order to produce the impression that grief had deprivedhim of the strength to hold it.
At the same time, he experienced remorse, and he despised himself forbehaving in this manner. But was it his fault? He did not love hisfather? Why should he!
The colonel had left nothing. The sale of big furniture barely paid theexpenses of his burial.
The servant found a scrap of paper, which she handed to Marius. Itcontained the following, in the colonel’s handwriting:—
“_For my son_.—The Emperor made me a Baron on the battle-field ofWaterloo. Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which Ipurchased with my blood, my son shall take it and bear it. That he willbe worthy of it is a matter of course.” Below, the colonel had added:“At that same battle of Waterloo, a sergeant saved my life. The man’sname was Thénardier. I think that he has recently been keeping a littleinn, in a village in the neighborhood of Paris, at Chelles orMontfermeil. If my son meets him, he will do all the good he can toThénardier.”

Marius took this paper and preserved it, not out of duty to his father,but because of that vague respect for death which is always imperiousin the heart of man.
Nothing remained of the colonel. M. Gillenormand had his sword anduniform sold to an old-clothes dealer. The neighbors devastated thegarden and pillaged the rare flowers. The other plants turned tonettles and weeds, and died.
Marius remained only forty-eight hours at Vernon. After the intermenthe returned to Paris, and applied himself again to his law studies,with no more thought of his father than if the latter had never lived.In two days the colonel was buried, and in three forgotten.
Marius wore crape on his hat. That was all.



CHAPTER V—THE UTILITY OF GOING TO MASS, IN ORDER TO BECOME AREVOLUTIONIST

Marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood. One Sunday,when he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice, at that same chapel of theVirgin whither his aunt had led him when a small lad, he placed himselfbehind a pillar, being more absent-minded and thoughtful than usual onthat occasion, and knelt down, without paying any special heed, upon achair of Utrecht velvet, on the back of which was inscribed this name:_Monsieur Mabeuf, warden_. Mass had hardly begun when an old manpresented himself and said to Marius:—
“This is my place, sir.”

Marius stepped aside promptly, and the old man took possession of hischair.
The mass concluded, Marius still stood thoughtfully a few pacesdistant; the old man approached him again and said:—
“I beg your pardon, sir, for having disturbed you a while ago, and foragain disturbing you at this moment; you must have thought meintrusive, and I will explain myself.”

“There is no need of that, Sir,” said Marius.
“Yes!” went on the old man, “I do not wish you to have a bad opinion ofme. You see, I am attached to this place. It seems to me that the massis better from here. Why? I will tell you. It is from this place, thatI have watched a poor, brave father come regularly, every two or threemonths, for the last ten years, since he had no other opportunity andno other way of seeing his child, because he was prevented by familyarrangements. He came at the hour when he knew that his son would bebrought to mass. The little one never suspected that his father wasthere. Perhaps he did not even know that he had a father, poorinnocent! The father kept behind a pillar, so that he might not beseen. He gazed at his child and he wept. He adored that little fellow,poor man! I could see that. This spot has become sanctified in mysight, and I have contracted a habit of coming hither to listen to themass. I prefer it to the stall to which I have a right, in my capacityof warden. I knew that unhappy gentleman a little, too. He had afather-in-law, a wealthy aunt, relatives, I don’t know exactly whatall, who threatened to disinherit the child if he, the father, saw him.He sacrificed himself in order that his son might be rich and happysome day. He was separated from him because of political opinions.Certainly, I approve of political opinions, but there are people who donot know where to stop. Mon Dieu! a man is not a monster because he wasat Waterloo; a father is not separated from his child for such a reasonas that. He was one of Bonaparte’s colonels. He is dead, I believe. Helived at Vernon, where I have a brother who is a curé, and his name wassomething like Pontmarie or Montpercy. He had a fine sword-cut, on myhonor.”

“Pontmercy,” suggested Marius, turning pale.
“Precisely, Pontmercy. Did you know him?”

“Sir,” said Marius, “he was my father.”

The old warden clasped his hands and exclaimed:—
“Ah! you are the child! Yes, that’s true, he must be a man by thistime. Well! poor child, you may say that you had a father who loved youdearly!”

Marius offered his arm to the old man and conducted him to hislodgings.
On the following day, he said to M. Gillenormand:—
“I have arranged a hunting-party with some friends. Will you permit meto be absent for three days?”

“Four!” replied his grandfather. “Go and amuse yourself.”

And he said to his daughter in a low tone, and with a wink, “Some loveaffair!”




CHAPTER VI—THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN

Where it was that Marius went will be disclosed a little further on.
Marius was absent for three days, then he returned to Paris, wentstraight to the library of the law-school and asked for the files ofthe _Moniteur_.
He read the _Moniteur_, he read all the histories of the Republic andthe Empire, the _Memorial de Sainte-Hélène_, all the memoirs, all thenewspapers, the bulletins, the proclamations; he devoured everything.The first time that he came across his father’s name in the bulletinsof the grand army, he had a fever for a week. He went to see thegenerals under whom Georges Pontmercy had served, among others, ComteH. Church-warden Mabeuf, whom he went to see again, told him about thelife at Vernon, the colonel’s retreat, his flowers, his solitude.Marius came to a full knowledge of that rare, sweet, and sublime man,that species of lion-lamb who had been his father.
In the meanwhile, occupied as he was with this study which absorbed allhis moments as well as his thoughts, he hardly saw the Gillenormands atall. He made his appearance at meals; then they searched for him, andhe was not to be found. Father Gillenormand smiled. “Bah! bah! He isjust of the age for the girls!” Sometimes the old man added: “Thedeuce! I thought it was only an affair of gallantry. It seems that itis an affair of passion!”

It was a passion, in fact. Marius was on the high road to adoring hisfather.
At the same time, his ideas underwent an extraordinary change. Thephases of this change were numerous and successive. As this is thehistory of many minds of our day, we think it will prove useful tofollow these phases step by step and to indicate them all.
That history upon which he had just cast his eyes appalled him.
The first effect was to dazzle him.
Up to that time, the Republic, the Empire, had been to him onlymonstrous words. The Republic, a guillotine in the twilight; theEmpire, a sword in the night. He had just taken a look at it, and wherehe had expected to find only a chaos of shadows, he had beheld, with asort of unprecedented surprise, mingled with fear and joy, starssparkling, Mirabeau, Vergniaud, Saint-Just, Robespierre, Camille,Desmoulins, Danton, and a sun arise, Napoleon. He did not know where hestood. He recoiled, blinded by the brilliant lights. Little by little,when his astonishment had passed off, he grew accustomed to thisradiance, he contemplated these deeds without dizziness, he examinedthese personages without terror; the Revolution and the Empirepresented themselves luminously, in perspective, before his mind’s eye;he beheld each of these groups of events and of men summed up in twotremendous facts: the Republic in the sovereignty of civil rightrestored to the masses, the Empire in the sovereignty of the Frenchidea imposed on Europe; he beheld the grand figure of the people emergefrom the Revolution, and the grand figure of France spring forth fromthe Empire. He asserted in his conscience, that all this had been good.What his dazzled state neglected in this, his first far too syntheticestimation, we do not think it necessary to point out here. It is thestate of a mind on the march that we are recording. Progress is notaccomplished in one stage. That stated, once for all, in connectionwith what precedes as well as with what is to follow, we continue.
He then perceived that, up to that moment, he had comprehended hiscountry no more than he had comprehended his father. He had not knowneither the one or the other, and a sort of voluntary night had obscuredhis eyes. Now he saw, and on the one hand he admired, while on theother he adored.
He was filled with regret and remorse, and he reflected in despair thatall he had in his soul could now be said only to the tomb. Oh! if hisfather had still been in existence, if he had still had him, if God, inhis compassion and his goodness, had permitted his father to be stillamong the living, how he would have run, how he would have precipitatedhimself, how he would have cried to his father: “Father! Here I am! Itis I! I have the same heart as thou! I am thy son!” How he would haveembraced that white head, bathed his hair in tears, gazed upon hisscar, pressed his hands, adored his garment, kissed his feet! Oh! Whyhad his father died so early, before his time, before the justice, thelove of his son had come to him? Marius had a continual sob in hisheart, which said to him every moment: “Alas!” At the same time, hebecame more truly serious, more truly grave, more sure of his thoughtand his faith. At each instant, gleams of the true came to complete hisreason. An inward growth seemed to be in progress within him. He wasconscious of a sort of natural enlargement, which gave him two thingsthat were new to him—his father and his country.
As everything opens when one has a key, so he explained to himself thatwhich he had hated, he penetrated that which he had abhorred;henceforth he plainly perceived the providential, divine and humansense of the great things which he had been taught to detest, and ofthe great men whom he had been instructed to curse. When he reflectedon his former opinions, which were but those of yesterday, and which,nevertheless, seemed to him already so very ancient, he grew indignant,yet he smiled.
From the rehabilitation of his father, he naturally passed to therehabilitation of Napoleon.
But the latter, we will confess, was not effected without labor.
From his infancy, he had been imbued with the judgments of the party of1814, on Bonaparte. Now, all the prejudices of the Restoration, all itsinterests, all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon. It execratedhim even more than it did Robespierre. It had very cleverly turned tosufficiently good account the fatigue of the nation, and the hatred ofmothers. Bonaparte had become an almost fabulous monster, and in orderto paint him to the imagination of the people, which, as we latelypointed out, resembles the imagination of children, the party of 1814made him appear under all sorts of terrifying masks in succession, fromthat which is terrible though it remains grandiose to that which isterrible and becomes grotesque, from Tiberius to the bugaboo. Thus, inspeaking of Bonaparte, one was free to sob or to puff up with laughter,provided that hatred lay at the bottom. Marius had neverentertained—about _that man_, as he was called—any other ideas in hismind. They had combined with the tenacity which existed in his nature.There was in him a headstrong little man who hated Napoleon.
On reading history, on studying him, especially in the documents andmaterials for history, the veil which concealed Napoleon from the eyesof Marius was gradually rent. He caught a glimpse of something immense,and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment, on thescore of Bonaparte as about all the rest; each day he saw moredistinctly; and he set about mounting, slowly, step by step, almostregretfully in the beginning, then with intoxication and as thoughattracted by an irresistible fascination, first the sombre steps, thenthe vaguely illuminated steps, at last the luminous and splendid stepsof enthusiasm.
One night, he was alone in his little chamber near the roof. His candlewas burning; he was reading, with his elbows resting on his table closeto the open window. All sorts of reveries reached him from space, andmingled with his thoughts. What a spectacle is the night! One hearsdull sounds, without knowing whence they proceed; one beholds Jupiter,which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth, glowing like afirebrand, the azure is black, the stars shine; it is formidable.
He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army, those heroic strophespenned on the field of battle; there, at intervals, he beheld hisfather’s name, always the name of the Emperor; the whole of that greatEmpire presented itself to him; he felt a flood swelling and risingwithin him; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close tohim like a breath, and whispered in his ear; he gradually got into asingular state; he thought that he heard drums, cannon, trumpets, themeasured tread of battalions, the dull and distant gallop of thecavalry; from time to time, his eyes were raised heavenward, and gazedupon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measurelessdepths of space, then they fell upon his book once more, and there theybeheld other colossal things moving confusedly. His heart contractedwithin him. He was in a transport, trembling, panting. All at once,without himself knowing what was in him, and what impulse he wasobeying, he sprang to his feet, stretched both arms out of the window,gazed intently into the gloom, the silence, the infinite darkness, theeternal immensity, and exclaimed: “Long live the Emperor!”

From that moment forth, all was over; the Ogre of Corsica,—theusurper,—the tyrant,—the monster who was the lover of his ownsisters,—the actor who took lessons of Talma,—the poisoner ofJaffa,—the tiger,—Buonaparte,—all this vanished, and gave place in hismind to a vague and brilliant radiance in which shone, at aninaccessible height, the pale marble phantom of Cæsar. The Emperor hadbeen for his father only the well-beloved captain whom one admires, forwhom one sacrifices one’s self; he was something more to Marius. He wasthe predestined constructor of the French group, succeeding the Romangroup in the domination of the universe. He was a prodigious architect,of a destruction, the continuer of Charlemagne, of Louis XI., of HenryIV., of Richelieu, of Louis XIV., and of the Committee of PublicSafety, having his spots, no doubt, his faults, his crimes even, beinga man, that is to say; but august in his faults, brilliant in hisspots, powerful in his crime.
He was the predestined man, who had forced all nations to say: “Thegreat nation!” He was better than that, he was the very incarnation ofFrance, conquering Europe by the sword which he grasped, and the worldby the light which he shed. Marius saw in Bonaparte the dazzlingspectre which will always rise upon the frontier, and which will guardthe future. Despot but dictator; a despot resulting from a republic andsumming up a revolution. Napoleon became for him the man-people asJesus Christ is the man-God.
It will be perceived, that like all new converts to a religion, hisconversion intoxicated him, he hurled himself headlong into adhesionand he went too far. His nature was so constructed; once on thedownward slope, it was almost impossible for him to put on the drag.Fanaticism for the sword took possession of him, and complicated in hismind his enthusiasm for the idea. He did not perceive that, along withgenius, and pell-mell, he was admitting force, that is to say, that hewas installing in two compartments of his idolatry, on the one handthat which is divine, on the other that which is brutal. In manyrespects, he had set about deceiving himself otherwise. He admittedeverything. There is a way of encountering error while on one’s way tothe truth. He had a violent sort of good faith which took everything inthe lump. In the new path which he had entered on, in judging themistakes of the old regime, as in measuring the glory of Napoleon, heneglected the attenuating circumstances.
At all events, a tremendous step had been taken. Where he had formerlybeheld the fall of the monarchy, he now saw the advent of France. Hisorientation had changed. What had been his East became the West. He hadturned squarely round.
All these revolutions were accomplished within him, without his familyobtaining an inkling of the case.
When, during this mysterious labor, he had entirely shed his oldBourbon and ultra skin, when he had cast off the aristocrat, theJacobite and the Royalist, when he had become thoroughly arevolutionist, profoundly democratic and republican, he went to anengraver on the Quai des Orfévres and ordered a hundred cards bearingthis name: _Le Baron Marius Pontmercy_.
This was only the strictly logical consequence of the change which hadtaken place in him, a change in which everything gravitated round hisfather.
Only, as he did not know any one and could not sow his cards with anyporter, he put them in his pocket.
By another natural consequence, in proportion as he drew nearer to hisfather, to the latter’s memory, and to the things for which the colonelhad fought five and twenty years before, he receded from hisgrandfather. We have long ago said, that M. Gillenormand’s temper didnot please him. There already existed between them all the dissonancesof the grave young man and the frivolous old man. The gayety of Géronteshocks and exasperates the melancholy of Werther. So long as the samepolitical opinions and the same ideas had been common to them both,Marius had met M. Gillenormand there as on a bridge. When the bridgefell, an abyss was formed. And then, over and above all, Mariusexperienced unutterable impulses to revolt, when he reflected that itwas M. Gillenormand who had, from stupid motives, torn him ruthlesslyfrom the colonel, thus depriving the father of the child, and the childof the father.
By dint of pity for his father, Marius had nearly arrived at aversionfor his grandfather.
Nothing of this sort, however, was betrayed on the exterior, as we havealready said. Only he grew colder and colder; laconic at meals, andrare in the house. When his aunt scolded him for it, he was very gentleand alleged his studies, his lectures, the examinations, etc., as apretext. His grandfather never departed from his infallible diagnosis:“In love! I know all about it.”

From time to time Marius absented himself.
“Where is it that he goes off like this?” said his aunt.
On one of these trips, which were always very brief, he went toMontfermeil, in order to obey the injunction which his father had lefthim, and he sought the old sergeant to Waterloo, the inn-keeperThénardier. Thénardier had failed, the inn was closed, and no one knewwhat had become of him. Marius was away from the house for four days onthis quest.
“He is getting decidedly wild,” said his grandfather.
They thought they had noticed that he wore something on his breast,under his shirt, which was attached to his neck by a black ribbon.



CHAPTER VII—SOME PETTICOAT

We have mentioned a lancer.
He was a great-grand-nephew of M. Gillenormand, on the paternal side,who led a garrison life, outside the family and far from the domestichearth. Lieutenant Théodule Gillenormand fulfilled all the conditionsrequired to make what is called a fine officer. He had “a lady’swaist,” a victorious manner of trailing his sword and of twirling hismoustache in a hook. He visited Paris very rarely, and so rarely thatMarius had never seen him. The cousins knew each other only by name. Wethink we have said that Théodule was the favorite of Aunt Gillenormand,who preferred him because she did not see him. Not seeing peoplepermits one to attribute to them all possible perfections.
One morning, Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder returned to herapartment as much disturbed as her placidity was capable of allowing.Marius had just asked his grandfather’s permission to take a littletrip, adding that he meant to set out that very evening. “Go!” had beenhis grandfather’s reply, and M. Gillenormand had added in an aside, ashe raised his eyebrows to the top of his forehead: “Here he is passingthe night out again.” Mademoiselle Gillenormand had ascended to herchamber greatly puzzled, and on the staircase had dropped thisexclamation: “This is too much!”—and this interrogation: “But where isit that he goes?” She espied some adventure of the heart, more or lessillicit, a woman in the shadow, a rendezvous, a mystery, and she wouldnot have been sorry to thrust her spectacles into the affair. Tasting amystery resembles getting the first flavor of a scandal; sainted soulsdo not detest this. There is some curiosity about scandal in the secretcompartments of bigotry.
So she was the prey of a vague appetite for learning a history.
In order to get rid of this curiosity which agitated her a littlebeyond her wont, she took refuge in her talents, and set aboutscalloping, with one layer of cotton after another, one of thoseembroideries of the Empire and the Restoration, in which there arenumerous cart-wheels. The work was clumsy, the worker cross. She hadbeen seated at this for several hours when the door opened.Mademoiselle Gillenormand raised her nose. Lieutenant Théodule stoodbefore her, making the regulation salute. She uttered a cry of delight.One may be old, one may be a prude, one may be pious, one may be anaunt, but it is always agreeable to see a lancer enter one’s chamber.
“You here, Théodule!” she exclaimed.
“On my way through town, aunt.”

“Embrace me.”

“Here goes!” said Théodule.
And he kissed her. Aunt Gillenormand went to her writing-desk andopened it.
“You will remain with us a week at least?”

“I leave this very evening, aunt.”

“It is not possible!”

“Mathematically!”

“Remain, my little Théodule, I beseech you.”

“My heart says ‘yes,’ but my orders say ‘no.’ The matter is simple.They are changing our garrison; we have been at Melun, we are beingtransferred to Gaillon. It is necessary to pass through Paris in orderto get from the old post to the new one. I said: ‘I am going to see myaunt.’”

“Here is something for your trouble.”

And she put ten louis into his hand.
“For my pleasure, you mean to say, my dear aunt.”

Théodule kissed her again, and she experienced the joy of having someof the skin scratched from her neck by the braidings on his uniform.
“Are you making the journey on horseback, with your regiment?” sheasked him.
“No, aunt. I wanted to see you. I have special permission. My servantis taking my horse; I am travelling by diligence. And, by the way, Iwant to ask you something.”

“What is it?”

“Is my cousin Marius Pontmercy travelling so, too?”

“How do you know that?” said his aunt, suddenly pricked to the quickwith a lively curiosity.
“On my arrival, I went to the diligence to engage my seat in thecoupé.”

“Well?”

“A traveller had already come to engage a seat in the imperial. I sawhis name on the card.”

“What name?”

“Marius Pontmercy.”

“The wicked fellow!” exclaimed his aunt. “Ah! your cousin is not asteady lad like yourself. To think that he is to pass the night in adiligence!”

“Just as I am going to do.”

“But you—it is your duty; in his case, it is wildness.”

“Bosh!” said Théodule.
Here an event occurred to Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder,—an ideastruck her. If she had been a man, she would have slapped her brow. Sheapostrophized Théodule:—
“Are you aware whether your cousin knows you?”

“No. I have seen him; but he has never deigned to notice me.”

“So you are going to travel together?”

“He in the imperial, I in the coupé.”

“Where does this diligence run?”

“To Andelys.”

“Then that is where Marius is going?”

“Unless, like myself, he should stop on the way. I get down at Vernon,in order to take the branch coach for Gaillon. I know nothing ofMarius’ plan of travel.”

“Marius! what an ugly name! what possessed them to name him Marius?While you, at least, are called Théodule.”

“I would rather be called Alfred,” said the officer.
“Listen, Théodule.”

“I am listening, aunt.”

“Pay attention.”

“I am paying attention.”

“You understand?”

“Yes.”

“Well, Marius absents himself!”

“Eh! eh!”

“He travels.”

“Ah! ah!”

“He spends the night out.”

“Oh! oh!”

“We should like to know what there is behind all this.”

Théodule replied with the composure of a man of bronze:—
“Some petticoat or other.”

And with that inward laugh which denotes certainty, he added:—
“A lass.”

“That is evident,” exclaimed his aunt, who thought she heard M.Gillenormand speaking, and who felt her conviction become irresistibleat that word _fillette_, accentuated in almost the very same fashion bythe granduncle and the grandnephew. She resumed:—
“Do us a favor. Follow Marius a little. He does not know you, it willbe easy. Since a lass there is, try to get a sight of her. You mustwrite us the tale. It will amuse his grandfather.”

Théodule had no excessive taste for this sort of spying; but he wasmuch touched by the ten louis, and he thought he saw a chance for apossible sequel. He accepted the commission and said: “As you please,aunt.”

And he added in an aside, to himself: “Here I am a duenna.”

Mademoiselle Gillenormand embraced him.
“You are not the man to play such pranks, Théodule. You obeydiscipline, you are the slave of orders, you are a man of scruples andduty, and you would not quit your family to go and see a creature.”

The lancer made the pleased grimace of Cartouche when praised for hisprobity.
Marius, on the evening following this dialogue, mounted the diligencewithout suspecting that he was watched. As for the watcher, the firstthing he did was to fall asleep. His slumber was complete andconscientious. Argus snored all night long.
At daybreak, the conductor of the diligence shouted: “Vernon! relay ofVernon! Travellers for Vernon!” And Lieutenant Théodule woke.
“Good,” he growled, still half asleep, “this is where I get out.”

Then, as his memory cleared by degrees, the effect of waking, herecalled his aunt, the ten louis, and the account which he hadundertaken to render of the deeds and proceedings of Marius. This sethim to laughing.
“Perhaps he is no longer in the coach,” he thought, as he rebuttonedthe waistcoat of his undress uniform. “He may have stopped at Poissy;he may have stopped at Triel; if he did not get out at Meulan, he mayhave got out at Mantes, unless he got out at Rolleboise, or if he didnot go on as far as Pacy, with the choice of turning to the left atÉvreus, or to the right at Laroche-Guyon. Run after him, aunty. Whatthe devil am I to write to that good old soul?”

At that moment a pair of black trousers descending from the imperial,made its appearance at the window of the coupé.
“Can that be Marius?” said the lieutenant.
It was Marius.
A little peasant girl, all entangled with the horses and the postilionsat the end of the vehicle, was offering flowers to the travellers.“Give your ladies flowers!” she cried.
Marius approached her and purchased the finest flowers in her flatbasket.
“Come now,” said Théodule, leaping down from the coupé, “this piques mycuriosity. Who the deuce is he going to carry those flowers to? Shemust be a splendidly handsome woman for so fine a bouquet. I want tosee her.”

And no longer in pursuance of orders, but from personal curiosity, likedogs who hunt on their own account, he set out to follow Marius.
Marius paid no attention to Théodule. Elegant women descended from thediligence; he did not glance at them. He seemed to see nothing aroundhim.
“He is pretty deeply in love!” thought Théodule.
Marius directed his steps towards the church.
“Capital,” said Théodule to himself. “Rendezvous seasoned with a bit ofmass are the best sort. Nothing is so exquisite as an ogle which passesover the good God’s head.”

On arriving at the church, Marius did not enter it, but skirted theapse. He disappeared behind one of the angles of the apse.
“The rendezvous is appointed outside,” said Théodule. “Let’s have alook at the lass.”

And he advanced on the tips of his boots towards the corner whichMarius had turned.
On arriving there, he halted in amazement.
Marius, with his forehead clasped in his hands, was kneeling upon thegrass on a grave. He had strewn his bouquet there. At the extremity ofthe grave, on a little swelling which marked the head, there stood across of black wood with this name in white letters: COLONEL BARONPONTMERCY. Marius’ sobs were audible.
The “lass” was a grave.



CHAPTER VIII—MARBLE AGAINST GRANITE

It was hither that Marius had come on the first occasion of hisabsenting himself from Paris. It was hither that he had come every timethat M. Gillenormand had said: “He is sleeping out.”

Lieutenant Théodule was absolutely put out of countenance by thisunexpected encounter with a sepulchre; he experienced a singular anddisagreeable sensation which he was incapable of analyzing, and whichwas composed of respect for the tomb, mingled with respect for thecolonel. He retreated, leaving Marius alone in the cemetery, and therewas discipline in this retreat. Death appeared to him with largeepaulets, and he almost made the military salute to him. Not knowingwhat to write to his aunt, he decided not to write at all; and it isprobable that nothing would have resulted from the discovery made byThéodule as to the love affairs of Marius, if, by one of thosemysterious arrangements which are so frequent in chance, the scene atVernon had not had an almost immediate counter-shock at Paris.
Marius returned from Vernon on the third day, in the middle of themorning, descended at his grandfather’s door, and, wearied by the twonights spent in the diligence, and feeling the need of repairing hisloss of sleep by an hour at the swimming-school, he mounted rapidly tohis chamber, took merely time enough to throw off his travelling-coat,and the black ribbon which he wore round his neck, and went off to thebath.
M. Gillenormand, who had risen betimes like all old men in good health,had heard his entrance, and had made haste to climb, as quickly as hisold legs permitted, the stairs to the upper story where Marius lived,in order to embrace him, and to question him while so doing, and tofind out where he had been.
But the youth had taken less time to descend than the old man had toascend, and when Father Gillenormand entered the attic, Marius was nolonger there.
The bed had not been disturbed, and on the bed lay, outspread, but notdefiantly the great-coat and the black ribbon.
“I like this better,” said M. Gillenormand.
And a moment later, he made his entrance into the salon, whereMademoiselle Gillenormand was already seated, busily embroidering hercart-wheels.
The entrance was a triumphant one.
M. Gillenormand held in one hand the great-coat, and in the other theneck-ribbon, and exclaimed:—
“Victory! We are about to penetrate the mystery! We are going to learnthe most minute details; we are going to lay our finger on thedebaucheries of our sly friend! Here we have the romance itself. I havethe portrait!”

In fact, a case of black shagreen, resembling a medallion portrait, wassuspended from the ribbon.
The old man took this case and gazed at it for some time withoutopening it, with that air of enjoyment, rapture, and wrath, with whicha poor hungry fellow beholds an admirable dinner which is not for him,pass under his very nose.
“For this evidently is a portrait. I know all about such things. Thatis worn tenderly on the heart. How stupid they are! Some abominablefright that will make us shudder, probably! Young men have such badtaste nowadays!”

“Let us see, father,” said the old spinster.
The case opened by the pressure of a spring. They found in it nothingbut a carefully folded paper.
_“From the same to the same,”_ said M. Gillenormand, bursting withlaughter. “I know what it is. A billet-doux.”

“Ah! let us read it!” said the aunt.
And she put on her spectacles. They unfolded the paper and read asfollows:—
“_For my son_.—The Emperor made me a Baron on the battlefield ofWaterloo. Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which Ipurchased with my blood, my son shall take it and bear it. That he willbe worthy of it is a matter of course.”

The feelings of father and daughter cannot be described. They feltchilled as by the breath of a death’s-head. They did not exchange aword.
Only, M. Gillenormand said in a low voice and as though speaking tohimself:—
“It is the slasher’s handwriting.”

The aunt examined the paper, turned it about in all directions, thenput it back in its case.
At the same moment a little oblong packet, enveloped in blue paper,fell from one of the pockets of the great-coat. MademoiselleGillenormand picked it up and unfolded the blue paper.
It contained Marius’ hundred cards. She handed one of them to M.Gillenormand, who read: _Le Baron Marius Pontmercy_.
The old man rang the bell. Nicolette came. M. Gillenormand took theribbon, the case, and the coat, flung them all on the floor in themiddle of the room, and said:—
“Carry those duds away.”

A full hour passed in the most profound silence. The old man and theold spinster had seated themselves with their backs to each other, andwere thinking, each on his own account, the same things, in allprobability.
At the expiration of this hour, Aunt Gillenormand said:—“A pretty stateof things!”

A few moments later, Marius made his appearance. He entered. Evenbefore he had crossed the threshold, he saw his grandfather holding oneof his own cards in his hand, and on catching sight of him, the latterexclaimed with his air of bourgeois and grinning superiority which wassomething crushing:—
“Well! well! well! well! well! so you are a baron now. I present you mycompliments. What is the meaning of this?”

Marius reddened slightly and replied:—
“It means that I am the son of my father.”

M. Gillenormand ceased to laugh, and said harshly:—
“I am your father.”

“My father,” retorted Marius, with downcast eyes and a severe air, “wasa humble and heroic man, who served the Republic and France gloriously,who was great in the greatest history that men have ever made, wholived in the bivouac for a quarter of a century, beneath grape-shot andbullets, in snow and mud by day, beneath rain at night, who capturedtwo flags, who received twenty wounds, who died forgotten andabandoned, and who never committed but one mistake, which was to lovetoo fondly two ingrates, his country and myself.”

This was more than M. Gillenormand could bear to hear. At the word_republic_, he rose, or, to speak more correctly, he sprang to hisfeet. Every word that Marius had just uttered produced on the visage ofthe old Royalist the effect of the puffs of air from a forge upon ablazing brand. From a dull hue he had turned red, from red, purple, andfrom purple, flame-colored.
“Marius!” he cried. “Abominable child! I do not know what your fatherwas! I do not wish to know! I know nothing about that, and I do notknow him! But what I do know is, that there never was anything butscoundrels among those men! They were all rascals, assassins, red-caps,thieves! I say all! I say all! I know not one! I say all! Do you hearme, Marius! See here, you are no more a baron than my slipper is! Theywere all bandits in the service of Robespierre! All who servedB-u-o-naparté were brigands! They were all traitors who betrayed,betrayed, betrayed their legitimate king! All cowards who fled beforethe Prussians and the English at Waterloo! That is what I do know!Whether Monsieur your father comes in that category, I do not know! Iam sorry for it, so much the worse, your humble servant!”

In his turn, it was Marius who was the firebrand and M. Gillenormandwho was the bellows. Marius quivered in every limb, he did not knowwhat would happen next, his brain was on fire. He was the priest whobeholds all his sacred wafers cast to the winds, the fakir who beholdsa passer-by spit upon his idol. It could not be that such things hadbeen uttered in his presence. What was he to do? His father had justbeen trampled under foot and stamped upon in his presence, but by whom?By his grandfather. How was he to avenge the one without outraging theother? It was impossible for him to insult his grandfather and it wasequally impossible for him to leave his father unavenged. On the onehand was a sacred grave, on the other hoary locks.
He stood there for several moments, staggering as though intoxicated,with all this whirlwind dashing through his head; then he raised hiseyes, gazed fixedly at his grandfather, and cried in a voice ofthunder:—
“Down with the Bourbons, and that great hog of a Louis XVIII.!”

Louis XVIII. had been dead for four years; but it was all the same tohim.
The old man, who had been crimson, turned whiter than his hair. Hewheeled round towards a bust of M. le Duc de Berry, which stood on thechimney-piece, and made a profound bow, with a sort of peculiarmajesty. Then he paced twice, slowly and in silence, from the fireplaceto the window and from the window to the fireplace, traversing thewhole length of the room, and making the polished floor creak as thoughhe had been a stone statue walking.
On his second turn, he bent over his daughter, who was watching thisencounter with the stupefied air of an antiquated lamb, and said to herwith a smile that was almost calm: “A baron like this gentleman, and abourgeois like myself cannot remain under the same roof.”

And drawing himself up, all at once, pallid, trembling, terrible, withhis brow rendered more lofty by the terrible radiance of wrath, heextended his arm towards Marius and shouted to him:—
“Be off!”

Marius left the house.
On the following day, M. Gillenormand said to his daughter:
“You will send sixty pistoles every six months to that blood-drinker,and you will never mention his name to me.”

Having an immense reserve fund of wrath to get rid of, and not knowingwhat to do with it, he continued to address his daughter as _you_instead of _thou_ for the next three months.
Marius, on his side, had gone forth in indignation. There was onecircumstance which, it must be admitted, aggravated his exasperation.There are always petty fatalities of the sort which complicate domesticdramas. They augment the grievances in such cases, although, inreality, the wrongs are not increased by them. While carrying Marius’“duds” precipitately to his chamber, at his grandfather’s command,Nicolette had, inadvertently, let fall, probably, on the atticstaircase, which was dark, that medallion of black shagreen whichcontained the paper penned by the colonel. Neither paper nor case couldafterwards be found. Marius was convinced that “MonsieurGillenormand”—from that day forth he never alluded to him otherwise—hadflung “his father’s testament” in the fire. He knew by heart the fewlines which the colonel had written, and, consequently, nothing waslost. But the paper, the writing, that sacred relic,—all that was hisvery heart. What had been done with it?
Marius had taken his departure without saying whither he was going, andwithout knowing where, with thirty francs, his watch, and a few clothesin a hand-bag. He had entered a hackney-coach, had engaged it by thehour, and had directed his course at hap-hazard towards the Latinquarter.
What was to become of Marius?



BOOK FOURTH—THE FRIENDS OF THE A B C



CHAPTER I—A GROUP WHICH BARELY MISSED BECOMING HISTORIC

At that epoch, which was, to all appearances indifferent, a certainrevolutionary quiver was vaguely current. Breaths which had startedforth from the depths of ’89 and ’93 were in the air. Youth was on thepoint, may the reader pardon us the word, of moulting. People wereundergoing a transformation, almost without being conscious of it,through the movement of the age. The needle which moves round thecompass also moves in souls. Each person was taking that step inadvance which he was bound to take. The Royalists were becomingliberals, liberals were turning democrats. It was a flood tidecomplicated with a thousand ebb movements; the peculiarity of ebbs isto create intermixtures; hence the combination of very singular ideas;people adored both Napoleon and liberty. We are making history here.These were the mirages of that period. Opinions traverse phases.Voltairian royalism, a quaint variety, had a no less singular sequel,Bonapartist liberalism.
Other groups of minds were more serious. In that direction, theysounded principles, they attached themselves to the right. They grewenthusiastic for the absolute, they caught glimpses of infiniterealizations; the absolute, by its very rigidity, urges spirits towardsthe sky and causes them to float in illimitable space. There is nothinglike dogma for bringing forth dreams. And there is nothing like dreamsfor engendering the future. Utopia to-day, flesh and blood to-morrow.
These advanced opinions had a double foundation. A beginning of mysterymenaced “the established order of things,” which was suspicious andunderhand. A sign which was revolutionary to the highest degree. Thesecond thoughts of power meet the second thoughts of the populace inthe mine. The incubation of insurrections gives the retort to thepremeditation of _coups d‘état_.
There did not, as yet, exist in France any of those vast underlyingorganizations, like the German _tugendbund_ and Italian Carbonarism;but here and there there were dark underminings, which were in processof throwing off shoots. The Cougourde was being outlined at Aix; thereexisted at Paris, among other affiliations of that nature, the societyof the Friends of the A B C.
What were these Friends of the A B C? A society which had for itsobject apparently the education of children, in reality the elevationof man.
They declared themselves the Friends of the A B C,—the _Abaissé_,—thedebased,—that is to say, the people. They wished to elevate the people.It was a pun which we should do wrong to smile at. Puns are sometimesserious factors in politics; witness the _Castratus ad castra_, whichmade a general of the army of Narses; witness: _Barbari et Barberini_;witness: _Tu es Petrus et super hanc petram_, etc., etc.
The Friends of the A B C were not numerous, it was a secret society inthe state of embryo, we might almost say a coterie, if coteries endedin heroes. They assembled in Paris in two localities, near thefish-market, in a wine-shop called _Corinthe_, of which more will beheard later on, and near the Pantheon in a little café in the RueSaint-Michel called the _Café Musain_, now torn down; the first ofthese meeting-places was close to the workingman, the second to thestudents.
The assemblies of the Friends of the A B C were usually held in a backroom of the Café Musain.
This hall, which was tolerably remote from the café, with which it wasconnected by an extremely long corridor, had two windows and an exitwith a private stairway on the little Rue des Grès. There they smokedand drank, and gambled and laughed. There they conversed in very loudtones about everything, and in whispers of other things. An old map ofFrance under the Republic was nailed to the wall,—a sign quitesufficient to excite the suspicion of a police agent.
The greater part of the Friends of the A B C were students, who were oncordial terms with the working classes. Here are the names of theprincipal ones. They belong, in a certain measure, to history:Enjolras, Combeferre, Jean Prouvaire, Feuilly, Courfeyrac, Bahorel,Lesgle or Laigle, Joly, Grantaire.
These young men formed a sort of family, through the bond offriendship. All, with the exception of Laigle, were from the South.

  Enlarge
Friends of the a B C  3b4-1-abc-friends

This was a remarkable group. It vanished in the invisible depths whichlie behind us. At the point of this drama which we have now reached, itwill not perhaps be superfluous to throw a ray of light upon theseyouthful heads, before the reader beholds them plunging into the shadowof a tragic adventure.
Enjolras, whose name we have mentioned first of all,—the reader shallsee why later on,—was an only son and wealthy.
Enjolras was a charming young man, who was capable of being terrible.He was angelically handsome. He was a savage Antinous. One would havesaid, to see the pensive thoughtfulness of his glance, that he hadalready, in some previous state of existence, traversed therevolutionary apocalypse. He possessed the tradition of it as though hehad been a witness. He was acquainted with all the minute details ofthe great affair. A pontifical and warlike nature, a singular thing ina youth. He was an officiating priest and a man of war; from theimmediate point of view, a soldier of the democracy; above thecontemporary movement, the priest of the ideal. His eyes were deep, hislids a little red, his lower lip was thick and easily becamedisdainful, his brow was lofty. A great deal of brow in a face is likea great deal of horizon in a view. Like certain young men at thebeginning of this century and the end of the last, who becameillustrious at an early age, he was endowed with excessive youth, andwas as rosy as a young girl, although subject to hours of pallor.Already a man, he still seemed a child. His two and twenty yearsappeared to be but seventeen; he was serious, it did not seem as thoughhe were aware there was on earth a thing called woman. He had but onepassion—the right; but one thought—to overthrow the obstacle. On MountAventine, he would have been Gracchus; in the Convention, he would havebeen Saint-Just. He hardly saw the roses, he ignored spring, he did nothear the carolling of the birds; the bare throat of Evadne would havemoved him no more than it would have moved Aristogeiton; he, likeHarmodius, thought flowers good for nothing except to conceal thesword. He was severe in his enjoyments. He chastely dropped his eyesbefore everything which was not the Republic. He was the marble loverof liberty. His speech was harshly inspired, and had the thrill of ahymn. He was subject to unexpected outbursts of soul. Woe to thelove-affair which should have risked itself beside him! If any grisetteof the Place Cambrai or the Rue Saint-Jean-de-Beauvais, seeing thatface of a youth escaped from college, that page’s mien, those long,golden lashes, those blue eyes, that hair billowing in the wind, thoserosy cheeks, those fresh lips, those exquisite teeth, had conceived anappetite for that complete aurora, and had tried her beauty onEnjolras, an astounding and terrible glance would have promptly shownher the abyss, and would have taught her not to confound the mightycherub of Ezekiel with the gallant Cherubino of Beaumarchais.
By the side of Enjolras, who represented the logic of the Revolution,Combeferre represented its philosophy. Between the logic of theRevolution and its philosophy there exists this difference—that itslogic may end in war, whereas its philosophy can end only in peace.Combeferre complemented and rectified Enjolras. He was less lofty, butbroader. He desired to pour into all minds the extensive principles ofgeneral ideas: he said: “Revolution, but civilization”; and around themountain peak he opened out a vast view of the blue sky. The Revolutionwas more adapted for breathing with Combeferre than with Enjolras.Enjolras expressed its divine right, and Combeferre its natural right.The first attached himself to Robespierre; the second confined himselfto Condorcet. Combeferre lived the life of all the rest of the worldmore than did Enjolras. If it had been granted to these two young mento attain to history, the one would have been the just, the other thewise man. Enjolras was the more virile, Combeferre the more humane._Homo_ and _vir_, that was the exact effect of their different shades.Combeferre was as gentle as Enjolras was severe, through naturalwhiteness. He loved the word _citizen_, but he preferred the word_man_. He would gladly have said: _Hombre_, like the Spanish. He readeverything, went to the theatres, attended the courses of publiclecturers, learned the polarization of light from Arago, grewenthusiastic over a lesson in which Geoffroy Sainte-Hilaire explainedthe double function of the external carotid artery, and the internal,the one which makes the face, and the one which makes the brain; hekept up with what was going on, followed science step by step, comparedSaint-Simon with Fourier, deciphered hieroglyphics, broke the pebblewhich he found and reasoned on geology, drew from memory a silkwormmoth, pointed out the faulty French in the Dictionary of the Academy,studied Puységur and Deleuze, affirmed nothing, not even miracles;denied nothing, not even ghosts; turned over the files of the_Moniteur_, reflected. He declared that the future lies in the hand ofthe schoolmaster, and busied himself with educational questions. Hedesired that society should labor without relaxation at the elevationof the moral and intellectual level, at coining science, at puttingideas into circulation, at increasing the mind in youthful persons, andhe feared lest the present poverty of method, the paltriness from aliterary point of view confined to two or three centuries calledclassic, the tyrannical dogmatism of official pedants, scholasticprejudices and routines should end by converting our colleges intoartificial oyster beds. He was learned, a purist, exact, a graduate ofthe Polytechnic, a close student, and at the same time, thoughtful“even to chimæras,” so his friends said. He believed in all dreams,railroads, the suppression of suffering in chirurgical operations, thefixing of images in the dark chamber, the electric telegraph, thesteering of balloons. Moreover, he was not much alarmed by the citadelserected against the human mind in every direction, by superstition,despotism, and prejudice. He was one of those who think that sciencewill eventually turn the position. Enjolras was a chief, Combeferre wasa guide. One would have liked to fight under the one and to marchbehind the other. It is not that Combeferre was not capable offighting, he did not refuse a hand-to-hand combat with the obstacle,and to attack it by main force and explosively; but it suited himbetter to bring the human race into accord with its destiny gradually,by means of education, the inculcation of axioms, the promulgation ofpositive laws; and, between two lights, his preference was rather forillumination than for conflagration. A conflagration can create anaurora, no doubt, but why not await the dawn? A volcano illuminates,but daybreak furnishes a still better illumination. Possibly,Combeferre preferred the whiteness of the beautiful to the blaze of thesublime. A light troubled by smoke, progress purchased at the expenseof violence, only half satisfied this tender and serious spirit. Theheadlong precipitation of a people into the truth, a ‘93, terrifiedhim; nevertheless, stagnation was still more repulsive to him, in it hedetected putrefaction and death; on the whole, he preferred scum tomiasma, and he preferred the torrent to the cesspool, and the falls ofNiagara to the lake of Montfaucon. In short, he desired neither haltnor haste. While his tumultuous friends, captivated by the absolute,adored and invoked splendid revolutionary adventures, Combeferre wasinclined to let progress, good progress, take its own course; he mayhave been cold, but he was pure; methodical, but irreproachable;phlegmatic, but imperturbable. Combeferre would have knelt and claspedhis hands to enable the future to arrive in all its candor, and thatnothing might disturb the immense and virtuous evolution of the races._The good must be innocent_, he repeated incessantly. And in fact, ifthe grandeur of the Revolution consists in keeping the dazzling idealfixedly in view, and of soaring thither athwart the lightnings, withfire and blood in its talons, the beauty of progress lies in beingspotless; and there exists between Washington, who represents the one,and Danton, who incarnates the other, that difference which separatesthe swan from the angel with the wings of an eagle.
Jean Prouvaire was a still softer shade than Combeferre. His name wasJehan, owing to that petty momentary freak which mingled with thepowerful and profound movement whence sprang the very essential studyof the Middle Ages. Jean Prouvaire was in love; he cultivated a pot offlowers, played on the flute, made verses, loved the people, pitiedwoman, wept over the child, confounded God and the future in the sameconfidence, and blamed the Revolution for having caused the fall of aroyal head, that of André Chénier. His voice was ordinarily delicate,but suddenly grew manly. He was learned even to erudition, and almostan Orientalist. Above all, he was good; and, a very simple thing tothose who know how nearly goodness borders on grandeur, in the matterof poetry, he preferred the immense. He knew Italian, Latin, Greek, andHebrew; and these served him only for the perusal of four poets: Dante,Juvenal, Æschylus, and Isaiah. In French, he preferred Corneille toRacine, and Agrippa d’Aubigné to Corneille. He loved to saunter throughfields of wild oats and corn-flowers, and busied himself with cloudsnearly as much as with events. His mind had two attitudes, one on theside towards man, the other on that towards God; he studied or hecontemplated. All day long, he buried himself in social questions,salary, capital, credit, marriage, religion, liberty of thought,education, penal servitude, poverty, association, property, productionand sharing, the enigma of this lower world which covers the humanant-hill with darkness; and at night, he gazed upon the planets, thoseenormous beings. Like Enjolras, he was wealthy and an only son. Hespoke softly, bowed his head, lowered his eyes, smiled withembarrassment, dressed badly, had an awkward air, blushed at a merenothing, and was very timid. Yet he was intrepid.
Feuilly was a workingman, a fan-maker, orphaned both of father andmother, who earned with difficulty three francs a day, and had but onethought, to deliver the world. He had one other preoccupation, toeducate himself; he called this also, delivering himself. He had taughthimself to read and write; everything that he knew, he had learned byhimself. Feuilly had a generous heart. The range of his embrace wasimmense. This orphan had adopted the peoples. As his mother had failedhim, he meditated on his country. He brooded with the profounddivination of the man of the people, over what we now call the _idea ofthe nationality_, had learned history with the express object of ragingwith full knowledge of the case. In this club of young Utopians,occupied chiefly with France, he represented the outside world. He hadfor his specialty Greece, Poland, Hungary, Roumania, Italy. He utteredthese names incessantly, appropriately and inappropriately, with thetenacity of right. The violations of Turkey on Greece and Thessaly, ofRussia on Warsaw, of Austria on Venice, enraged him. Above all things,the great violence of 1772 aroused him. There is no more sovereigneloquence than the true in indignation; he was eloquent with thateloquence. He was inexhaustible on that infamous date of 1772, on thesubject of that noble and valiant race suppressed by treason, and thatthree-sided crime, on that monstrous ambush, the prototype and patternof all those horrible suppressions of states, which, since that time,have struck many a noble nation, and have annulled their certificate ofbirth, so to speak. All contemporary social crimes have their origin inthe partition of Poland. The partition of Poland is a theorem of whichall present political outrages are the corollaries. There has not beena despot, nor a traitor for nearly a century back, who has not signed,approved, counter-signed, and copied, _ne variatur_, the partition ofPoland. When the record of modern treasons was examined, that was thefirst thing which made its appearance. The congress of Vienna consultedthat crime before consummating its own. 1772 sounded the onset; 1815was the death of the game. Such was Feuilly’s habitual text. This poorworkingman had constituted himself the tutor of Justice, and sherecompensed him by rendering him great. The fact is, that there iseternity in right. Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice can beTeuton. Kings lose their pains and their honor in the attempt to makethem so. Sooner or later, the submerged part floats to the surface andreappears. Greece becomes Greece again, Italy is once more Italy. Theprotest of right against the deed persists forever. The theft of anation cannot be allowed by prescription. These lofty deeds ofrascality have no future. A nation cannot have its mark extracted likea pocket handkerchief.
Courfeyrac had a father who was called M. de Courfeyrac. One of thefalse ideas of the bourgeoisie under the Restoration as regardsaristocracy and the nobility was to believe in the particle. Theparticle, as every one knows, possesses no significance. But thebourgeois of the epoch of _la Minerve_ estimated so highly that poor_de_, that they thought themselves bound to abdicate it. M. deChauvelin had himself called M. Chauvelin; M. de Caumartin, M.Caumartin; M. de Constant de Robecque, Benjamin Constant; M. deLafayette, M. Lafayette. Courfeyrac had not wished to remain behind therest, and called himself plain Courfeyrac.
We might almost, so far as Courfeyrac is concerned, stop here, andconfine ourselves to saying with regard to what remains: “ForCourfeyrac, see Tholomyès.”

Courfeyrac had, in fact, that animation of youth which may be calledthe _beauté du diable_ of the mind. Later on, this disappears like theplayfulness of the kitten, and all this grace ends, with the bourgeois,on two legs, and with the tomcat, on four paws.
This sort of wit is transmitted from generation to generation of thesuccessive levies of youth who traverse the schools, who pass it fromhand to hand, _quasi cursores_, and is almost always exactly the same;so that, as we have just pointed out, any one who had listened toCourfeyrac in 1828 would have thought he heard Tholomyès in 1817. Only,Courfeyrac was an honorable fellow. Beneath the apparent similaritiesof the exterior mind, the difference between him and Tholomyès was verygreat. The latent man which existed in the two was totally different inthe first from what it was in the second. There was in Tholomyès adistrict attorney, and in Courfeyrac a paladin.
Enjolras was the chief, Combeferre was the guide, Courfeyrac was thecentre. The others gave more light, he shed more warmth; the truth is,that he possessed all the qualities of a centre, roundness andradiance.
Bahorel had figured in the bloody tumult of June, 1822, on the occasionof the burial of young Lallemand.
Bahorel was a good-natured mortal, who kept bad company, brave, aspendthrift, prodigal, and to the verge of generosity, talkative, andat times eloquent, bold to the verge of effrontery; the best fellowpossible; he had daring waistcoats, and scarlet opinions; a wholesaleblusterer, that is to say, loving nothing so much as a quarrel, unlessit were an uprising; and nothing so much as an uprising, unless it werea revolution; always ready to smash a window-pane, then to tear up thepavement, then to demolish a government, just to see the effect of it;a student in his eleventh year. He had nosed about the law, but did notpractise it. He had taken for his device: “Never a lawyer,” and for hisarmorial bearings a nightstand in which was visible a square cap. Everytime that he passed the law-school, which rarely happened, he buttonedup his frock-coat,—the paletot had not yet been invented,—and tookhygienic precautions. Of the school porter he said: “What a fine oldman!” and of the dean, M. Delvincourt: “What a monument!” In hislectures he espied subjects for ballads, and in his professorsoccasions for caricature. He wasted a tolerably large allowance,something like three thousand francs a year, in doing nothing.
He had peasant parents whom he had contrived to imbue with respect fortheir son.
He said of them: “They are peasants and not bourgeois; that is thereason they are intelligent.”

Bahorel, a man of caprice, was scattered over numerous cafés; theothers had habits, he had none. He sauntered. To stray is human. Tosaunter is Parisian. In reality, he had a penetrating mind and was moreof a thinker than appeared to view.
He served as a connecting link between the Friends of the A B C andother still unorganized groups, which were destined to take form lateron.
In this conclave of young heads, there was one bald member.
The Marquis d’Avaray, whom Louis XVIII. made a duke for having assistedhim to enter a hackney-coach on the day when he emigrated, was wont torelate, that in 1814, on his return to France, as the King wasdisembarking at Calais, a man handed him a petition.
“What is your request?” said the King.
“Sire, a post-office.”

“What is your name?”

“L’Aigle.”

The King frowned, glanced at the signature of the petition and beheldthe name written thus: LESGLE. This non-Bonaparte orthography touchedthe King and he began to smile. “Sire,” resumed the man with thepetition, “I had for ancestor a keeper of the hounds surnamedLesgueules. This surname furnished my name. I am called Lesgueules, bycontraction Lesgle, and by corruption l’Aigle.” This caused the King tosmile broadly. Later on he gave the man the posting office of Meaux,either intentionally or accidentally.
The bald member of the group was the son of this Lesgle, or Légle, andhe signed himself, Légle [de Meaux]. As an abbreviation, his companionscalled him Bossuet.
Bossuet was a gay but unlucky fellow. His specialty was not to succeedin anything. As an offset, he laughed at everything. At five and twentyhe was bald. His father had ended by owning a house and a field; buthe, the son, had made haste to lose that house and field in a badspeculation. He had nothing left. He possessed knowledge and wit, butall he did miscarried. Everything failed him and everybody deceivedhim; what he was building tumbled down on top of him. If he weresplitting wood, he cut off a finger. If he had a mistress, he speedilydiscovered that he had a friend also. Some misfortune happened to himevery moment, hence his joviality. He said: “I live under fallingtiles.” He was not easily astonished, because, for him, an accident waswhat he had foreseen, he took his bad luck serenely, and smiled at theteasing of fate, like a person who is listening to pleasantries. He waspoor, but his fund of good humor was inexhaustible. He soon reached hislast sou, never his last burst of laughter. When adversity entered hisdoors, he saluted this old acquaintance cordially, he tapped allcatastrophes on the stomach; he was familiar with fatality to the pointof calling it by its nickname: “Good day, Guignon,” he said to it.
These persecutions of fate had rendered him inventive. He was full ofresources. He had no money, but he found means, when it seemed good tohim, to indulge in “unbridled extravagance.” One night, he went so faras to eat a “hundred francs” in a supper with a wench, which inspiredhim to make this memorable remark in the midst of the orgy: “Pull offmy boots, you five-louis jade.”

Bossuet was slowly directing his steps towards the profession of alawyer; he was pursuing his law studies after the manner of Bahorel.Bossuet had not much domicile, sometimes none at all. He lodged nowwith one, now with another, most often with Joly. Joly was studyingmedicine. He was two years younger than Bossuet.
Joly was the “malade imaginaire” junior. What he had won in medicinewas to be more of an invalid than a doctor. At three and twenty hethought himself a valetudinarian, and passed his life in inspecting histongue in the mirror. He affirmed that man becomes magnetic like aneedle, and in his chamber he placed his bed with its head to thesouth, and the foot to the north, so that, at night, the circulation ofhis blood might not be interfered with by the great electric current ofthe globe. During thunder storms, he felt his pulse. Otherwise, he wasthe gayest of them all. All these young, maniacal, puny, merryincoherences lived in harmony together, and the result was an eccentricand agreeable being whom his comrades, who were prodigal of wingedconsonants, called Jolllly. “You may fly away on the four _L’s_,” JeanProuvaire said to him.23
Joly had a trick of touching his nose with the tip of his cane, whichis an indication of a sagacious mind.
All these young men who differed so greatly, and who, on the whole, canonly be discussed seriously, held the same religion: Progress.
All were the direct sons of the French Revolution. The most giddy ofthem became solemn when they pronounced that date: ’89. Their fathersin the flesh had been, either royalists, doctrinaires, it matters notwhat; this confusion anterior to themselves, who were young, did notconcern them at all; the pure blood of principle ran in their veins.They attached themselves, without intermediate shades, to incorruptibleright and absolute duty.
Affiliated and initiated, they sketched out the ideal underground.
Among all these glowing hearts and thoroughly convinced minds, therewas one sceptic. How came he there? By juxtaposition. This sceptic’sname was Grantaire, and he was in the habit of signing himself withthis rebus: R. Grantaire was a man who took good care not to believe inanything. Moreover, he was one of the students who had learned the mostduring their course at Paris; he knew that the best coffee was to behad at the Café Lemblin, and the best billiards at the Café Voltaire,that good cakes and lasses were to be found at the Ermitage, on theBoulevard du Maine, spatchcocked chickens at Mother Sauget’s, excellentmatelotes at the Barrière de la Cunette, and a certain thin white wineat the Barrière du Compat. He knew the best place for everything; inaddition, boxing and foot-fencing and some dances; and he was athorough single-stick player. He was a tremendous drinker to boot. Hewas inordinately homely: the prettiest boot-stitcher of that day, IrmaBoissy, enraged with his homeliness, pronounced sentence on him asfollows: “Grantaire is impossible”; but Grantaire’s fatuity was not tobe disconcerted. He stared tenderly and fixedly at all women, with theair of saying to them all: “If I only chose!” and of trying to make hiscomrades believe that he was in general demand.
All those words: rights of the people, rights of man, the socialcontract, the French Revolution, the Republic, democracy, humanity,civilization, religion, progress, came very near to signifying nothingwhatever to Grantaire. He smiled at them. Scepticism, that caries ofthe intelligence, had not left him a single whole idea. He lived withirony. This was his axiom: “There is but one certainty, my full glass.”He sneered at all devotion in all parties, the father as well as thebrother, Robespierre junior as well as Loizerolles. “They are greatlyin advance to be dead,” he exclaimed. He said of the crucifix: “Thereis a gibbet which has been a success.” A rover, a gambler, a libertine,often drunk, he displeased these young dreamers by humming incessantly:“J’aimons les filles, et j’aimons le bon vin.” Air: Vive Henri IV.
However, this sceptic had one fanaticism. This fanaticism was neither adogma, nor an idea, nor an art, nor a science; it was a man: Enjolras.Grantaire admired, loved, and venerated Enjolras. To whom did thisanarchical scoffer unite himself in this phalanx of absolute minds? Tothe most absolute. In what manner had Enjolras subjugated him? By hisideas? No. By his character. A phenomenon which is often observable. Asceptic who adheres to a believer is as simple as the law ofcomplementary colors. That which we lack attracts us. No one loves thelight like the blind man. The dwarf adores the drum-major. The toadalways has his eyes fixed on heaven. Why? In order to watch the bird inits flight. Grantaire, in whom writhed doubt, loved to watch faith soarin Enjolras. He had need of Enjolras. That chaste, healthy, firm,upright, hard, candid nature charmed him, without his being clearlyaware of it, and without the idea of explaining it to himself havingoccurred to him. He admired his opposite by instinct. His soft,yielding, dislocated, sickly, shapeless ideas attached themselves toEnjolras as to a spinal column. His moral backbone leaned on thatfirmness. Grantaire in the presence of Enjolras became some one oncemore. He was, himself, moreover, composed of two elements, which were,to all appearance, incompatible. He was ironical and cordial. Hisindifference loved. His mind could get along without belief, but hisheart could not get along without friendship. A profound contradiction;for an affection is a conviction. His nature was thus constituted.There are men who seem to be born to be the reverse, the obverse, thewrong side. They are Pollux, Patrocles, Nisus, Eudamidas, Ephestion,Pechmeja. They only exist on condition that they are backed up withanother man; their name is a sequel, and is only written preceded bythe conjunction _and_; and their existence is not their own; it is theother side of an existence which is not theirs. Grantaire was one ofthese men. He was the obverse of Enjolras.
One might almost say that affinities begin with the letters of thealphabet. In the series O and P are inseparable. You can, at will,pronounce O and P or Orestes and Pylades.
Grantaire, Enjolras’ true satellite, inhabited this circle of youngmen; he lived there, he took no pleasure anywhere but there; hefollowed them everywhere. His joy was to see these forms go and comethrough the fumes of wine. They tolerated him on account of his goodhumor.
Enjolras, the believer, disdained this sceptic; and, a sober manhimself, scorned this drunkard. He accorded him a little lofty pity.Grantaire was an unaccepted Pylades. Always harshly treated byEnjolras, roughly repulsed, rejected yet ever returning to the charge,he said of Enjolras: “What fine marble!”




CHAPTER II—BLONDEAU’S FUNERAL ORATION BY BOSSUET

On a certain afternoon, which had, as will be seen hereafter, somecoincidence with the events heretofore related, Laigle de Meaux was tobe seen leaning in a sensual manner against the doorpost of the CaféMusain. He had the air of a caryatid on a vacation; he carried nothingbut his reverie, however. He was staring at the Place Saint-Michel. Tolean one’s back against a thing is equivalent to lying down whilestanding erect, which attitude is not hated by thinkers. Laigle deMeaux was pondering without melancholy, over a little misadventurewhich had befallen him two days previously at the law-school, and whichhad modified his personal plans for the future, plans which were ratherindistinct in any case.
Reverie does not prevent a cab from passing by, nor the dreamer fromtaking note of that cab. Laigle de Meaux, whose eyes were strayingabout in a sort of diffuse lounging, perceived, athwart hissomnambulism, a two-wheeled vehicle proceeding through the place, at afoot pace and apparently in indecision. For whom was this cabriolet?Why was it driving at a walk? Laigle took a survey. In it, beside thecoachman, sat a young man, and in front of the young man lay a ratherbulky hand-bag. The bag displayed to passers-by the following nameinscribed in large black letters on a card which was sewn to the stuff:MARIUS PONTMERCY.
This name caused Laigle to change his attitude. He drew himself up andhurled this apostrophe at the young man in the cabriolet:—
“Monsieur Marius Pontmercy!”

The cabriolet thus addressed came to a halt.
The young man, who also seemed deeply buried in thought, raised hiseyes:—
“Hey?” said he.
“You are M. Marius Pontmercy?”

“Certainly.”

“I was looking for you,” resumed Laigle de Meaux.
“How so?” demanded Marius; for it was he: in fact, he had just quittedhis grandfather’s, and had before him a face which he now beheld forthe first time. “I do not know you.”

“Neither do I know you,” responded Laigle.
Marius thought he had encountered a wag, the beginning of amystification in the open street. He was not in a very good humor atthe moment. He frowned. Laigle de Meaux went on imperturbably:—
“You were not at the school day before yesterday.”

“That is possible.”

“That is certain.”

“You are a student?” demanded Marius.
“Yes, sir. Like yourself. Day before yesterday, I entered the school,by chance. You know, one does have such freaks sometimes. The professorwas just calling the roll. You are not unaware that they are veryridiculous on such occasions. At the third call, unanswered, your nameis erased from the list. Sixty francs in the gulf.”

Marius began to listen.
“It was Blondeau who was making the call. You know Blondeau, he has avery pointed and very malicious nose, and he delights to scent out theabsent. He slyly began with the letter P. I was not listening, notbeing compromised by that letter. The call was not going badly. Noerasures; the universe was present. Blondeau was grieved. I said tomyself: ‘Blondeau, my love, you will not get the very smallest sort ofan execution to-day.’ All at once Blondeau calls, ‘Marius Pontmercy!’No one answers. Blondeau, filled with hope, repeats more loudly:‘Marius Pontmercy!’ And he takes his pen. Monsieur, I have bowels ofcompassion. I said to myself hastily: ‘Here’s a brave fellow who isgoing to get scratched out. Attention. Here is a veritable mortal whois not exact. He’s not a good student. Here is none of yourheavy-sides, a student who studies, a greenhorn pedant, strong onletters, theology, science, and sapience, one of those dull wits cut bythe square; a pin by profession. He is an honorable idler who lounges,who practises country jaunts, who cultivates the grisette, who payscourt to the fair sex, who is at this very moment, perhaps, with mymistress. Let us save him. Death to Blondeau!’ At that moment, Blondeaudipped his pen in, all black with erasures in the ink, cast his yelloweyes round the audience room, and repeated for the third time: ‘MariusPontmercy!’ I replied: ‘Present!’ This is why you were not crossedoff.”

“Monsieur!—” said Marius.
“And why I was,” added Laigle de Meaux.
“I do not understand you,” said Marius.
Laigle resumed:—
“Nothing is more simple. I was close to the desk to reply, and close tothe door for the purpose of flight. The professor gazed at me with acertain intensity. All of a sudden, Blondeau, who must be the maliciousnose alluded to by Boileau, skipped to the letter L. L is my letter. Iam from Meaux, and my name is Lesgle.”

“L’Aigle!” interrupted Marius, “what fine name!”

“Monsieur, Blondeau came to this fine name, and called: ‘Laigle!’ Ireply: ‘Present!’ Then Blondeau gazes at me, with the gentleness of atiger, and says to me: ‘If you are Pontmercy, you are not Laigle.’ Aphrase which has a disobliging air for you, but which was lugubriousonly for me. That said, he crossed me off.”

Marius exclaimed:—
“I am mortified, sir—”

“First of all,” interposed Laigle, “I demand permission to embalmBlondeau in a few phrases of deeply felt eulogium. I will assume thathe is dead. There will be no great change required in his gauntness, inhis pallor, in his coldness, and in his smell. And I say: ‘_Erudiminiqui judicatis terram_. Here lies Blondeau, Blondeau the Nose, BlondeauNasica, the ox of discipline, _bos disciplinæ_, the bloodhound of thepassword, the angel of the roll-call, who was upright, square, exact,rigid, honest, and hideous. God crossed him off as he crossed me off.’”

Marius resumed:—
“I am very sorry—”

“Young man,” said Laigle de Meaux, “let this serve you as a lesson. Infuture, be exact.”

“I really beg you a thousand pardons.”

“Do not expose your neighbor to the danger of having his name erasedagain.”

“I am extremely sorry—”

Laigle burst out laughing.
“And I am delighted. I was on the brink of becoming a lawyer. Thiserasure saves me. I renounce the triumphs of the bar. I shall notdefend the widow, and I shall not attack the orphan. No more toga, nomore stage. Here is my erasure all ready for me. It is to you that I amindebted for it, Monsieur Pontmercy. I intend to pay a solemn call ofthanks upon you. Where do you live?”

“In this cab,” said Marius.
“A sign of opulence,” retorted Laigle calmly. “I congratulate you. Youhave there a rent of nine thousand francs per annum.”

At that moment, Courfeyrac emerged from the café.
Marius smiled sadly.
“I have paid this rent for the last two hours, and I aspire to get ridof it; but there is a sort of history attached to it, and I don’t knowwhere to go.”

“Come to my place, sir,” said Courfeyrac.
“I have the priority,” observed Laigle, “but I have no home.”

“Hold your tongue, Bossuet,” said Courfeyrac.
“Bossuet,” said Marius, “but I thought that your name was Laigle.”

“De Meaux,” replied Laigle; “by metaphor, Bossuet.”

Courfeyrac entered the cab.
“Coachman,” said he, “hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques.”

And that very evening, Marius found himself installed in a chamber ofthe hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques side by side with Courfeyrac.



CHAPTER III—MARIUS’ ASTONISHMENTS

In a few days, Marius had become Courfeyrac’s friend. Youth is theseason for prompt welding and the rapid healing of scars. Mariusbreathed freely in Courfeyrac’s society, a decidedly new thing for him.Courfeyrac put no questions to him. He did not even think of such athing. At that age, faces disclose everything on the spot. Words aresuperfluous. There are young men of whom it can be said that theircountenances chatter. One looks at them and one knows them.
One morning, however, Courfeyrac abruptly addressed this interrogationto him:—
“By the way, have you any political opinions?”

“The idea!” said Marius, almost affronted by the question.
“What are you?”

“A democrat-Bonapartist.”

“The gray hue of a reassured rat,” said Courfeyrac.
On the following day, Courfeyrac introduced Marius at the Café Musain.Then he whispered in his ear, with a smile: “I must give you your entryto the revolution.” And he led him to the hall of the Friends of the AB C. He presented him to the other comrades, saying this simple wordwhich Marius did not understand: “A pupil.”

Marius had fallen into a wasps’-nest of wits. However, although he wassilent and grave, he was, nonetheless, both winged and armed.
Marius, up to that time solitary and inclined to soliloquy, and toasides, both by habit and by taste, was a little fluttered by thiscovey of young men around him. All these various initiatives solicitedhis attention at once, and pulled him about. The tumultuous movementsof these minds at liberty and at work set his ideas in a whirl.Sometimes, in his trouble, they fled so far from him, that he haddifficulty in recovering them. He heard them talk of philosophy, ofliterature, of art, of history, of religion, in unexpected fashion. Hecaught glimpses of strange aspects; and, as he did not place them inproper perspective, he was not altogether sure that it was not chaosthat he grasped. On abandoning his grandfather’s opinions for theopinions of his father, he had supposed himself fixed; he nowsuspected, with uneasiness, and without daring to avow it to himself,that he was not. The angle at which he saw everything began to bedisplaced anew. A certain oscillation set all the horizons of hisbrains in motion. An odd internal upsetting. He almost suffered fromit.
It seemed as though there were no “consecrated things” for those youngmen. Marius heard singular propositions on every sort of subject, whichembarrassed his still timid mind.
A theatre poster presented itself, adorned with the title of a tragedyfrom the ancient repertory called classic: “Down with tragedy dear tothe bourgeois!” cried Bahorel. And Marius heard Combeferre reply:—
“You are wrong, Bahorel. The bourgeoisie loves tragedy, and thebourgeoisie must be left at peace on that score. Bewigged tragedy has areason for its existence, and I am not one of those who, by order ofÆschylus, contest its right to existence. There are rough outlines innature; there are, in creation, ready-made parodies; a beak which isnot a beak, wings which are not wings, gills which are not gills, pawswhich are not paws, a cry of pain which arouses a desire to laugh,there is the duck. Now, since poultry exists by the side of the bird, Ido not see why classic tragedy should not exist in the face of antiquetragedy.”

Or chance decreed that Marius should traverse Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseaubetween Enjolras and Courfeyrac.
Courfeyrac took his arm:—
“Pay attention. This is the Rue Plâtrière, now called Rue Jean-JacquesRousseau, on account of a singular household which lived in it sixtyyears ago. This consisted of Jean-Jacques and Thérèse. From time totime, little beings were born there. Thérèse gave birth to them,Jean-Jacques represented them as foundlings.”

And Enjolras addressed Courfeyrac roughly:—
“Silence in the presence of Jean-Jacques! I admire that man. He deniedhis own children, that may be; but he adopted the people.”

Not one of these young men articulated the word: The Emperor. JeanProuvaire alone sometimes said Napoleon; all the others said“Bonaparte.” Enjolras pronounced it “Buonaparte.”

Marius was vaguely surprised. _Initium sapientiæ_.



CHAPTER IV—THE BACK ROOM OF THE CAFÉ MUSAIN

One of the conversations among the young men, at which Marius waspresent and in which he sometimes joined, was a veritable shock to hismind.
This took place in the back room of the Café Musain. Nearly all theFriends of the A B C had convened that evening. The argand lamp wassolemnly lighted. They talked of one thing and another, without passionand with noise. With the exception of Enjolras and Marius, who heldtheir peace, all were haranguing rather at hap-hazard. Conversationsbetween comrades sometimes are subject to these peaceable tumults. Itwas a game and an uproar as much as a conversation. They tossed wordsto each other and caught them up in turn. They were chattering in allquarters.
No woman was admitted to this back room, except Louison, thedish-washer of the café, who passed through it from time to time, to goto her washing in the “lavatory.”

Grantaire, thoroughly drunk, was deafening the corner of which he hadtaken possession, reasoning and contradicting at the top of his lungs,and shouting:—
“I am thirsty. Mortals, I am dreaming: that the tun of Heidelberg hasan attack of apoplexy, and that I am one of the dozen leeches whichwill be applied to it. I want a drink. I desire to forget life. Life isa hideous invention of I know not whom. It lasts no time at all, and isworth nothing. One breaks one’s neck in living. Life is a theatre setin which there are but few practicable entrances. Happiness is anantique reliquary painted on one side only. Ecclesiastes says: ‘All isvanity.’ I agree with that good man, who never existed, perhaps. Zeronot wishing to go stark naked, clothed himself in vanity. O vanity! Thepatching up of everything with big words! a kitchen is a laboratory, adancer is a professor, an acrobat is a gymnast, a boxer is a pugilist,an apothecary is a chemist, a wigmaker is an artist, a hodman is anarchitect, a jockey is a sportsman, a wood-louse is a pterigybranche.Vanity has a right and a wrong side; the right side is stupid, it isthe negro with his glass beads; the wrong side is foolish, it is thephilosopher with his rags. I weep over the one and I laugh over theother. What are called honors and dignities, and even dignity andhonor, are generally of pinchbeck. Kings make playthings of humanpride. Caligula made a horse a consul; Charles II. made a knight of asirloin. Wrap yourself up now, then, between Consul Incitatus andBaronet Roastbeef. As for the intrinsic value of people, it is nolonger respectable in the least. Listen to the panegyric which neighbormakes of neighbor. White on white is ferocious; if the lily couldspeak, what a setting down it would give the dove! A bigoted womanprating of a devout woman is more venomous than the asp and the cobra.It is a shame that I am ignorant, otherwise I would quote to you a massof things; but I know nothing. For instance, I have always been witty;when I was a pupil of Gros, instead of daubing wretched littlepictures, I passed my time in pilfering apples; _rapin_24 is themasculine of _rapine_. So much for myself; as for the rest of you, youare worth no more than I am. I scoff at your perfections, excellencies,and qualities. Every good quality tends towards a defect; economyborders on avarice, the generous man is next door to the prodigal, thebrave man rubs elbows with the braggart; he who says very pious says atrifle bigoted; there are just as many vices in virtue as there areholes in Diogenes’ cloak. Whom do you admire, the slain or the slayer,Cæsar or Brutus? Generally men are in favor of the slayer. Long liveBrutus, he has slain! There lies the virtue. Virtue, granted, butmadness also. There are queer spots on those great men. The Brutus whokilled Cæsar was in love with the statue of a little boy. This statuewas from the hand of the Greek sculptor Strongylion, who also carvedthat figure of an Amazon known as the Beautiful Leg, Eucnemos, whichNero carried with him in his travels. This Strongylion left but twostatues which placed Nero and Brutus in accord. Brutus was in love withthe one, Nero with the other. All history is nothing but wearisomerepetition. One century is the plagiarist of the other. The battle ofMarengo copies the battle of Pydna; the Tolbiac of Clovis and theAusterlitz of Napoleon are as like each other as two drops of water. Idon’t attach much importance to victory. Nothing is so stupid as toconquer; true glory lies in convincing. But try to prove something! Ifyou are content with success, what mediocrity, and with conquering,what wretchedness! Alas, vanity and cowardice everywhere. Everythingobeys success, even grammar. _Si volet usus_, says Horace. Therefore Idisdain the human race. Shall we descend to the party at all? Do youwish me to begin admiring the peoples? What people, if you please?Shall it be Greece? The Athenians, those Parisians of days gone by,slew Phocion, as we might say Coligny, and fawned upon tyrants to suchan extent that Anacephorus said of Pisistratus: “His urine attracts thebees.” The most prominent man in Greece for fifty years was thatgrammarian Philetas, who was so small and so thin that he was obligedto load his shoes with lead in order not to be blown away by the wind.There stood on the great square in Corinth a statue carved by Silanionand catalogued by Pliny; this statue represented Episthates. What didEpisthates do? He invented a trip. That sums up Greece and glory. Letus pass on to others. Shall I admire England? Shall I admire France?France? Why? Because of Paris? I have just told you my opinion ofAthens. England? Why? Because of London? I hate Carthage. And then,London, the metropolis of luxury, is the headquarters of wretchedness.There are a hundred deaths a year of hunger in the parish ofCharing-Cross alone. Such is Albion. I add, as the climax, that I haveseen an Englishwoman dancing in a wreath of roses and blue spectacles.A fig then for England! If I do not admire John Bull, shall I admireBrother Jonathan? I have but little taste for that slave-holdingbrother. Take away _Time is money_, what remains of England? Take away_Cotton is king_, what remains of America? Germany is the lymph, Italyis the bile. Shall we go into ecstasies over Russia? Voltaire admiredit. He also admired China. I admit that Russia has its beauties, amongothers, a stout despotism; but I pity the despots. Their health isdelicate. A decapitated Alexis, a poignarded Peter, a strangled Paul,another Paul crushed flat with kicks, divers Ivans strangled, withtheir throats cut, numerous Nicholases and Basils poisoned, all thisindicates that the palace of the Emperors of Russia is in a conditionof flagrant insalubrity. All civilized peoples offer this detail to theadmiration of the thinker; war; now, war, civilized war, exhausts andsums up all the forms of ruffianism, from the brigandage of theTrabuceros in the gorges of Mont Jaxa to the marauding of the ComancheIndians in the Doubtful Pass. ‘Bah!’ you will say to me, ‘but Europe iscertainly better than Asia?’ I admit that Asia is a farce; but I do notprecisely see what you find to laugh at in the Grand Lama, you peoplesof the west, who have mingled with your fashions and your elegances allthe complicated filth of majesty, from the dirty chemise of QueenIsabella to the chamber-chair of the Dauphin. Gentlemen of the humanrace, I tell you, not a bit of it! It is at Brussels that the most beeris consumed, at Stockholm the most brandy, at Madrid the mostchocolate, at Amsterdam the most gin, at London the most wine, atConstantinople the most coffee, at Paris the most absinthe; there areall the useful notions. Paris carries the day, in short. In Paris, eventhe rag-pickers are sybarites; Diogenes would have loved to be arag-picker of the Place Maubert better than to be a philosopher at thePiræus. Learn this in addition; the wineshops of the rag-pickers arecalled _bibines_; the most celebrated are the _Saucepan_ and _TheSlaughter-House_. Hence, tea-gardens, goguettes, caboulots, bouibuis,mastroquets, bastringues, manezingues, bibines of the rag-pickers,caravanseries of the caliphs, I certify to you, I am a voluptuary, Ieat at Richard’s at forty sous a head, I must have Persian carpets toroll naked Cleopatra in! Where is Cleopatra? Ah! So it is you, Louison.Good day.”

Thus did Grantaire, more than intoxicated, launch into speech, catchingat the dish-washer in her passage, from his corner in the back room ofthe Café Musain.
Bossuet, extending his hand towards him, tried to impose silence onhim, and Grantaire began again worse than ever:—
“Aigle de Meaux, down with your paws. You produce on me no effect withyour gesture of Hippocrates refusing Artaxerxes’ bric-à-brac. I excuseyou from the task of soothing me. Moreover, I am sad. What do you wishme to say to you? Man is evil, man is deformed; the butterfly is asuccess, man is a failure. God made a mistake with that animal. A crowdoffers a choice of ugliness. The first comer is a wretch,_Femme_—woman—rhymes with _infâme_,—infamous. Yes, I have the spleen,complicated with melancholy, with homesickness, plus hypochondria, andI am vexed and I rage, and I yawn, and I am bored, and I am tired todeath, and I am stupid! Let God go to the devil!”

“Silence then, capital R!” resumed Bossuet, who was discussing a pointof law behind the scenes, and who was plunged more than waist high in aphrase of judicial slang, of which this is the conclusion:—
“—And as for me, although I am hardly a legist, and at the most, anamateur attorney, I maintain this: that, in accordance with the termsof the customs of Normandy, at Saint-Michel, and for each year, anequivalent must be paid to the profit of the lord of the manor, savingthe rights of others, and by all and several, the proprietors as wellas those seized with inheritance, and that, for all emphyteuses,leases, freeholds, contracts of domain, mortgages—”

“Echo, plaintive nymph,” hummed Grantaire.
Near Grantaire, an almost silent table, a sheet of paper, an inkstandand a pen between two glasses of brandy, announced that a vaudevillewas being sketched out.
This great affair was being discussed in a low voice, and the two headsat work touched each other: “Let us begin by finding names. When onehas the names, one finds the subject.”

“That is true. Dictate. I will write.”

“Monsieur Dorimon.”

“An independent gentleman?”

“Of course.”

“His daughter, Célestine.”

“—tine. What next?”

“Colonel Sainval.”

“Sainval is stale. I should say Valsin.”

Beside the vaudeville aspirants, another group, which was also takingadvantage of the uproar to talk low, was discussing a duel. An oldfellow of thirty was counselling a young one of eighteen, andexplaining to him what sort of an adversary he had to deal with.
“The deuce! Look out for yourself. He is a fine swordsman. His play isneat. He has the attack, no wasted feints, wrist, dash, lightning, ajust parade, mathematical parries, _bigre!_ and he is left-handed.”

In the angle opposite Grantaire, Joly and Bahorel were playingdominoes, and talking of love.
“You are in luck, that you are,” Joly was saying. “You have a mistresswho is always laughing.”

“That is a fault of hers,” returned Bahorel. “One’s mistress does wrongto laugh. That encourages one to deceive her. To see her gay removesyour remorse; if you see her sad, your conscience pricks you.”

“Ingrate! a woman who laughs is such a good thing! And you neverquarrel!”

“That is because of the treaty which we have made. On forming ourlittle Holy Alliance we assigned ourselves each our frontier, which wenever cross. What is situated on the side of winter belongs to Vaud, onthe side of the wind to Gex. Hence the peace.”

“Peace is happiness digesting.”

“And you, Jolllly, where do you stand in your entanglement withMamselle—you know whom I mean?”

“She sulks at me with cruel patience.”

“Yet you are a lover to soften the heart with gauntness.”

“Alas!”

“In your place, I would let her alone.”

“That is easy enough to say.”

“And to do. Is not her name Musichetta?”

“Yes. Ah! my poor Bahorel, she is a superb girl, very literary, withtiny feet, little hands, she dresses well, and is white and dimpled,with the eyes of a fortune-teller. I am wild over her.”

“My dear fellow, then in order to please her, you must be elegant, andproduce effects with your knees. Buy a good pair of trousers ofdouble-milled cloth at Staub’s. That will assist.”

“At what price?” shouted Grantaire.
The third corner was delivered up to a poetical discussion. Paganmythology was giving battle to Christian mythology. The question wasabout Olympus, whose part was taken by Jean Prouvaire, out of pureromanticism.
Jean Prouvaire was timid only in repose. Once excited, he burst forth,a sort of mirth accentuated his enthusiasm, and he was at once bothlaughing and lyric.
“Let us not insult the gods,” said he. “The gods may not have takentheir departure. Jupiter does not impress me as dead. The gods aredreams, you say. Well, even in nature, such as it is to-day, after theflight of these dreams, we still find all the grand old pagan myths.Such and such a mountain with the profile of a citadel, like theVignemale, for example, is still to me the headdress of Cybele; it hasnot been proved to me that Pan does not come at night to breathe intothe hollow trunks of the willows, stopping up the holes in turn withhis fingers, and I have always believed that Io had something to dowith the cascade of Pissevache.”

In the last corner, they were talking politics. The Charter which hadbeen granted was getting roughly handled. Combeferre was upholding itweakly. Courfeyrac was energetically making a breach in it. On thetable lay an unfortunate copy of the famous Touquet Charter. Courfeyrachad seized it, and was brandishing it, mingling with his arguments therattling of this sheet of paper.
“In the first place, I won’t have any kings; if it were only from aneconomical point of view, I don’t want any; a king is a parasite. Onedoes not have kings gratis. Listen to this: the dearness of kings. Atthe death of François I., the national debt of France amounted to anincome of thirty thousand livres; at the death of Louis XIV. it was twomilliards, six hundred millions, at twenty-eight livres the mark, whichwas equivalent in 1760, according to Desmarets, to four milliards, fivehundred millions, which would to-day be equivalent to twelve milliards.In the second place, and no offence to Combeferre, a charter granted isbut a poor expedient of civilization. To save the transition, to softenthe passage, to deaden the shock, to cause the nation to passinsensibly from the monarchy to democracy by the practice ofconstitutional fictions,—what detestable reasons all those are! No! no!let us never enlighten the people with false daylight. Principlesdwindle and pale in your constitutional cellar. No illegitimacy, nocompromise, no grant from the king to the people. In all such grantsthere is an Article 14. By the side of the hand which gives there isthe claw which snatches back. I refuse your charter point-blank. Acharter is a mask; the lie lurks beneath it. A people which accepts acharter abdicates. The law is only the law when entire. No! nocharter!”

It was winter; a couple of fagots were crackling in the fireplace. Thiswas tempting, and Courfeyrac could not resist. He crumpled the poorTouquet Charter in his fist, and flung it in the fire. The paperflashed up. Combeferre watched the masterpiece of Louis XVIII. burnphilosophically, and contented himself with saying:—
“The charter metamorphosed into flame.”

And sarcasms, sallies, jests, that French thing which is called_entrain_, and that English thing which is called humor, good and badtaste, good and bad reasons, all the wild pyrotechnics of dialogue,mounting together and crossing from all points of the room, produced asort of merry bombardment over their heads.



CHAPTER V—ENLARGEMENT OF HORIZON

The shocks of youthful minds among themselves have this admirableproperty, that one can never foresee the spark, nor divine thelightning flash. What will dart out presently? No one knows. The burstof laughter starts from a tender feeling.
At the moment of jest, the serious makes its entry. Impulses depend onthe first chance word. The spirit of each is sovereign, jest sufficesto open the field to the unexpected. These are conversations withabrupt turns, in which the perspective changes suddenly. Chance is thestage-manager of such conversations.
A severe thought, starting oddly from a clash of words, suddenlytraversed the conflict of quips in which Grantaire, Bahorel, Prouvaire,Bossuet, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac were confusedly fencing.
How does a phrase crop up in a dialogue? Whence comes it that itsuddenly impresses itself on the attention of those who hear it? Wehave just said, that no one knows anything about it. In the midst ofthe uproar, Bossuet all at once terminated some apostrophe toCombeferre, with this date:—
“June 18th, 1815, Waterloo.”

At this name of Waterloo, Marius, who was leaning his elbows on atable, beside a glass of water, removed his wrist from beneath hischin, and began to gaze fixedly at the audience.
“Pardieu!” exclaimed Courfeyrac (“Parbleu” was falling into disuse atthis period), “that number 18 is strange and strikes me. It isBonaparte’s fatal number. Place Louis in front and Brumaire behind, youhave the whole destiny of the man, with this significant peculiarity,that the end treads close on the heels of the commencement.”

Enjolras, who had remained mute up to that point, broke the silence andaddressed this remark to Combeferre:—
“You mean to say, the crime and the expiation.”

This word _crime_ overpassed the measure of what Marius, who wasalready greatly agitated by the abrupt evocation of Waterloo, couldaccept.
He rose, walked slowly to the map of France spread out on the wall, andat whose base an island was visible in a separate compartment, laid hisfinger on this compartment and said:—
“Corsica, a little island which has rendered France very great.”

This was like a breath of icy air. All ceased talking. They felt thatsomething was on the point of occurring.
Bahorel, replying to Bossuet, was just assuming an attitude of thetorso to which he was addicted. He gave it up to listen.
Enjolras, whose blue eye was not fixed on any one, and who seemed to begazing at space, replied, without glancing at Marius:—
“France needs no Corsica to be great. France is great because she isFrance. _Quia nomina leo_.”

Marius felt no desire to retreat; he turned towards Enjolras, and hisvoice burst forth with a vibration which came from a quiver of his verybeing:—
“God forbid that I should diminish France! But amalgamating Napoleonwith her is not diminishing her. Come! let us argue the question. I ama newcomer among you, but I will confess that you amaze me. Where do westand? Who are we? Who are you? Who am I? Let us come to an explanationabout the Emperor. I hear you say _Buonaparte_, accenting the _u_ likethe Royalists. I warn you that my grandfather does better still; hesays _Buonaparté_’. I thought you were young men. Where, then, is yourenthusiasm? And what are you doing with it? Whom do you admire, if youdo not admire the Emperor? And what more do you want? If you will havenone of that great man, what great men would you like? He hadeverything. He was complete. He had in his brain the sum of humanfaculties. He made codes like Justinian, he dictated like Cæsar, hisconversation was mingled with the lightning-flash of Pascal, with thethunderclap of Tacitus, he made history and he wrote it, his bulletinsare Iliads, he combined the cipher of Newton with the metaphor ofMahomet, he left behind him in the East words as great as the pyramids,at Tilsit he taught Emperors majesty, at the Academy of Sciences hereplied to Laplace, in the Council of State he held his own againstMerlin, he gave a soul to the geometry of the first, and to thechicanery of the last, he was a legist with the attorneys and siderealwith the astronomers; like Cromwell blowing out one of two candles, hewent to the Temple to bargain for a curtain tassel; he saw everything;he knew everything; which did not prevent him from laughinggood-naturedly beside the cradle of his little child; and all at once,frightened Europe lent an ear, armies put themselves in motion, parksof artillery rumbled, pontoons stretched over the rivers, clouds ofcavalry galloped in the storm, cries, trumpets, a trembling of thronesin every direction, the frontiers of kingdoms oscillated on the map,the sound of a superhuman sword was heard, as it was drawn from itssheath; they beheld him, him, rise erect on the horizon with a blazingbrand in his hand, and a glow in his eyes, unfolding amid the thunder,his two wings, the grand army and the old guard, and he was thearchangel of war!”

All held their peace, and Enjolras bowed his head. Silence alwaysproduces somewhat the effect of acquiescence, of the enemy being drivento the wall. Marius continued with increased enthusiasm, and almostwithout pausing for breath:—
“Let us be just, my friends! What a splendid destiny for a nation to bethe Empire of such an Emperor, when that nation is France and when itadds its own genius to the genius of that man! To appear and to reign,to march and to triumph, to have for halting-places all capitals, totake his grenadiers and to make kings of them, to decree the falls ofdynasties, and to transfigure Europe at the pace of a charge; to makeyou feel that when you threaten you lay your hand on the hilt of thesword of God; to follow in a single man, Hannibal, Cæsar, Charlemagne;to be the people of some one who mingles with your dawns the startlingannouncement of a battle won, to have the cannon of the Invalides torouse you in the morning, to hurl into abysses of light prodigiouswords which flame forever, Marengo, Arcola, Austerlitz, Jena, Wagram!To cause constellations of victories to flash forth at each instantfrom the zenith of the centuries, to make the French Empire a pendantto the Roman Empire, to be the great nation and to give birth to thegrand army, to make its legions fly forth over all the earth, as amountain sends out its eagles on all sides to conquer, to dominate, tostrike with lightning, to be in Europe a sort of nation gilded throughglory, to sound athwart the centuries a trumpet-blast of Titans, toconquer the world twice, by conquest and by dazzling, that is sublime;and what greater thing is there?”

“To be free,” said Combeferre.
Marius lowered his head in his turn; that cold and simple word hadtraversed his epic effusion like a blade of steel, and he felt itvanishing within him. When he raised his eyes, Combeferre was no longerthere. Probably satisfied with his reply to the apotheosis, he had justtaken his departure, and all, with the exception of Enjolras, hadfollowed him. The room had been emptied. Enjolras, left alone withMarius, was gazing gravely at him. Marius, however, having rallied hisideas to some extent, did not consider himself beaten; there lingeredin him a trace of inward fermentation which was on the point, no doubt,of translating itself into syllogisms arrayed against Enjolras, whenall of a sudden, they heard some one singing on the stairs as he went.It was Combeferre, and this is what he was singing:—
“Si César m’avait donnéLa gloire et la guerre,Et qu’il me fallait quitterL’amour de ma mère,Je dirais au grand César:Reprends ton sceptre et ton char,J’aime mieux ma mère, ô gué!J’aime mieux ma mère!”25

The wild and tender accents with which Combeferre sang communicated tothis couplet a sort of strange grandeur. Marius, thoughtfully, and withhis eyes diked on the ceiling, repeated almost mechanically: “Mymother?—”

At that moment, he felt Enjolras’ hand on his shoulder.
“Citizen,” said Enjolras to him, “my mother is the Republic.”




CHAPTER VI—RES ANGUSTA

That evening left Marius profoundly shaken, and with a melancholyshadow in his soul. He felt what the earth may possibly feel, at themoment when it is torn open with the iron, in order that grain may bedeposited within it; it feels only the wound; the quiver of the germand the joy of the fruit only arrive later.
Marius was gloomy. He had but just acquired a faith; must he thenreject it already? He affirmed to himself that he would not. Hedeclared to himself that he would not doubt, and he began to doubt inspite of himself. To stand between two religions, from one of which youhave not as yet emerged, and another into which you have not yetentered, is intolerable; and twilight is pleasing only to bat-likesouls. Marius was clear-eyed, and he required the true light. Thehalf-lights of doubt pained him. Whatever may have been his desire toremain where he was, he could not halt there, he was irresistiblyconstrained to continue, to advance, to examine, to think, to marchfurther. Whither would this lead him? He feared, after having taken somany steps which had brought him nearer to his father, to now take astep which should estrange him from that father. His discomfort wasaugmented by all the reflections which occurred to him. An escarpmentrose around him. He was in accord neither with his grandfather nor withhis friends; daring in the eyes of the one, he was behind the times inthe eyes of the others, and he recognized the fact that he was doublyisolated, on the side of age and on the side of youth. He ceased to goto the Café Musain.
In the troubled state of his conscience, he no longer thought ofcertain serious sides of existence. The realities of life do not allowthemselves to be forgotten. They soon elbowed him abruptly.
One morning, the proprietor of the hotel entered Marius’ room and saidto him:—
“Monsieur Courfeyrac answered for you.”

“Yes.”

“But I must have my money.”

“Request Courfeyrac to come and talk with me,” said Marius.
Courfeyrac having made his appearance, the host left them. Marius thentold him what it had not before occurred to him to relate, that he wasthe same as alone in the world, and had no relatives.
“What is to become of you?” said Courfeyrac.
“I do not know in the least,” replied Marius.
“What are you going to do?”

“I do not know.”

“Have you any money?”

“Fifteen francs.”

“Do you want me to lend you some?”

“Never.”

“Have you clothes?”

“Here is what I have.”

“Have you trinkets?”

“A watch.”

“Silver?”

“Gold; here it is.”

“I know a clothes-dealer who will take your frock-coat and a pair oftrousers.”

“That is good.”

“You will then have only a pair of trousers, a waistcoat, a hat and acoat.”

“And my boots.”

“What! you will not go barefoot? What opulence!”

“That will be enough.”

“I know a watchmaker who will buy your watch.”

“That is good.”

“No; it is not good. What will you do after that?”

“Whatever is necessary. Anything honest, that is to say.”

“Do you know English?”

“No.”

“Do you know German?”

“No.”

“So much the worse.”

“Why?”

“Because one of my friends, a publisher, is getting up a sort of anencyclopædia, for which you might have translated English or Germanarticles. It is badly paid work, but one can live by it.”

“I will learn English and German.”

“And in the meanwhile?”

“In the meanwhile I will live on my clothes and my watch.”

The clothes-dealer was sent for. He paid twenty francs for the cast-offgarments. They went to the watchmaker’s. He bought the watch forforty-five francs.
“That is not bad,” said Marius to Courfeyrac, on their return to thehotel, “with my fifteen francs, that makes eighty.”

“And the hotel bill?” observed Courfeyrac.
“Hello, I had forgotten that,” said Marius.
The landlord presented his bill, which had to be paid on the spot. Itamounted to seventy francs.
“I have ten francs left,” said Marius.
“The deuce,” exclaimed Courfeyrac, “you will eat up five francs whileyou are learning English, and five while learning German. That will beswallowing a tongue very fast, or a hundred sous very slowly.”

In the meantime Aunt Gillenormand, a rather good-hearted person atbottom in difficulties, had finally hunted up Marius’ abode.
One morning, on his return from the law-school, Marius found a letterfrom his aunt, and the _sixty pistoles_, that is to say, six hundredfrancs in gold, in a sealed box.
Marius sent back the thirty louis to his aunt, with a respectfulletter, in which he stated that he had sufficient means of subsistenceand that he should be able thenceforth to supply all his needs. At thatmoment, he had three francs left.
His aunt did not inform his grandfather of this refusal for fear ofexasperating him. Besides, had he not said: “Let me never hear the nameof that blood-drinker again!”

Marius left the hotel de la Porte Saint-Jacques, as he did not wish torun in debt there.



BOOK FIFTH—THE EXCELLENCE OF MISFORTUNE



CHAPTER I—MARIUS INDIGENT


  Enlarge
Excellence of Misfortune  3b5-1-misfortune

Life became hard for Marius. It was nothing to eat his clothes and hiswatch. He ate of that terrible, inexpressible thing that is called _dela vache enragé_; that is to say, he endured great hardships andprivations. A terrible thing it is, containing days without bread,nights without sleep, evenings without a candle, a hearth without afire, weeks without work, a future without hope, a coat out at theelbows, an old hat which evokes the laughter of young girls, a doorwhich one finds locked on one at night because one’s rent is not paid,the insolence of the porter and the cook-shop man, the sneers ofneighbors, humiliations, dignity trampled on, work of whatever natureaccepted, disgusts, bitterness, despondency. Marius learned how allthis is eaten, and how such are often the only things which one has todevour. At that moment of his existence when a man needs his pride,because he needs love, he felt that he was jeered at because he wasbadly dressed, and ridiculous because he was poor. At the age whenyouth swells the heart with imperial pride, he dropped his eyes morethan once on his dilapidated boots, and he knew the unjust shame andthe poignant blushes of wretchedness. Admirable and terrible trial fromwhich the feeble emerge base, from which the strong emerge sublime. Acrucible into which destiny casts a man, whenever it desires ascoundrel or a demi-god.
For many great deeds are performed in petty combats. There areinstances of bravery ignored and obstinate, which defend themselvesstep by step in that fatal onslaught of necessities and turpitudes.Noble and mysterious triumphs which no eye beholds, which are requitedwith no renown, which are saluted with no trumpet blast. Life,misfortune, isolation, abandonment, poverty, are the fields of battlewhich have their heroes; obscure heroes, who are, sometimes, granderthan the heroes who win renown.
Firm and rare natures are thus created; misery, almost always astep-mother, is sometimes a mother; destitution gives birth to might ofsoul and spirit; distress is the nurse of pride; unhappiness is a goodmilk for the magnanimous.
There came a moment in Marius’ life, when he swept his own landing,when he bought his sou’s worth of Brie cheese at the fruiterer’s, whenhe waited until twilight had fallen to slip into the baker’s andpurchase a loaf, which he carried off furtively to his attic as thoughhe had stolen it. Sometimes there could be seen gliding into thebutcher’s shop on the corner, in the midst of the bantering cooks whoelbowed him, an awkward young man, carrying big books under his arm,who had a timid yet angry air, who, on entering, removed his hat from abrow whereon stood drops of perspiration, made a profound bow to thebutcher’s astonished wife, asked for a mutton cutlet, paid six or sevensous for it, wrapped it up in a paper, put it under his arm, betweentwo books, and went away. It was Marius. On this cutlet, which hecooked for himself, he lived for three days.
On the first day he ate the meat, on the second he ate the fat, on thethird he gnawed the bone. Aunt Gillenormand made repeated attempts, andsent him the sixty pistoles several times. Marius returned them onevery occasion, saying that he needed nothing.
He was still in mourning for his father when the revolution which wehave just described was effected within him. From that time forth, hehad not put off his black garments. But his garments were quitting him.The day came when he had no longer a coat. The trousers would go next.What was to be done? Courfeyrac, to whom he had, on his side, done somegood turns, gave him an old coat. For thirty sous, Marius got it turnedby some porter or other, and it was a new coat. But this coat wasgreen. Then Marius ceased to go out until after nightfall. This madehis coat black. As he wished always to appear in mourning, he clothedhimself with the night.
In spite of all this, he got admitted to practice as a lawyer. He wassupposed to live in Courfeyrac’s room, which was decent, and where acertain number of law-books backed up and completed by severaldilapidated volumes of romance, passed as the library required by theregulations. He had his letters addressed to Courfeyrac’s quarters.
When Marius became a lawyer, he informed his grandfather of the fact ina letter which was cold but full of submission and respect. M.Gillenormand trembled as he took the letter, read it, tore it in fourpieces, and threw it into the waste-basket. Two or three days later,Mademoiselle Gillenormand heard her father, who was alone in his room,talking aloud to himself. He always did this whenever he was greatlyagitated. She listened, and the old man was saying: “If you were not afool, you would know that one cannot be a baron and a lawyer at thesame time.”




CHAPTER II—MARIUS POOR

It is the same with wretchedness as with everything else. It ends bybecoming bearable. It finally assumes a form, and adjusts itself. Onevegetates, that is to say, one develops in a certain meagre fashion,which is, however, sufficient for life. This is the mode in which theexistence of Marius Pontmercy was arranged:
He had passed the worst straits; the narrow pass was opening out alittle in front of him. By dint of toil, perseverance, courage, andwill, he had managed to draw from his work about seven hundred francs ayear. He had learned German and English; thanks to Courfeyrac, who hadput him in communication with his friend the publisher, Marius filledthe modest post of utility man in the literature of the publishinghouse. He drew up prospectuses, translated newspapers, annotatededitions, compiled biographies, etc.; net product, year in and yearout, seven hundred francs. He lived on it. How? Not so badly. We willexplain.
Marius occupied in the Gorbeau house, for an annual sum of thirtyfrancs, a den minus a fireplace, called a cabinet, which contained onlythe most indispensable articles of furniture. This furniture belongedto him. He gave three francs a month to the old _principal tenant_ tocome and sweep his hole, and to bring him a little hot water everymorning, a fresh egg, and a penny roll. He breakfasted on this egg androll. His breakfast varied in cost from two to four sous, according aseggs were dear or cheap. At six o’clock in the evening he descended theRue Saint-Jacques to dine at Rousseau’s, opposite Basset’s, thestamp-dealer’s, on the corner of the Rue des Mathurins. He ate no soup.He took a six-sou plate of meat, a half-portion of vegetables for threesous, and a three-sou dessert. For three sous he got as much bread ashe wished. As for wine, he drank water. When he paid at the desk whereMadam Rousseau, at that period still plump and rosy majesticallypresided, he gave a sou to the waiter, and Madam Rousseau gave him asmile. Then he went away. For sixteen sous he had a smile and a dinner.
This Restaurant Rousseau, where so few bottles and so many watercarafes were emptied, was a calming potion rather than a restaurant. Itno longer exists. The proprietor had a fine nickname: he was called_Rousseau the Aquatic_.
Thus, breakfast four sous, dinner sixteen sous; his food cost himtwenty sous a day; which made three hundred and sixty-five francs ayear. Add the thirty francs for rent, and the thirty-six francs to theold woman, plus a few trifling expenses; for four hundred and fiftyfrancs, Marius was fed, lodged, and waited on. His clothing cost him ahundred francs, his linen fifty francs, his washing fifty francs; thewhole did not exceed six hundred and fifty francs. He was rich. Hesometimes lent ten francs to a friend. Courfeyrac had once been able toborrow sixty francs of him. As far as fire was concerned, as Marius hadno fireplace, he had “simplified matters.”

Marius always had two complete suits of clothes, the one old, “forevery day”; the other, brand new for special occasions. Both wereblack. He had but three shirts, one on his person, the second in thecommode, and the third in the washerwoman’s hands. He renewed them asthey wore out. They were always ragged, which caused him to button hiscoat to the chin.
It had required years for Marius to attain to this flourishingcondition. Hard years; difficult, some of them, to traverse, others toclimb. Marius had not failed for a single day. He had enduredeverything in the way of destitution; he had done everything exceptcontract debts. He did himself the justice to say that he had neverowed any one a sou. A debt was, to him, the beginning of slavery. Heeven said to himself, that a creditor is worse than a master; for themaster possesses only your person, a creditor possesses your dignityand can administer to it a box on the ear. Rather than borrow, he wentwithout food. He had passed many a day fasting. Feeling that allextremes meet, and that, if one is not on one’s guard, lowered fortunesmay lead to baseness of soul, he kept a jealous watch on his pride.Such and such a formality or action, which, in any other situationwould have appeared merely a deference to him, now seemed insipidity,and he nerved himself against it. His face wore a sort of severe flush.He was timid even to rudeness.
During all these trials he had felt himself encouraged and evenuplifted, at times, by a secret force that he possessed within himself.The soul aids the body, and at certain moments, raises it. It is theonly bird which bears up its own cage.
Besides his father’s name, another name was graven in Marius’ heart,the name of Thénardier. Marius, with his grave and enthusiastic nature,surrounded with a sort of aureole the man to whom, in his thoughts, heowed his father’s life,—that intrepid sergeant who had saved thecolonel amid the bullets and the cannon-balls of Waterloo. He neverseparated the memory of this man from the memory of his father, and heassociated them in his veneration. It was a sort of worship in twosteps, with the grand altar for the colonel and the lesser one forThénardier. What redoubled the tenderness of his gratitude towardsThénardier, was the idea of the distress into which he knew thatThénardier had fallen, and which had engulfed the latter. Marius hadlearned at Montfermeil of the ruin and bankruptcy of the unfortunateinn-keeper. Since that time, he had made unheard-of efforts to findtraces of him and to reach him in that dark abyss of misery in whichThénardier had disappeared. Marius had beaten the whole country; he hadgone to Chelles, to Bondy, to Gourney, to Nogent, to Lagny. He hadpersisted for three years, expending in these explorations the littlemoney which he had laid by. No one had been able to give him any newsof Thénardier: he was supposed to have gone abroad. His creditors hadalso sought him, with less love than Marius, but with as muchassiduity, and had not been able to lay their hands on him. Mariusblamed himself, and was almost angry with himself for his lack ofsuccess in his researches. It was the only debt left him by thecolonel, and Marius made it a matter of honor to pay it. “What,” hethought, “when my father lay dying on the field of battle, didThénardier contrive to find him amid the smoke and the grape-shot, andbear him off on his shoulders, and yet he owed him nothing, and I, whoowe so much to Thénardier, cannot join him in this shadow where he islying in the pangs of death, and in my turn bring him back from deathto life! Oh! I will find him!” To find Thénardier, in fact, Mariuswould have given one of his arms, to rescue him from his misery, hewould have sacrificed all his blood. To see Thénardier, to renderThénardier some service, to say to him: “You do not know me; well, I doknow you! Here I am. Dispose of me!” This was Marius’ sweetest and mostmagnificent dream.



CHAPTER III—MARIUS GROWN UP

At this epoch, Marius was twenty years of age. It was three years sincehe had left his grandfather. Both parties had remained on the sameterms, without attempting to approach each other, and without seekingto see each other. Besides, what was the use of seeing each other?Marius was the brass vase, while Father Gillenormand was the iron pot.
We admit that Marius was mistaken as to his grandfather’s heart. He hadimagined that M. Gillenormand had never loved him, and that thatcrusty, harsh, and smiling old fellow who cursed, shouted, and stormedand brandished his cane, cherished for him, at the most, only thataffection, which is at once slight and severe, of the dotards ofcomedy. Marius was in error. There are fathers who do not love theirchildren; there exists no grandfather who does not adore his grandson.At bottom, as we have said, M. Gillenormand idolized Marius. Heidolized him after his own fashion, with an accompaniment ofsnappishness and boxes on the ear; but, this child once gone, he felt ablack void in his heart; he would allow no one to mention the child tohim, and all the while secretly regretted that he was so well obeyed.At first, he hoped that this Buonapartist, this Jacobin, thisterrorist, this Septembrist, would return. But the weeks passed by,years passed; to M. Gillenormand’s great despair, the “blood-drinker”did not make his appearance. “I could not do otherwise than turn himout,” said the grandfather to himself, and he asked himself: “If thething were to do over again, would I do it?” His pride instantlyanswered “yes,” but his aged head, which he shook in silence, repliedsadly “no.” He had his hours of depression. He missed Marius. Old menneed affection as they need the sun. It is warmth. Strong as his naturewas, the absence of Marius had wrought some change in him. Nothing inthe world could have induced him to take a step towards “that rogue”;but he suffered. He never inquired about him, but he thought of himincessantly. He lived in the Marais in a more and more retired manner;he was still merry and violent as of old, but his merriment had aconvulsive harshness, and his violences always terminated in a sort ofgentle and gloomy dejection. He sometimes said: “Oh! if he only wouldreturn, what a good box on the ear I would give him!”

As for his aunt, she thought too little to love much; Marius was nolonger for her much more than a vague black form; and she eventuallycame to occupy herself with him much less than with the cat or theparoquet which she probably had. What augmented Father Gillenormand’ssecret suffering was, that he locked it all up within his breast, anddid not allow its existence to be divined. His sorrow was like thoserecently invented furnaces which consume their own smoke. It sometimeshappened that officious busybodies spoke to him of Marius, and askedhim: “What is your grandson doing?” “What has become of him?” The oldbourgeois replied with a sigh, that he was a sad case, and giving afillip to his cuff, if he wished to appear gay: “Monsieur le Baron dePontmercy is practising pettifogging in some corner or other.”

While the old man regretted, Marius applauded himself. As is the casewith all good-hearted people, misfortune had eradicated his bitterness.He only thought of M. Gillenormand in an amiable light, but he had sethis mind on not receiving anything more from the man who _had beenunkind to his father_. This was the mitigated translation of his firstindignation. Moreover, he was happy at having suffered, and atsuffering still. It was for his father’s sake. The hardness of his lifesatisfied and pleased him. He said to himself with a sort of joy that—_it was certainly the least he could do_; that it was anexpiation;—that, had it not been for that, he would have been punishedin some other way and later on for his impious indifference towards hisfather, and such a father! that it would not have been just that hisfather should have all the suffering, and he none of it; and that, inany case, what were his toils and his destitution compared with thecolonel’s heroic life? that, in short, the only way for him to approachhis father and resemble him, was to be brave in the face of indigence,as the other had been valiant before the enemy; and that that was, nodoubt, what the colonel had meant to imply by the words: “He will beworthy of it.” Words which Marius continued to wear, not on his breast,since the colonel’s writing had disappeared, but in his heart.
And then, on the day when his grandfather had turned him out of doors,he had been only a child, now he was a man. He felt it. Misery, werepeat, had been good for him. Poverty in youth, when it succeeds, hasthis magnificent property about it, that it turns the whole willtowards effort, and the whole soul towards aspiration. Povertyinstantly lays material life bare and renders it hideous; henceinexpressible bounds towards the ideal life. The wealthy young man hasa hundred coarse and brilliant distractions, horse races, hunting,dogs, tobacco, gaming, good repasts, and all the rest of it;occupations for the baser side of the soul, at the expense of theloftier and more delicate sides. The poor young man wins his bread withdifficulty; he eats; when he has eaten, he has nothing more butmeditation. He goes to the spectacles which God furnishes gratis; hegazes at the sky, space, the stars, flowers, children, the humanityamong which he is suffering, the creation amid which he beams. He gazesso much on humanity that he perceives its soul, he gazes upon creationto such an extent that he beholds God. He dreams, he feels himselfgreat; he dreams on, and feels himself tender. From the egotism of theman who suffers he passes to the compassion of the man who meditates.An admirable sentiment breaks forth in him, forgetfulness of self andpity for all. As he thinks of the innumerable enjoyments which natureoffers, gives, and lavishes to souls which stand open, and refuses tosouls that are closed, he comes to pity, he the millionnaire of themind, the millionnaire of money. All hatred departs from his heart, inproportion as light penetrates his spirit. And is he unhappy? No. Themisery of a young man is never miserable. The first young lad who comesto hand, however poor he may be, with his strength, his health, hisrapid walk, his brilliant eyes, his warmly circulating blood, his blackhair, his red lips, his white teeth, his pure breath, will alwaysarouse the envy of an aged emperor. And then, every morning, he setshimself afresh to the task of earning his bread; and while his handsearn his bread, his dorsal column gains pride, his brain gathers ideas.His task finished, he returns to ineffable ecstasies, to contemplation,to joys; he beholds his feet set in afflictions, in obstacles, on thepavement, in the nettles, sometimes in the mire; his head in the light.He is firm, serene, gentle, peaceful, attentive, serious, content withlittle, kindly; and he thanks God for having bestowed on him those twoforms of riches which many a rich man lacks: work, which makes himfree; and thought, which makes him dignified.
This is what had happened with Marius. To tell the truth, he inclined alittle too much to the side of contemplation. From the day when he hadsucceeded in earning his living with some approach to certainty, he hadstopped, thinking it good to be poor, and retrenching time from hiswork to give to thought; that is to say, he sometimes passed entiredays in meditation, absorbed, engulfed, like a visionary, in the mutevoluptuousness of ecstasy and inward radiance. He had thus propoundedthe problem of his life: to toil as little as possible at materiallabor, in order to toil as much as possible at the labor which isimpalpable; in other words, to bestow a few hours on real life, and tocast the rest to the infinite. As he believed that he lacked nothing,he did not perceive that contemplation, thus understood, ends bybecoming one of the forms of idleness; that he was contenting himselfwith conquering the first necessities of life, and that he was restingfrom his labors too soon.
It was evident that, for this energetic and enthusiastic nature, thiscould only be a transitory state, and that, at the first shock againstthe inevitable complications of destiny, Marius would awaken.
In the meantime, although he was a lawyer, and whatever FatherGillenormand thought about the matter, he was not practising, he wasnot even pettifogging. Meditation had turned him aside from pleading.To haunt attorneys, to follow the court, to hunt up cases—what a bore!Why should he do it? He saw no reason for changing the manner ofgaining his livelihood! The obscure and ill-paid publishingestablishment had come to mean for him a sure source of work which didnot involve too much labor, as we have explained, and which sufficedfor his wants.
One of the publishers for whom he worked, M. Magimel, I think, offeredto take him into his own house, to lodge him well, to furnish him withregular occupation, and to give him fifteen hundred francs a year. Tobe well lodged! Fifteen hundred francs! No doubt. But renounce hisliberty! Be on fixed wages! A sort of hired man of letters! Accordingto Marius’ opinion, if he accepted, his position would become bothbetter and worse at the same time, he acquired comfort, and lost hisdignity; it was a fine and complete unhappiness converted into arepulsive and ridiculous state of torture: something like the case of ablind man who should recover the sight of one eye. He refused.
Marius dwelt in solitude. Owing to his taste for remaining outside ofeverything, and through having been too much alarmed, he had notentered decidedly into the group presided over by Enjolras. They hadremained good friends; they were ready to assist each other on occasionin every possible way; but nothing more. Marius had two friends: oneyoung, Courfeyrac; and one old, M. Mabeuf. He inclined more to the oldman. In the first place, he owed to him the revolution which had takenplace within him; to him he was indebted for having known and loved hisfather. “He operated on me for a cataract,” he said.
The churchwarden had certainly played a decisive part.
It was not, however, that M. Mabeuf had been anything but the calm andimpassive agent of Providence in this connection. He had enlightenedMarius by chance and without being aware of the fact, as does a candlewhich some one brings; he had been the candle and not the some one.
As for Marius’ inward political revolution, M. Mabeuf was totallyincapable of comprehending it, of willing or of directing it.
As we shall see M. Mabeuf again, later on, a few words will not besuperfluous.



CHAPTER IV—M. MABEUF

On the day when M. Mabeuf said to Marius: “Certainly I approve ofpolitical opinions,” he expressed the real state of his mind. Allpolitical opinions were matters of indifference to him, and he approvedthem all, without distinction, provided they left him in peace, as theGreeks called the Furies “the beautiful, the good, the charming,” theEumenides. M. Mabeuf’s political opinion consisted in a passionate lovefor plants, and, above all, for books. Like all the rest of the world,he possessed the termination in _ist_, without which no one could existat that time, but he was neither a Royalist, a Bonapartist, a Chartist,an Orleanist, nor an Anarchist; he was a _bouquinist_, a collector ofold books. He did not understand how men could busy themselves withhating each other because of silly stuff like the charter, democracy,legitimacy, monarchy, the republic, etc., when there were in the worldall sorts of mosses, grasses, and shrubs which they might be lookingat, and heaps of folios, and even of 32mos, which they might turn over.He took good care not to become useless; having books did not preventhis reading, being a botanist did not prevent his being a gardener.When he made Pontmercy’s acquaintance, this sympathy had existedbetween the colonel and himself—that what the colonel did for flowers,he did for fruits. M. Mabeuf had succeeded in producing seedling pearsas savory as the pears of St. Germain; it is from one of hiscombinations, apparently, that the October Mirabelle, now celebratedand no less perfumed than the summer Mirabelle, owes its origin. Hewent to mass rather from gentleness than from piety, and because, as heloved the faces of men, but hated their noise, he found them assembledand silent only in church. Feeling that he must be something in theState, he had chosen the career of warden. However, he had neversucceeded in loving any woman as much as a tulip bulb, nor any man asmuch as an Elzevir. He had long passed sixty, when, one day, some oneasked him: “Have you never been married?” “I have forgotten,” said he.When it sometimes happened to him—and to whom does it not happen?—tosay: “Oh! if I were only rich!” it was not when ogling a pretty girl,as was the case with Father Gillenormand, but when contemplating an oldbook. He lived alone with an old housekeeper. He was somewhat gouty,and when he was asleep, his aged fingers, stiffened with rheumatism,lay crooked up in the folds of his sheets. He had composed andpublished a _Flora of the Environs of Cauteretz_, with colored plates,a work which enjoyed a tolerable measure of esteem and which sold well.People rang his bell, in the Rue Mésières, two or three times a day, toask for it. He drew as much as two thousand francs a year from it; thisconstituted nearly the whole of his fortune. Although poor, he had hadthe talent to form for himself, by dint of patience, privations, andtime, a precious collection of rare copies of every sort. He never wentout without a book under his arm, and he often returned with two. Thesole decoration of the four rooms on the ground floor, which composedhis lodgings, consisted of framed herbariums, and engravings of the oldmasters. The sight of a sword or a gun chilled his blood. He had neverapproached a cannon in his life, even at the Invalides. He had apassable stomach, a brother who was a curé, perfectly white hair, noteeth, either in his mouth or his mind, a trembling in every limb, aPicard accent, an infantile laugh, the air of an old sheep, and he waseasily frightened. Add to this, that he had no other friendship, noother acquaintance among the living, than an old bookseller of thePorte-Saint-Jacques, named Royal. His dream was to naturalize indigo inFrance.
His servant was also a sort of innocent. The poor good old woman was aspinster. Sultan, her cat, which might have mewed Allegri’s miserere inthe Sixtine Chapel, had filled her heart and sufficed for the quantityof passion which existed in her. None of her dreams had ever proceededas far as man. She had never been able to get further than her cat.Like him, she had a moustache. Her glory consisted in her caps, whichwere always white. She passed her time, on Sundays, after mass, incounting over the linen in her chest, and in spreading out on her bedthe dresses in the piece which she bought and never had made up. Sheknew how to read. M. Mabeuf had nicknamed her Mother Plutarque.
M. Mabeuf had taken a fancy to Marius, because Marius, being young andgentle, warmed his age without startling his timidity. Youth combinedwith gentleness produces on old people the effect of the sun withoutwind. When Marius was saturated with military glory, with gunpowder,with marches and countermarches, and with all those prodigious battlesin which his father had given and received such tremendous blows of thesword, he went to see M. Mabeuf, and M. Mabeuf talked to him of hishero from the point of view of flowers.
His brother the curé died about 1830, and almost immediately, as whenthe night is drawing on, the whole horizon grew dark for M. Mabeuf. Anotary’s failure deprived him of the sum of ten thousand francs, whichwas all that he possessed in his brother’s right and his own. TheRevolution of July brought a crisis to publishing. In a period ofembarrassment, the first thing which does not sell is a _Flora. TheFlora of the Environs of Cauteretz_ stopped short. Weeks passed bywithout a single purchaser. Sometimes M. Mabeuf started at the sound ofthe bell. “Monsieur,” said Mother Plutarque sadly, “it is thewater-carrier.” In short, one day, M. Mabeuf quitted the Rue Mésières,abdicated the functions of warden, gave up Saint-Sulpice, sold not apart of his books, but of his prints,—that to which he was the leastattached,—and installed himself in a little house on the RueMontparnasse, where, however, he remained but one quarter for tworeasons: in the first place, the ground floor and the garden cost threehundred francs, and he dared not spend more than two hundred francs onhis rent; in the second, being near Faton’s shooting-gallery, he couldhear the pistol-shots; which was intolerable to him.
He carried off his _Flora_, his copper-plates, his herbariums, hisportfolios, and his books, and established himself near theSalpêtrière, in a sort of thatched cottage of the village ofAusterlitz, where, for fifty crowns a year, he got three rooms and agarden enclosed by a hedge, and containing a well. He took advantage ofthis removal to sell off nearly all his furniture. On the day of hisentrance into his new quarters, he was very gay, and drove the nails onwhich his engravings and herbariums were to hang, with his own hands,dug in his garden the rest of the day, and at night, perceiving thatMother Plutarque had a melancholy air, and was very thoughtful, hetapped her on the shoulder and said to her with a smile: “We have theindigo!”

Only two visitors, the bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques andMarius, were admitted to view the thatched cottage at Austerlitz, abrawling name which was, to tell the truth, extremely disagreeable tohim.
However, as we have just pointed out, brains which are absorbed in somebit of wisdom, or folly, or, as it often happens, in both at once, arebut slowly accessible to the things of actual life. Their own destinyis a far-off thing to them. There results from such concentration apassivity, which, if it were the outcome of reasoning, would resemblephilosophy. One declines, descends, trickles away, even crumbles away,and yet is hardly conscious of it one’s self. It always ends, it istrue, in an awakening, but the awakening is tardy. In the meantime, itseems as though we held ourselves neutral in the game which is going onbetween our happiness and our unhappiness. We are the stake, and welook on at the game with indifference.
It is thus that, athwart the cloud which formed about him, when all hishopes were extinguished one after the other, M. Mabeuf remained ratherpuerilely, but profoundly serene. His habits of mind had the regularswing of a pendulum. Once mounted on an illusion, he went for a verylong time, even after the illusion had disappeared. A clock does notstop short at the precise moment when the key is lost.
M. Mabeuf had his innocent pleasures. These pleasures were inexpensiveand unexpected; the merest chance furnished them. One day, MotherPlutarque was reading a romance in one corner of the room. She wasreading aloud, finding that she understood better thus. To read aloudis to assure one’s self of what one is reading. There are people whoread very loud, and who have the appearance of giving themselves theirword of honor as to what they are perusing.
It was with this sort of energy that Mother Plutarque was reading theromance which she had in hand. M. Mabeuf heard her without listening toher.
In the course of her reading, Mother Plutarque came to this phrase. Itwas a question of an officer of dragoons and a beauty:—
“—The beauty pouted, and the dragoon—”

Here she interrupted herself to wipe her glasses.
“Bouddha and the Dragon,” struck in M. Mabeuf in a low voice. “Yes, itis true that there was a dragon, which, from the depths of its cave,spouted flame through his maw and set the heavens on fire. Many starshad already been consumed by this monster, which, besides, had theclaws of a tiger. Bouddha went into its den and succeeded in convertingthe dragon. That is a good book that you are reading, Mother Plutarque.There is no more beautiful legend in existence.”

And M. Mabeuf fell into a delicious reverie.



CHAPTER V—POVERTY A GOOD NEIGHBOR FOR MISERY

Marius liked this candid old man who saw himself gradually falling intothe clutches of indigence, and who came to feel astonishment, little bylittle, without, however, being made melancholy by it. Marius metCourfeyrac and sought out M. Mabeuf. Very rarely, however; twice amonth at most.
Marius’ pleasure consisted in taking long walks alone on the outerboulevards, or in the Champs-de-Mars, or in the least frequented alleysof the Luxembourg. He often spent half a day in gazing at a marketgarden, the beds of lettuce, the chickens on the dung-heap, the horseturning the water-wheel. The passers-by stared at him in surprise, andsome of them thought his attire suspicious and his mien sinister. Hewas only a poor young man dreaming in an objectless way.
It was during one of his strolls that he had hit upon the Gorbeauhouse, and, tempted by its isolation and its cheapness, had taken uphis abode there. He was known there only under the name of M. Marius.
Some of his father’s old generals or old comrades had invited him to goand see them, when they learned about him. Marius had not refused theirinvitations. They afforded opportunities of talking about his father.Thus he went from time to time, to Comte Pajol, to General Bellavesne,to General Fririon, to the Invalides. There was music and dancingthere. On such evenings, Marius put on his new coat. But he never wentto these evening parties or balls except on days when it was freezingcold, because he could not afford a carriage, and he did not wish toarrive with boots otherwise than like mirrors.
He said sometimes, but without bitterness: “Men are so made that in adrawing-room you may be soiled everywhere except on your shoes. Inorder to insure a good reception there, only one irreproachable thingis asked of you; your conscience? No, your boots.”

All passions except those of the heart are dissipated by reverie.Marius’ political fevers vanished thus. The Revolution of 1830 assistedin the process, by satisfying and calming him. He remained the same,setting aside his fits of wrath. He still held the same opinions. Only,they had been tempered. To speak accurately, he had no longer anyopinions, he had sympathies. To what party did he belong? To the partyof humanity. Out of humanity he chose France; out of the Nation hechose the people; out of the people he chose the woman. It was to thatpoint above all, that his pity was directed. Now he preferred an ideato a deed, a poet to a hero, and he admired a book like Job more thanan event like Marengo. And then, when, after a day spent in meditation,he returned in the evening through the boulevards, and caught a glimpsethrough the branches of the trees of the fathomless space beyond, thenameless gleams, the abyss, the shadow, the mystery, all that which isonly human seemed very pretty indeed to him.
He thought that he had, and he really had, in fact, arrived at thetruth of life and of human philosophy, and he had ended by gazing atnothing but heaven, the only thing which Truth can perceive from thebottom of her well.
This did not prevent him from multiplying his plans, his combinations,his scaffoldings, his projects for the future. In this state ofreverie, an eye which could have cast a glance into Marius’ interiorwould have been dazzled with the purity of that soul. In fact, had itbeen given to our eyes of the flesh to gaze into the consciences ofothers, we should be able to judge a man much more surely according towhat he dreams, than according to what he thinks. There is will inthought, there is none in dreams. Reverie, which is utterlyspontaneous, takes and keeps, even in the gigantic and the ideal, theform of our spirit. Nothing proceeds more directly and more sincerelyfrom the very depth of our soul, than our unpremeditated and boundlessaspirations towards the splendors of destiny. In these aspirations,much more than in deliberate, rational co-ordinated ideas, is the realcharacter of a man to be found. Our chimæras are the things which themost resemble us. Each one of us dreams of the unknown and theimpossible in accordance with his nature.
Towards the middle of this year 1831, the old woman who waited onMarius told him that his neighbors, the wretched Jondrette family, hadbeen turned out of doors. Marius, who passed nearly the whole of hisdays out of the house, hardly knew that he had any neighbors.
“Why are they turned out?” he asked.
“Because they do not pay their rent; they owe for two quarters.”

“How much is it?”

“Twenty francs,” said the old woman.
Marius had thirty francs saved up in a drawer.
“Here,” he said to the old woman, “take these twenty-five francs. Payfor the poor people and give them five francs, and do not tell themthat it was I.”




CHAPTER VI—THE SUBSTITUTE

It chanced that the regiment to which Lieutenant Théodule belonged cameto perform garrison duty in Paris. This inspired Aunt Gillenormand witha second idea. She had, on the first occasion, hit upon the plan ofhaving Marius spied upon by Théodule; now she plotted to have Théoduletake Marius’ place.
At all events and in case the grandfather should feel the vague need ofa young face in the house,—these rays of dawn are sometimes sweet toruin,—it was expedient to find another Marius. “Take it as a simpleerratum,” she thought, “such as one sees in books. For Marius, readThéodule.”

A grandnephew is almost the same as a grandson; in default of a lawyerone takes a lancer.
One morning, when M. Gillenormand was about to read something in the_Quotidienne_, his daughter entered and said to him in her sweetestvoice; for the question concerned her favorite:—
“Father, Théodule is coming to present his respects to you thismorning.”

“Who’s Théodule?”

“Your grandnephew.”

“Ah!” said the grandfather.
Then he went back to his reading, thought no more of his grandnephew,who was merely some Théodule or other, and soon flew into a rage, whichalmost always happened when he read. The “sheet” which he held,although Royalist, of course, announced for the following day, withoutany softening phrases, one of these little events which were of dailyoccurrence at that date in Paris: “That the students of the schools oflaw and medicine were to assemble on the Place du Panthéon, atmidday,—to deliberate.” The discussion concerned one of the questionsof the moment, the artillery of the National Guard, and a conflictbetween the Minister of War and “the citizen’s militia,” on the subjectof the cannon parked in the courtyard of the Louvre. The students wereto “deliberate” over this. It did not take much more than this to swellM. Gillenormand’s rage.
He thought of Marius, who was a student, and who would probably go withthe rest, to “deliberate, at midday, on the Place du Panthéon.”

As he was indulging in this painful dream, Lieutenant Théodule enteredclad in plain clothes as a bourgeois, which was clever of him, and wasdiscreetly introduced by Mademoiselle Gillenormand. The lancer hadreasoned as follows: “The old druid has not sunk all his money in alife pension. It is well to disguise one’s self as a civilian from timeto time.”

Mademoiselle Gillenormand said aloud to her father:—
“Théodule, your grandnephew.”

And in a low voice to the lieutenant:—
“Approve of everything.”

And she withdrew.
The lieutenant, who was but little accustomed to such venerableencounters, stammered with some timidity: “Good day, uncle,”—and made asalute composed of the involuntary and mechanical outline of themilitary salute finished off as a bourgeois salute.
“Ah! so it’s you; that is well, sit down,” said the old gentleman.
That said, he totally forgot the lancer.
Théodule seated himself, and M. Gillenormand rose.
M. Gillenormand began to pace back and forth, his hands in his pockets,talking aloud, and twitching, with his irritated old fingers, at thetwo watches which he wore in his two fobs.
“That pack of brats! they convene on the Place du Panthéon! by my life!urchins who were with their nurses but yesterday! If one were tosqueeze their noses, milk would burst out. And they deliberateto-morrow, at midday. What are we coming to? What are we coming to? Itis clear that we are making for the abyss. That is what the_descamisados_ have brought us to! To deliberate on the citizenartillery! To go and jabber in the open air over the jibes of theNational Guard! And with whom are they to meet there? Just see whitherJacobinism leads. I will bet anything you like, a million against acounter, that there will be no one there but returned convicts andreleased galley-slaves. The Republicans and the galley-slaves,—theyform but one nose and one handkerchief. Carnot used to say: ‘Wherewould you have me go, traitor?’ Fouché replied: ‘Wherever you please,imbecile!’ That’s what the Republicans are like.”

“That is true,” said Théodule.
M. Gillenormand half turned his head, saw Théodule, and went on:—
“When one reflects that that scoundrel was so vile as to turncarbonaro! Why did you leave my house? To go and become a Republican!Pssst! In the first place, the people want none of your republic, theyhave common sense, they know well that there always have been kings,and that there always will be; they know well that the people are onlythe people, after all, they make sport of it, of your republic—do youunderstand, idiot? Is it not a horrible caprice? To fall in love withPère Duchesne, to make sheep’s-eyes at the guillotine, to singromances, and play on the guitar under the balcony of ’93—it’s enoughto make one spit on all these young fellows, such fools are they! Theyare all alike. Not one escapes. It suffices for them to breathe the airwhich blows through the street to lose their senses. The nineteenthcentury is poison. The first scamp that happens along lets his beardgrow like a goat’s, thinks himself a real scoundrel, and abandons hisold relatives. He’s a Republican, he’s a romantic. What does that mean,romantic? Do me the favor to tell me what it is. All possible follies.A year ago, they ran to _Hernani_. Now, I just ask you, _Hernani!_antitheses! abominations which are not even written in French! Andthen, they have cannons in the courtyard of the Louvre. Such are therascalities of this age!”

“You are right, uncle,” said Théodule.
M. Gillenormand resumed:—
“Cannons in the courtyard of the Museum! For what purpose? Do you wantto fire grape-shot at the Apollo Belvedere? What have those cartridgesto do with the Venus de Medici? Oh! the young men of the present dayare all blackguards! What a pretty creature is their Benjamin Constant!And those who are not rascals are simpletons! They do all they can tomake themselves ugly, they are badly dressed, they are afraid of women,in the presence of petticoats they have a mendicant air which sets thegirls into fits of laughter; on my word of honor, one would say thepoor creatures were ashamed of love. They are deformed, and theycomplete themselves by being stupid; they repeat the puns of Tiercelinand Potier, they have sack coats, stablemen’s waistcoats, shirts ofcoarse linen, trousers of coarse cloth, boots of coarse leather, andtheir rigmarole resembles their plumage. One might make use of theirjargon to put new soles on their old shoes. And all this awkward batchof brats has political opinions, if you please. Political opinionsshould be strictly forbidden. They fabricate systems, they recastsociety, they demolish the monarchy, they fling all laws to the earth,they put the attic in the cellar’s place and my porter in the place ofthe King, they turn Europe topsy-turvy, they reconstruct the world, andall their love affairs consist in staring slily at the ankles of thelaundresses as these women climb into their carts. Ah! Marius! Ah! youblackguard! to go and vociferate on the public place! to discuss, todebate, to take measures! They call that measures, just God! Disorderhumbles itself and becomes silly. I have seen chaos, I now see a mess.Students deliberating on the National Guard,—such a thing could not beseen among the Ogibewas nor the Cadodaches! Savages who go naked, withtheir noddles dressed like a shuttlecock, with a club in their paws,are less of brutes than those bachelors of arts! The four-pennymonkeys! And they set up for judges! Those creatures deliberate andratiocinate! The end of the world is come! This is plainly the end ofthis miserable terraqueous globe! A final hiccough was required, andFrance has emitted it. Deliberate, my rascals! Such things will happenso long as they go and read the newspapers under the arcades of theOdéon. That costs them a sou, and their good sense, and theirintelligence, and their heart and their soul, and their wits. Theyemerge thence, and decamp from their families. All newspapers arepests; all, even the _Drapeau Blanc!_ At bottom, Martainville was aJacobin. Ah! just Heaven! you may boast of having driven yourgrandfather to despair, that you may!”

“That is evident,” said Théodule.
And profiting by the fact that M. Gillenormand was taking breath, thelancer added in a magisterial manner:—
“There should be no other newspaper than the _Moniteur_, and no otherbook than the _Annuaire Militaire_.”

M. Gillenormand continued:—
“It is like their Sieyès! A regicide ending in a senator; for that isthe way they always end. They give themselves a scar with the addressof _thou_ as citizens, in order to get themselves called, eventually,_Monsieur le Comte_. Monsieur le Comte as big as my arm, assassins ofSeptember. The philosopher Sieyès! I will do myself the justice to say,that I have never had any better opinion of the philosophies of allthose philosophers, than of the spectacles of the grimacer of Tivoli!One day I saw the Senators cross the Quai Malplaquet in mantles ofviolet velvet sown with bees, with hats à la Henri IV. They werehideous. One would have pronounced them monkeys from the tiger’s court.Citizens, I declare to you, that your progress is madness, that yourhumanity is a dream, that your revolution is a crime, that yourrepublic is a monster, that your young and virgin France comes from thebrothel, and I maintain it against all, whoever you may be, whetherjournalists, economists, legists, or even were you better judges ofliberty, of equality, and fraternity than the knife of the guillotine!And that I announce to you, my fine fellows!”

“Parbleu!” cried the lieutenant, “that is wonderfully true.”

M. Gillenormand paused in a gesture which he had begun, wheeled round,stared Lancer Théodule intently in the eyes, and said to him:—
“You are a fool.”




BOOK SIXTH—THE CONJUNCTION OF TWO STARS



CHAPTER I—THE SOBRIQUET: MODE OF FORMATION OF FAMILY NAMES

Marius was, at this epoch, a handsome young man, of medium stature,with thick and intensely black hair, a lofty and intelligent brow,well-opened and passionate nostrils, an air of calmness and sincerity,and with something indescribably proud, thoughtful, and innocent overhis whole countenance. His profile, all of whose lines were rounded,without thereby losing their firmness, had a certain Germanicsweetness, which has made its way into the French physiognomy by way ofAlsace and Lorraine, and that complete absence of angles which renderedthe Sicambres so easily recognizable among the Romans, and whichdistinguishes the leonine from the aquiline race. He was at that periodof life when the mind of men who think is composed, in nearly equalparts, of depth and ingenuousness. A grave situation being given, hehad all that is required to be stupid: one more turn of the key, and hemight be sublime. His manners were reserved, cold, polished, not verygenial. As his mouth was charming, his lips the reddest, and his teeththe whitest in the world, his smile corrected the severity of his face,as a whole. At certain moments, that pure brow and that voluptuoussmile presented a singular contrast. His eyes were small, but hisglance was large.
At the period of his most abject misery, he had observed that younggirls turned round when he passed by, and he fled or hid, with death inhis soul. He thought that they were staring at him because of his oldclothes, and that they were laughing at them; the fact is, that theystared at him because of his grace, and that they dreamed of him.
This mute misunderstanding between him and the pretty passers-by hadmade him shy. He chose none of them for the excellent reason that hefled from all of them. He lived thus indefinitely,—stupidly, asCourfeyrac said.
Courfeyrac also said to him: “Do not aspire to be venerable” [theycalled each other _thou_; it is the tendency of youthful friendships toslip into this mode of address]. “Let me give you a piece of advice, mydear fellow. Don’t read so many books, and look a little more at thelasses. The jades have some good points about them, O Marius! By dintof fleeing and blushing, you will become brutalized.”

On other occasions, Courfeyrac encountered him and said:—“Good morning,Monsieur l’Abbé!”

When Courfeyrac had addressed to him some remark of this nature, Mariusavoided women, both young and old, more than ever for a week to come,and he avoided Courfeyrac to boot.
Nevertheless, there existed in all the immensity of creation, two womenwhom Marius did not flee, and to whom he paid no attention whatever. Intruth, he would have been very much amazed if he had been informed thatthey were women. One was the bearded old woman who swept out hischamber, and caused Courfeyrac to say: “Seeing that his servant womanwears his beard, Marius does not wear his own beard.” The other was asort of little girl whom he saw very often, and whom he never lookedat.
For more than a year, Marius had noticed in one of the walks of theLuxembourg, the one which skirts the parapet of the Pépinière, a manand a very young girl, who were almost always seated side by side onthe same bench, at the most solitary end of the alley, on the Rue del’Ouest side. Every time that that chance which meddles with thestrolls of persons whose gaze is turned inwards, led Marius to thatwalk,—and it was nearly every day,—he found this couple there. The manappeared to be about sixty years of age; he seemed sad and serious; hiswhole person presented the robust and weary aspect peculiar to militarymen who have retired from the service. If he had worn a decoration,Marius would have said: “He is an ex-officer.” He had a kindly butunapproachable air, and he never let his glance linger on the eyes ofany one. He wore blue trousers, a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmedhat, which always appeared to be new, a black cravat, a quaker shirt,that is to say, it was dazzlingly white, but of coarse linen. Agrisette who passed near him one day, said: “Here’s a very tidywidower.” His hair was very white.
The first time that the young girl who accompanied him came and seatedherself on the bench which they seemed to have adopted, she was a sortof child thirteen or fourteen years of age, so thin as to be almosthomely, awkward, insignificant, and with a possible promise of handsomeeyes. Only, they were always raised with a sort of displeasingassurance. Her dress was both aged and childish, like the dress of thescholars in a convent; it consisted of a badly cut gown of blackmerino. They had the air of being father and daughter.
Marius scanned this old man, who was not yet aged, and this littlegirl, who was not yet a person, for a few days, and thereafter paid noattention to them. They, on their side, did not appear even to see him.They conversed together with a peaceful and indifferent air. The girlchattered incessantly and merrily. The old man talked but little, and,at times, he fixed on her eyes overflowing with an ineffable paternity.
Marius had acquired the mechanical habit of strolling in that walk. Heinvariably found them there.
This is the way things went:—
Marius liked to arrive by the end of the alley which was furthest fromtheir bench; he walked the whole length of the alley, passed in frontof them, then returned to the extremity whence he had come, and beganagain. This he did five or six times in the course of his promenade,and the promenade was taken five or six times a week, without itshaving occurred to him or to these people to exchange a greeting. Thatpersonage, and that young girl, although they appeared,—and perhapsbecause they appeared,—to shun all glances, had, naturally, caused someattention on the part of the five or six students who strolled alongthe Pépinière from time to time; the studious after their lectures, theothers after their game of billiards. Courfeyrac, who was among thelast, had observed them several times, but, finding the girl homely, hehad speedily and carefully kept out of the way. He had fled,discharging at them a sobriquet, like a Parthian dart. Impressed solelywith the child’s gown and the old man’s hair, he had dubbed thedaughter Mademoiselle Lanoire, and the father, Monsieur Leblanc, sothat as no one knew them under any other title, this nickname became alaw in the default of any other name. The students said: “Ah! MonsieurLeblanc is on his bench.” And Marius, like the rest, had found itconvenient to call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc.
We shall follow their example, and we shall say M. Leblanc, in order tofacilitate this tale.
So Marius saw them nearly every day, at the same hour, during the firstyear. He found the man to his taste, but the girl insipid.



CHAPTER II—LUX FACTA EST

During the second year, precisely at the point in this history whichthe reader has now reached, it chanced that this habit of theLuxembourg was interrupted, without Marius himself being quite awarewhy, and nearly six months elapsed, during which he did not set foot inthe alley. One day, at last, he returned thither once more; it was aserene summer morning, and Marius was in joyous mood, as one is whenthe weather is fine. It seemed to him that he had in his heart all thesongs of the birds that he was listening to, and all the bits of bluesky of which he caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees.
He went straight to “his alley,” and when he reached the end of it heperceived, still on the same bench, that well-known couple. Only, whenhe approached, it certainly was the same man; but it seemed to him thatit was no longer the same girl. The person whom he now beheld was atall and beautiful creature, possessed of all the most charming linesof a woman at the precise moment when they are still combined with allthe most ingenuous graces of the child; a pure and fugitive moment,which can be expressed only by these two words,—“fifteen years.” Shehad wonderful brown hair, shaded with threads of gold, a brow thatseemed made of marble, cheeks that seemed made of rose-leaf, a paleflush, an agitated whiteness, an exquisite mouth, whence smiles dartedlike sunbeams, and words like music, a head such as Raphael would havegiven to Mary, set upon a neck that Jean Goujon would have attributedto a Venus. And, in order that nothing might be lacking to thisbewitching face, her nose was not handsome—it was pretty; neitherstraight nor curved, neither Italian nor Greek; it was the Parisiannose, that is to say, spiritual, delicate, irregular, pure,—whichdrives painters to despair, and charms poets.
When Marius passed near her, he could not see her eyes, which wereconstantly lowered. He saw only her long chestnut lashes, permeatedwith shadow and modesty.
This did not prevent the beautiful child from smiling as she listenedto what the white-haired old man was saying to her, and nothing couldbe more fascinating than that fresh smile, combined with those droopingeyes.
For a moment, Marius thought that she was another daughter of the sameman, a sister of the former, no doubt. But when the invariable habit ofhis stroll brought him, for the second time, near the bench, and he hadexamined her attentively, he recognized her as the same. In six monthsthe little girl had become a young maiden; that was all. Nothing ismore frequent than this phenomenon. There is a moment when girlsblossom out in the twinkling of an eye, and become roses all at once.One left them children but yesterday; today, one finds them disquietingto the feelings.
This child had not only grown, she had become idealized. As three daysin April suffice to cover certain trees with flowers, six months hadsufficed to clothe her with beauty. Her April had arrived.
One sometimes sees people, who, poor and mean, seem to wake up, passsuddenly from indigence to luxury, indulge in expenditures of allsorts, and become dazzling, prodigal, magnificent, all of a sudden.That is the result of having pocketed an income; a note fell dueyesterday. The young girl had received her quarterly income.
And then, she was no longer the school-girl with her felt hat, hermerino gown, her scholar’s shoes, and red hands; taste had come to herwith beauty; she was a well-dressed person, clad with a sort of richand simple elegance, and without affectation. She wore a dress of blackdamask, a cape of the same material, and a bonnet of white crape. Herwhite gloves displayed the delicacy of the hand which toyed with thecarved, Chinese ivory handle of a parasol, and her silken shoe outlinedthe smallness of her foot. When one passed near her, her whole toiletteexhaled a youthful and penetrating perfume.
As for the man, he was the same as usual.
The second time that Marius approached her, the young girl raised hereyelids; her eyes were of a deep, celestial blue, but in that veiledazure, there was, as yet, nothing but the glance of a child. She lookedat Marius indifferently, as she would have stared at the brat runningbeneath the sycamores, or the marble vase which cast a shadow on thebench, and Marius, on his side, continued his promenade, and thoughtabout something else.
He passed near the bench where the young girl sat, five or six times,but without even turning his eyes in her direction.
On the following days, he returned, as was his wont, to the Luxembourg;as usual, he found there “the father and daughter;” but he paid nofurther attention to them. He thought no more about the girl now thatshe was beautiful than he had when she was homely. He passed very nearthe bench where she sat, because such was his habit.



CHAPTER III—EFFECT OF THE SPRING

One day, the air was warm, the Luxembourg was inundated with light andshade, the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it thatmorning, the sparrows were giving vent to little twitters in the depthsof the chestnut-trees. Marius had thrown open his whole soul to nature,he was not thinking of anything, he simply lived and breathed, hepassed near the bench, the young girl raised her eyes to him, the twoglances met.
What was there in the young girl’s glance on this occasion? Mariuscould not have told. There was nothing and there was everything. It wasa strange flash.
She dropped her eyes, and he pursued his way.
What he had just seen was no longer the ingenuous and simple eye of achild; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened, then abruptlyclosed again.
There comes a day when the young girl glances in this manner. Woe tohim who chances to be there!
That first gaze of a soul which does not, as yet, know itself, is likethe dawn in the sky. It is the awakening of something radiant andstrange. Nothing can give any idea of the dangerous charm of thatunexpected gleam, which flashes suddenly and vaguely forth fromadorable shadows, and which is composed of all the innocence of thepresent, and of all the passion of the future. It is a sort ofundecided tenderness which reveals itself by chance, and which waits.It is a snare which the innocent maiden sets unknown to herself, and inwhich she captures hearts without either wishing or knowing it. It is avirgin looking like a woman.
It is rare that a profound reverie does not spring from that glance,where it falls. All purities and all candors meet in that celestial andfatal gleam which, more than all the best-planned tender glances ofcoquettes, possesses the magic power of causing the sudden blossoming,in the depths of the soul, of that sombre flower, impregnated withperfume and with poison, which is called love.
That evening, on his return to his garret, Marius cast his eyes overhis garments, and perceived, for the first time, that he had been soslovenly, indecorous, and inconceivably stupid as to go for his walk inthe Luxembourg with his “every-day clothes,” that is to say, with a hatbattered near the band, coarse carter’s boots, black trousers whichshowed white at the knees, and a black coat which was pale at theelbows.



CHAPTER IV—BEGINNING OF A GREAT MALADY

On the following day, at the accustomed hour, Marius drew from hiswardrobe his new coat, his new trousers, his new hat, and his newboots; he clothed himself in this complete panoply, put on his gloves,a tremendous luxury, and set off for the Luxembourg.
On the way thither, he encountered Courfeyrac, and pretended not to seehim. Courfeyrac, on his return home, said to his friends:—
“I have just met Marius’ new hat and new coat, with Marius inside them.He was going to pass an examination, no doubt. He looked utterlystupid.”

On arriving at the Luxembourg, Marius made the tour of the fountainbasin, and stared at the swans; then he remained for a long time incontemplation before a statue whose head was perfectly black withmould, and one of whose hips was missing. Near the basin there was abourgeois forty years of age, with a prominent stomach, who was holdingby the hand a little urchin of five, and saying to him: “Shun excess,my son, keep at an equal distance from despotism and from anarchy.”Marius listened to this bourgeois. Then he made the circuit of thebasin once more. At last he directed his course towards “his alley,”slowly, and as if with regret. One would have said that he was bothforced to go there and withheld from doing so. He did not perceive ithimself, and thought that he was doing as he always did.
On turning into the walk, he saw M. Leblanc and the young girl at theother end, “on their bench.” He buttoned his coat up to the very top,pulled it down on his body so that there might be no wrinkles,examined, with a certain complaisance, the lustrous gleams of histrousers, and marched on the bench. This march savored of an attack,and certainly of a desire for conquest. So I say that he marched on thebench, as I should say: “Hannibal marched on Rome.”

However, all his movements were purely mechanical, and he hadinterrupted none of the habitual preoccupations of his mind and labors.At that moment, he was thinking that the _Manuel du Baccalauréat_ was astupid book, and that it must have been drawn up by rare idiots, toallow of three tragedies of Racine and only one comedy of Molière beinganalyzed therein as masterpieces of the human mind. There was apiercing whistling going on in his ears. As he approached the bench, heheld fast to the folds in his coat, and fixed his eyes on the younggirl. It seemed to him that she filled the entire extremity of thealley with a vague blue light.
In proportion as he drew near, his pace slackened more and more. Onarriving at some little distance from the bench, and long before he hadreached the end of the walk, he halted, and could not explain tohimself why he retraced his steps. He did not even say to himself thathe would not go as far as the end. It was only with difficulty that theyoung girl could have perceived him in the distance and noted his fineappearance in his new clothes. Nevertheless, he held himself veryerect, in case any one should be looking at him from behind.
He attained the opposite end, then came back, and this time heapproached a little nearer to the bench. He even got to within threeintervals of trees, but there he felt an indescribable impossibility ofproceeding further, and he hesitated. He thought he saw the younggirl’s face bending towards him. But he exerted a manly and violenteffort, subdued his hesitation, and walked straight ahead. A fewseconds later, he rushed in front of the bench, erect and firm,reddening to the very ears, without daring to cast a glance either tothe right or to the left, with his hand thrust into his coat like astatesman. At the moment when he passed,—under the cannon of theplace,—he felt his heart beat wildly. As on the preceding day, she woreher damask gown and her crape bonnet. He heard an ineffable voice,which must have been “her voice.” She was talking tranquilly. She wasvery pretty. He felt it, although he made no attempt to see her. “Shecould not, however,” he thought, “help feeling esteem and considerationfor me, if she only knew that I am the veritable author of thedissertation on Marcos Obrégon de la Ronde, which M. François deNeufchâteau put, as though it were his own, at the head of his editionof _Gil Blas_.” He went beyond the bench as far as the extremity of thewalk, which was very near, then turned on his heel and passed once morein front of the lovely girl. This time, he was very pale. Moreover, allhis emotions were disagreeable. As he went further from the bench andthe young girl, and while his back was turned to her, he fancied thatshe was gazing after him, and that made him stumble.
He did not attempt to approach the bench again; he halted near themiddle of the walk, and there, a thing which he never did, he sat down,and reflecting in the most profoundly indistinct depths of his spirit,that after all, it was hard that persons whose white bonnet and blackgown he admired should be absolutely insensible to his splendidtrousers and his new coat.
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour, he rose, as though he wereon the point of again beginning his march towards that bench which wassurrounded by an aureole. But he remained standing there, motionless.For the first time in fifteen months, he said to himself that thatgentleman who sat there every day with his daughter, had, on his side,noticed him, and probably considered his assiduity singular.
For the first time, also, he was conscious of some irreverence indesignating that stranger, even in his secret thoughts, by thesobriquet of M. Leblanc.
He stood thus for several minutes, with drooping head, tracing figuresin the sand, with the cane which he held in his hand.
Then he turned abruptly in the direction opposite to the bench, to M.Leblanc and his daughter, and went home.
That day he forgot to dine. At eight o’clock in the evening heperceived this fact, and as it was too late to go down to the RueSaint-Jacques, he said: “Never mind!” and ate a bit of bread.
He did not go to bed until he had brushed his coat and folded it upwith great care.



CHAPTER V—DIVERS CLAPS OF THUNDER FALL ON MA’AM BOUGON

On the following day, Ma’am Bougon, as Courfeyrac styled the oldportress-principal-tenant, housekeeper of the Gorbeau hovel, Ma’amBougon, whose name was, in reality, Madame Burgon, as we have foundout, but this iconoclast, Courfeyrac, respected nothing,—Ma’am Bougonobserved, with stupefaction, that M. Marius was going out again in hisnew coat.
He went to the Luxembourg again, but he did not proceed further thanhis bench midway of the alley. He seated himself there, as on thepreceding day, surveying from a distance, and clearly making out, thewhite bonnet, the black dress, and above all, that blue light. He didnot stir from it, and only went home when the gates of the Luxembourgclosed. He did not see M. Leblanc and his daughter retire. He concludedthat they had quitted the garden by the gate on the Rue de l’Ouest.Later on, several weeks afterwards, when he came to think it over, hecould never recall where he had dined that evening.
On the following day, which was the third, Ma’am Bougon wasthunderstruck. Marius went out in his new coat. “Three days insuccession!” she exclaimed.
She tried to follow him, but Marius walked briskly, and with immensestrides; it was a hippopotamus undertaking the pursuit of a chamois.She lost sight of him in two minutes, and returned breathless,three-quarters choked with asthma, and furious. “If there is anysense,” she growled, “in putting on one’s best clothes every day, andmaking people run like this!”

Marius betook himself to the Luxembourg.
The young girl was there with M. Leblanc. Marius approached as near ashe could, pretending to be busy reading a book, but he halted afar off,then returned and seated himself on his bench, where he spent fourhours in watching the house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk,and who produced on him the impression that they were making sport ofhim.
A fortnight passed thus. Marius went to the Luxembourg no longer forthe sake of strolling there, but to seat himself always in the samespot, and that without knowing why. Once arrived there, he did notstir. He put on his new coat every morning, for the purpose of notshowing himself, and he began all over again on the morrow.
She was decidedly a marvellous beauty. The only remark approaching acriticism, that could be made, was, that the contradiction between hergaze, which was melancholy, and her smile, which was merry, gave arather wild effect to her face, which sometimes caused this sweetcountenance to become strange without ceasing to be charming.



CHAPTER VI—TAKEN PRISONER

On one of the last days of the second week, Marius was seated on hisbench, as usual, holding in his hand an open book, of which he had notturned a page for the last two hours. All at once he started. An eventwas taking place at the other extremity of the walk. Leblanc and hisdaughter had just left their seat, and the daughter had taken herfather’s arm, and both were advancing slowly, towards the middle of thealley where Marius was. Marius closed his book, then opened it again,then forced himself to read; he trembled; the aureole was comingstraight towards him. “Ah! good Heavens!” thought he, “I shall not havetime to strike an attitude.” Still the white-haired man and the girladvanced. It seemed to him that this lasted for a century, and that itwas but a second. “What are they coming in this direction for?” heasked himself. “What! She will pass here? Her feet will tread thissand, this walk, two paces from me?” He was utterly upset, he wouldhave liked to be very handsome, he would have liked to own the cross.He heard the soft and measured sound of their approaching footsteps. Heimagined that M. Leblanc was darting angry glances at him. “Is thatgentleman going to address me?” he thought to himself. He dropped hishead; when he raised it again, they were very near him. The young girlpassed, and as she passed, she glanced at him. She gazed steadily athim, with a pensive sweetness which thrilled Marius from head to foot.It seemed to him that she was reproaching him for having allowed solong a time to elapse without coming as far as her, and that she wassaying to him: “I am coming myself.” Marius was dazzled by those eyesfraught with rays and abysses.
He felt his brain on fire. She had come to him, what joy! And then, howshe had looked at him! She appeared to him more beautiful than he hadever seen her yet. Beautiful with a beauty which was wholly feminineand angelic, with a complete beauty which would have made Petrarch singand Dante kneel. It seemed to him that he was floating free in theazure heavens. At the same time, he was horribly vexed because therewas dust on his boots.
He thought he felt sure that she had looked at his boots too.
He followed her with his eyes until she disappeared. Then he started upand walked about the Luxembourg garden like a madman. It is possiblethat, at times, he laughed to himself and talked aloud. He was sodreamy when he came near the children’s nurses, that each one of themthought him in love with her.
He quitted the Luxembourg, hoping to find her again in the street.
He encountered Courfeyrac under the arcades of the Odéon, and said tohim: “Come and dine with me.” They went off to Rousseau’s and spent sixfrancs. Marius ate like an ogre. He gave the waiter six sous. Atdessert, he said to Courfeyrac. “Have you read the paper? What a finediscourse Audry de Puyraveau delivered!”

He was desperately in love.
After dinner, he said to Courfeyrac: “I will treat you to the play.”They went to the Porte-Sainte-Martin to see Frédérick in _l’Auberge desAdrets_. Marius was enormously amused.
At the same time, he had a redoubled attack of shyness. On emergingfrom the theatre, he refused to look at the garter of a modiste who wasstepping across a gutter, and Courfeyrac, who said: “I should like toput that woman in my collection,” almost horrified him.
Courfeyrac invited him to breakfast at the Café Voltaire on thefollowing morning. Marius went thither, and ate even more than on thepreceding evening. He was very thoughtful and very merry. One wouldhave said that he was taking advantage of every occasion to laughuproariously. He tenderly embraced some man or other from theprovinces, who was presented to him. A circle of students formed roundthe table, and they spoke of the nonsense paid for by the State whichwas uttered from the rostrum in the Sorbonne, then the conversationfell upon the faults and omissions in Guicherat’s dictionaries andgrammars. Marius interrupted the discussion to exclaim: “But it is veryagreeable, all the same to have the cross!”

“That’s queer!” whispered Courfeyrac to Jean Prouvaire.
“No,” responded Prouvaire, “that’s serious.”

It was serious; in fact, Marius had reached that first violent andcharming hour with which grand passions begin.
A glance had wrought all this.
When the mine is charged, when the conflagration is ready, nothing ismore simple. A glance is a spark.
It was all over with him. Marius loved a woman. His fate was enteringthe unknown.
The glance of women resembles certain combinations of wheels, which aretranquil in appearance yet formidable. You pass close to them everyday, peaceably and with impunity, and without a suspicion of anything.A moment arrives when you forget that the thing is there. You go andcome, dream, speak, laugh. All at once you feel yourself clutched; allis over. The wheels hold you fast, the glance has ensnared you. It hascaught you, no matter where or how, by some portion of your thoughtwhich was fluttering loose, by some distraction which had attacked you.You are lost. The whole of you passes into it. A chain of mysteriousforces takes possession of you. You struggle in vain; no more humansuccor is possible. You go on falling from gearing to gearing, fromagony to agony, from torture to torture, you, your mind, your fortune,your future, your soul; and, according to whether you are in the powerof a wicked creature, or of a noble heart, you will not escape fromthis terrifying machine otherwise than disfigured with shame, ortransfigured by passion.



CHAPTER VII—ADVENTURES OF THE LETTER U DELIVERED OVER TO CONJECTURES

Isolation, detachment, from everything, pride, independence, the tasteof nature, the absence of daily and material activity, the life withinhimself, the secret conflicts of chastity, a benevolent ecstasy towardsall creation, had prepared Marius for this possession which is calledpassion. His worship of his father had gradually become a religion,and, like all religions, it had retreated to the depths of his soul.Something was required in the foreground. Love came.
A full month elapsed, during which Marius went every day to theLuxembourg. When the hour arrived, nothing could hold him back.—“He ison duty,” said Courfeyrac. Marius lived in a state of delight. It iscertain that the young girl did look at him.
He had finally grown bold, and approached the bench. Still, he did notpass in front of it any more, in obedience to the instinct of timidityand to the instinct of prudence common to lovers. He considered itbetter not to attract “the attention of the father.” He combined hisstations behind the trees and the pedestals of the statues with aprofound diplomacy, so that he might be seen as much as possible by theyoung girl and as little as possible by the old gentleman. Sometimes,he remained motionless by the half-hour together in the shade of aLeonidas or a Spartacus, holding in his hand a book, above which hiseyes, gently raised, sought the beautiful girl, and she, on her side,turned her charming profile towards him with a vague smile. Whileconversing in the most natural and tranquil manner in the world withthe white-haired man, she bent upon Marius all the reveries of avirginal and passionate eye. Ancient and time-honored manœuvre whichEve understood from the very first day of the world, and which everywoman understands from the very first day of her life! her mouthreplied to one, and her glance replied to another.
It must be supposed, that M. Leblanc finally noticed something, foroften, when Marius arrived, he rose and began to walk about. He hadabandoned their accustomed place and had adopted the bench by theGladiator, near the other end of the walk, as though with the object ofseeing whether Marius would pursue them thither. Marius did notunderstand, and committed this error. “The father” began to growinexact, and no longer brought “his daughter” every day. Sometimes, hecame alone. Then Marius did not stay. Another blunder.
Marius paid no heed to these symptoms. From the phase of timidity, hehad passed, by a natural and fatal progress, to the phase of blindness.His love increased. He dreamed of it every night. And then, anunexpected bliss had happened to him, oil on the fire, a redoubling ofthe shadows over his eyes. One evening, at dusk, he had found, on thebench which “M. Leblanc and his daughter” had just quitted, ahandkerchief, a very simple handkerchief, without embroidery, butwhite, and fine, and which seemed to him to exhale ineffable perfume.He seized it with rapture. This handkerchief was marked with theletters U. F. Marius knew nothing about this beautiful child,—neitherher family name, her Christian name nor her abode; these two letterswere the first thing of her that he had gained possession of, adorableinitials, upon which he immediately began to construct his scaffolding.U was evidently the Christian name. “Ursule!” he thought, “what adelicious name!” He kissed the handkerchief, drank it in, placed it onhis heart, on his flesh, during the day, and at night, laid it beneathhis lips that he might fall asleep on it.
“I feel that her whole soul lies within it!” he exclaimed.
This handkerchief belonged to the old gentleman, who had simply let itfall from his pocket.
In the days which followed the finding of this treasure, he onlydisplayed himself at the Luxembourg in the act of kissing thehandkerchief and laying it on his heart. The beautiful child understoodnothing of all this, and signified it to him by imperceptible signs.
“O modesty!” said Marius.



CHAPTER VIII—THE VETERANS THEMSELVES CAN BE HAPPY

Since we have pronounced the word modesty, and since we concealnothing, we ought to say that once, nevertheless, in spite of hisecstasies, “his Ursule” caused him very serious grief. It was on one ofthe days when she persuaded M. Leblanc to leave the bench and strollalong the walk. A brisk May breeze was blowing, which swayed the crestsof the plaintain-trees. The father and daughter, arm in arm, had justpassed Marius’ bench. Marius had risen to his feet behind them, and wasfollowing them with his eyes, as was fitting in the desperate situationof his soul.
All at once, a gust of wind, more merry than the rest, and probablycharged with performing the affairs of Springtime, swept down from thenursery, flung itself on the alley, enveloped the young girl in adelicious shiver, worthy of Virgil’s nymphs, and the fawns ofTheocritus, and lifted her dress, the robe more sacred than that ofIsis, almost to the height of her garter. A leg of exquisite shapeappeared. Marius saw it. He was exasperated and furious.
The young girl had hastily thrust down her dress, with a divinelytroubled motion, but he was nonetheless angry for all that. He wasalone in the alley, it is true. But there might have been some onethere. And what if there had been some one there! Can any onecomprehend such a thing? What she had just done is horrible!—Alas, thepoor child had done nothing; there had been but one culprit, the wind;but Marius, in whom quivered the Bartholo who exists in Cherubin, wasdetermined to be vexed, and was jealous of his own shadow. It is thus,in fact, that the harsh and capricious jealousy of the flesh awakens inthe human heart, and takes possession of it, even without any right.Moreover, setting aside even that jealousy, the sight of that charmingleg had contained nothing agreeable for him; the white stocking of thefirst woman he chanced to meet would have afforded him more pleasure.
When “his Ursule,” after having reached the end of the walk, retracedher steps with M. Leblanc, and passed in front of the bench on whichMarius had seated himself once more, Marius darted a sullen andferocious glance at her. The young girl gave way to that slightstraightening up with a backward movement, accompanied by a raising ofthe eyelids, which signifies: “Well, what is the matter?”

This was “their first quarrel.”

Marius had hardly made this scene at her with his eyes, when some onecrossed the walk. It was a veteran, very much bent, extremely wrinkled,and pale, in a uniform of the Louis XV. pattern, bearing on his breastthe little oval plaque of red cloth, with the crossed swords, thesoldier’s cross of Saint-Louis, and adorned, in addition, with acoat-sleeve, which had no arm within it, with a silver chin and awooden leg. Marius thought he perceived that this man had an extremelywell satisfied air. It even struck him that the aged cynic, as hehobbled along past him, addressed to him a very fraternal and verymerry wink, as though some chance had created an understanding betweenthem, and as though they had shared some piece of good luck together.What did that relic of Mars mean by being so contented? What had passedbetween that wooden leg and the other? Marius reached a paroxysm ofjealousy.—“Perhaps he was there!” he said to himself; “perhaps hesaw!”—And he felt a desire to exterminate the veteran.
With the aid of time, all points grow dull. Marius’ wrath against“Ursule,” just and legitimate as it was, passed off. He finallypardoned her; but this cost him a great effort; he sulked for threedays.
Nevertheless, in spite of all this, and because of all this, hispassion augmented and grew to madness.



CHAPTER IX—ECLIPSE

The reader has just seen how Marius discovered, or thought that hediscovered, that _She_ was named Ursule.
Appetite grows with loving. To know that her name was Ursule was agreat deal; it was very little. In three or four weeks, Marius haddevoured this bliss. He wanted another. He wanted to know where shelived.
He had committed his first blunder, by falling into the ambush of thebench by the Gladiator. He had committed a second, by not remaining atthe Luxembourg when M. Leblanc came thither alone. He now committed athird, and an immense one. He followed “Ursule.”

She lived in the Rue de l’Ouest, in the most unfrequented spot, in anew, three-story house, of modest appearance.
From that moment forth, Marius added to his happiness of seeing her atthe Luxembourg the happiness of following her home.
His hunger was increasing. He knew her first name, at least, a charmingname, a genuine woman’s name; he knew where she lived; he wanted toknow who she was.
One evening, after he had followed them to their dwelling, and had seenthem disappear through the carriage gate, he entered in their train andsaid boldly to the porter:—
“Is that the gentleman who lives on the first floor, who has just comein?”

“No,” replied the porter. “He is the gentleman on the third floor.”

Another step gained. This success emboldened Marius.
“On the front?” he asked.
“Parbleu!” said the porter, “the house is only built on the street.”

“And what is that gentleman’s business?” began Marius again.
“He is a gentleman of property, sir. A very kind man who does good tothe unfortunate, though not rich himself.”

“What is his name?” resumed Marius.
The porter raised his head and said:—
“Are you a police spy, sir?”

Marius went off quite abashed, but delighted. He was getting on.
“Good,” thought he, “I know that her name is Ursule, that she is thedaughter of a gentleman who lives on his income, and that she livesthere, on the third floor, in the Rue de l’Ouest.”

On the following day, M. Leblanc and his daughter made only a verybrief stay in the Luxembourg; they went away while it was still broaddaylight. Marius followed them to the Rue de l’Ouest, as he had takenup the habit of doing. On arriving at the carriage entrance M. Leblancmade his daughter pass in first, then paused, before crossing thethreshold, and stared intently at Marius.
On the next day they did not come to the Luxembourg. Marius waited forthem all day in vain.
At nightfall, he went to the Rue de l’Ouest, and saw a light in thewindows of the third story.
He walked about beneath the windows until the light was extinguished.
The next day, no one at the Luxembourg. Marius waited all day, thenwent and did sentinel duty under their windows. This carried him on toten o’clock in the evening.
His dinner took care of itself. Fever nourishes the sick man, and lovethe lover.
He spent a week in this manner. M. Leblanc no longer appeared at theLuxembourg.
Marius indulged in melancholy conjectures; he dared not watch theporte-cochère during the day; he contented himself with going at nightto gaze upon the red light of the windows. At times he saw shadows flitacross them, and his heart began to beat.
On the eighth day, when he arrived under the windows, there was nolight in them.
“Hello!” he said, “the lamp is not lighted yet. But it is dark. Canthey have gone out?” He waited until ten o’clock. Until midnight. Untilone in the morning. Not a light appeared in the windows of the thirdstory, and no one entered the house.
He went away in a very gloomy frame of mind.
On the morrow,—for he only existed from morrow to morrow, there was, soto speak, no to-day for him,—on the morrow, he found no one at theLuxembourg; he had expected this. At dusk, he went to the house.
No light in the windows; the shades were drawn; the third floor wastotally dark.
Marius rapped at the porte-cochère, entered, and said to the porter:—
“The gentleman on the third floor?”

“Has moved away,” replied the porter.
Marius reeled and said feebly:—
“How long ago?”

“Yesterday.”

“Where is he living now?”

“I don’t know anything about it.”

“So he has not left his new address?”

“No.”

And the porter, raising his eyes, recognized Marius.
“Come! So it’s you!” said he; “but you are decidedly a spy then?”




BOOK SEVENTH—PATRON MINETTE



CHAPTER I—MINES AND MINERS

Human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance, _athird lower floor_. The social soil is everywhere undermined, sometimesfor good, sometimes for evil. These works are superposed one upon theother. There are superior mines and inferior mines. There is a top anda bottom in this obscure sub-soil, which sometimes gives way beneathcivilization, and which our indifference and heedlessness trample underfoot. The Encyclopedia, in the last century, was a mine that was almostopen to the sky. The shades, those sombre hatchers of primitiveChristianity, only awaited an opportunity to bring about an explosionunder the Cæsars and to inundate the human race with light. For in thesacred shadows there lies latent light. Volcanoes are full of a shadowthat is capable of flashing forth. Every form begins by being night.The catacombs, in which the first mass was said, were not alone thecellar of Rome, they were the vaults of the world.
Beneath the social construction, that complicated marvel of astructure, there are excavations of all sorts. There is the religiousmine, the philosophical mine, the economic mine, the revolutionarymine. Such and such a pick-axe with the idea, such a pick with ciphers.Such another with wrath. People hail and answer each other from onecatacomb to another. Utopias travel about underground, in the pipes.There they branch out in every direction. They sometimes meet, andfraternize there. Jean-Jacques lends his pick to Diogenes, who lendshim his lantern. Sometimes they enter into combat there. Calvin seizesSocinius by the hair. But nothing arrests nor interrupts the tension ofall these energies toward the goal, and the vast, simultaneousactivity, which goes and comes, mounts, descends, and mounts again inthese obscurities, and which immense unknown swarming slowly transformsthe top and the bottom and the inside and the outside. Society hardlyeven suspects this digging which leaves its surface intact and changesits bowels. There are as many different subterranean stages as thereare varying works, as there are extractions. What emerges from thesedeep excavations? The future.
The deeper one goes, the more mysterious are the toilers. The work isgood, up to a degree which the social philosophies are able torecognize; beyond that degree it is doubtful and mixed; lower down, itbecomes terrible. At a certain depth, the excavations are no longerpenetrable by the spirit of civilization, the limit breathable by manhas been passed; a beginning of monsters is possible.
The descending scale is a strange one; and each one of the rungs ofthis ladder corresponds to a stage where philosophy can find foothold,and where one encounters one of these workmen, sometimes divine,sometimes misshapen. Below John Huss, there is Luther; below Luther,there is Descartes; below Descartes, there is Voltaire; below Voltaire,there is Condorcet; below Condorcet, there is Robespierre; belowRobespierre, there is Marat; below Marat there is Babeuf. And so itgoes on. Lower down, confusedly, at the limit which separates theindistinct from the invisible, one perceives other gloomy men, whoperhaps do not exist as yet. The men of yesterday are spectres; thoseof to-morrow are forms. The eye of the spirit distinguishes them butobscurely. The embryonic work of the future is one of the visions ofphilosophy.
A world in limbo, in the state of fœtus, what an unheard-of spectre!
Saint-Simon, Owen, Fourier, are there also, in lateral galleries.
Surely, although a divine and invisible chain unknown to themselves,binds together all these subterranean pioneers who, almost always,think themselves isolated, and who are not so, their works varygreatly, and the light of some contrasts with the blaze of others. Thefirst are paradisiacal, the last are tragic. Nevertheless, whatever maybe the contrast, all these toilers, from the highest to the mostnocturnal, from the wisest to the most foolish, possess one likeness,and this is it: disinterestedness. Marat forgets himself like Jesus.They throw themselves on one side, they omit themselves, they think notof themselves. They have a glance, and that glance seeks the absolute.The first has the whole heavens in his eyes; the last, enigmaticalthough he may be, has still, beneath his eyelids, the pale beam of theinfinite. Venerate the man, whoever he may be, who has this sign—thestarry eye.
The shadowy eye is the other sign.
With it, evil commences. Reflect and tremble in the presence of any onewho has no glance at all. The social order has its black miners.
There is a point where depth is tantamount to burial, and where lightbecomes extinct.
Below all these mines which we have just mentioned, below all thesegalleries, below this whole immense, subterranean, venous system ofprogress and utopia, much further on in the earth, much lower thanMarat, lower than Babeuf, lower, much lower, and without any connectionwith the upper levels, there lies the last mine. A formidable spot.This is what we have designated as the _le troisième dessous_. It isthe grave of shadows. It is the cellar of the blind. _Inferi_.
This communicates with the abyss.



CHAPTER II—THE LOWEST DEPTHS

There disinterestedness vanishes. The demon is vaguely outlined; eachone is for himself. The _I_ in the eyes howls, seeks, fumbles, andgnaws. The social Ugolino is in this gulf.
The wild spectres who roam in this grave, almost beasts, almostphantoms, are not occupied with universal progress; they are ignorantboth of the idea and of the word; they take no thought for anything butthe satisfaction of their individual desires. They are almostunconscious, and there exists within them a sort of terribleobliteration. They have two mothers, both step-mothers, ignorance andmisery. They have a guide, necessity; and for all forms ofsatisfaction, appetite. They are brutally voracious, that is to say,ferocious, not after the fashion of the tyrant, but after the fashionof the tiger. From suffering these spectres pass to crime; fatalaffiliation, dizzy creation, logic of darkness. That which crawls inthe social third lower level is no longer complaint stifled by theabsolute; it is the protest of matter. Man there becomes a dragon. Tobe hungry, to be thirsty—that is the point of departure; to beSatan—that is the point reached. From that vault Lacenaire emerges.
We have just seen, in Book Fourth, one of the compartments of the uppermine, of the great political, revolutionary, and philosophicalexcavation. There, as we have just said, all is pure, noble, dignified,honest. There, assuredly, one might be misled; but error is worthy ofveneration there, so thoroughly does it imply heroism. The work thereeffected, taken as a whole has a name: Progress.
The moment has now come when we must take a look at other depths,hideous depths. There exists beneath society, we insist upon thispoint, and there will exist, until that day when ignorance shall bedissipated, the great cavern of evil.
This cavern is below all, and is the foe of all. It is hatred, withoutexception. This cavern knows no philosophers; its dagger has never cuta pen. Its blackness has no connection with the sublime blackness ofthe inkstand. Never have the fingers of night which contract beneaththis stifling ceiling, turned the leaves of a book nor unfolded anewspaper. Babeuf is a speculator to Cartouche; Marat is an aristocratto Schinderhannes. This cavern has for its object the destruction ofeverything.
Of everything. Including the upper superior mines, which it execrates.It not only undermines, in its hideous swarming, the actual socialorder; it undermines philosophy, it undermines human thought, itundermines civilization, it undermines revolution, it underminesprogress. Its name is simply theft, prostitution, murder,assassination. It is darkness, and it desires chaos. Its vault isformed of ignorance.
All the others, those above it, have but one object—to suppress it. Itis to this point that philosophy and progress tend, with all theirorgans simultaneously, by their amelioration of the real, as well as bytheir contemplation of the absolute. Destroy the cavern Ignorance andyou destroy the lair Crime.
Let us condense, in a few words, a part of what we have just written.The only social peril is darkness.
Humanity is identity. All men are made of the same clay. There is nodifference, here below, at least, in predestination. The same shadow infront, the same flesh in the present, the same ashes afterwards. Butignorance, mingled with the human paste, blackens it. This incurableblackness takes possession of the interior of a man and is thereconverted into evil.



CHAPTER III—BABET, GUEULEMER, CLAQUESOUS, AND MONTPARNASSE

A quartette of ruffians, Claquesous, Gueulemer, Babet, and Montparnassegoverned the third lower floor of Paris, from 1830 to 1835.
Gueulemer was a Hercules of no defined position. For his lair he hadthe sewer of the Arche-Marion. He was six feet high, his pectoralmuscles were of marble, his biceps of brass, his breath was that of acavern, his torso that of a colossus, his head that of a bird. Onethought one beheld the Farnese Hercules clad in duck trousers and acotton velvet waistcoat. Gueulemer, built after this sculpturalfashion, might have subdued monsters; he had found it more expeditiousto be one. A low brow, large temples, less than forty years of age, butwith crow’s-feet, harsh, short hair, cheeks like a brush, a beard likethat of a wild boar; the reader can see the man before him. His musclescalled for work, his stupidity would have none of it. He was a great,idle force. He was an assassin through coolness. He was thought to be acreole. He had, probably, somewhat to do with Marshal Brune, havingbeen a porter at Avignon in 1815. After this stage, he had turnedruffian.
The diaphaneity of Babet contrasted with the grossness of Gueulemer.Babet was thin and learned. He was transparent but impenetrable.Daylight was visible through his bones, but nothing through his eyes.He declared that he was a chemist. He had been a jack of all trades. Hehad played in vaudeville at Saint-Mihiel. He was a man of purpose, afine talker, who underlined his smiles and accentuated his gestures.His occupation consisted in selling, in the open air, plaster busts andportraits of “the head of the State.” In addition to this, he extractedteeth. He had exhibited phenomena at fairs, and he had owned a boothwith a trumpet and this poster: “Babet, Dental Artist, Member of theAcademies, makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids,extracts teeth, undertakes stumps abandoned by his brotherpractitioners. Price: one tooth, one franc, fifty centimes; two teeth,two francs; three teeth, two francs, fifty. Take advantage of thisopportunity.” This _Take advantage of this opportunity_ meant: Have asmany teeth extracted as possible. He had been married and had hadchildren. He did not know what had become of his wife and children. Hehad lost them as one loses his handkerchief. Babet read the papers, astriking exception in the world to which he belonged. One day, at theperiod when he had his family with him in his booth on wheels, he hadread in the _Messager_, that a woman had just given birth to a child,who was doing well, and had a calf’s muzzle, and he exclaimed: “There’sa fortune! my wife has not the wit to present me with a child likethat!”

Later on he had abandoned everything, in order to “undertake Paris.”This was his expression.
Who was Claquesous? He was night. He waited until the sky was daubedwith black, before he showed himself. At nightfall he emerged from thehole whither he returned before daylight. Where was this hole? No oneknew. He only addressed his accomplices in the most absolute darkness,and with his back turned to them. Was his name Claquesous? Certainlynot. If a candle was brought, he put on a mask. He was a ventriloquist.Babet said: “Claquesous is a nocturne for two voices.” Claquesous wasvague, terrible, and a roamer. No one was sure whether he had a name,Claquesous being a sobriquet; none was sure that he had a voice, as hisstomach spoke more frequently than his voice; no one was sure that hehad a face, as he was never seen without his mask. He disappeared asthough he had vanished into thin air; when he appeared, it was asthough he sprang from the earth.
A lugubrious being was Montparnasse. Montparnasse was a child; lessthan twenty years of age, with a handsome face, lips like cherries,charming black hair, the brilliant light of springtime in his eyes; hehad all vices and aspired to all crimes.
The digestion of evil aroused in him an appetite for worse. It was thestreet boy turned pickpocket, and a pickpocket turned garroter. He wasgenteel, effeminate, graceful, robust, sluggish, ferocious. The rim ofhis hat was curled up on the left side, in order to make room for atuft of hair, after the style of 1829. He lived by robbery withviolence. His coat was of the best cut, but threadbare. Montparnassewas a fashion-plate in misery and given to the commission of murders.The cause of all this youth’s crimes was the desire to be well-dressed.The first grisette who had said to him: “You are handsome!” had castthe stain of darkness into his heart, and had made a Cain of this Abel.Finding that he was handsome, he desired to be elegant: now, the heightof elegance is idleness; idleness in a poor man means crime. Fewprowlers were so dreaded as Montparnasse. At eighteen, he had alreadynumerous corpses in his past. More than one passer-by lay withoutstretched arms in the presence of this wretch, with his face in apool of blood. Curled, pomaded, with laced waist, the hips of a woman,the bust of a Prussian officer, the murmur of admiration from theboulevard wenches surrounding him, his cravat knowingly tied, abludgeon in his pocket, a flower in his buttonhole; such was this dandyof the sepulchre.



CHAPTER IV—COMPOSITION OF THE TROUPE

These four ruffians formed a sort of Proteus, winding like a serpentamong the police, and striving to escape Vidocq’s indiscreet glances“under divers forms, tree, flame, fountain,” lending each other theirnames and their traps, hiding in their own shadows, boxes with secretcompartments and refuges for each other, stripping off theirpersonalities, as one removes his false nose at a masked ball,sometimes simplifying matters to the point of consisting of but oneindividual, sometimes multiplying themselves to such a point thatCoco-Latour himself took them for a whole throng.
These four men were not four men; they were a sort of mysterious robberwith four heads, operating on a grand scale on Paris; they were thatmonstrous polyp of evil, which inhabits the crypt of society.
Thanks to their ramifications, and to the network underlying theirrelations, Babet, Gueulemer, Claquesous, and Montparnasse were chargedwith the general enterprise of the ambushes of the department of theSeine. The inventors of ideas of that nature, men with nocturnalimaginations, applied to them to have their ideas executed. Theyfurnished the canvas to the four rascals, and the latter undertook thepreparation of the scenery. They labored at the stage setting. Theywere always in a condition to lend a force proportioned and suitable toall crimes which demanded a lift of the shoulder, and which weresufficiently lucrative. When a crime was in quest of arms, theyunder-let their accomplices. They kept a troupe of actors of theshadows at the disposition of all underground tragedies.
They were in the habit of assembling at nightfall, the hour when theywoke up, on the plains which adjoin the Salpêtrière. There they heldtheir conferences. They had twelve black hours before them; theyregulated their employment accordingly.
_Patron-Minette_,—such was the name which was bestowed in thesubterranean circulation on the association of these four men. In thefantastic, ancient, popular parlance, which is vanishing day by day,_Patron-Minette_ signifies the morning, the same as _entre chien etloup_—between dog and wolf—signifies the evening. This appellation,_Patron-Minette_, was probably derived from the hour at which theirwork ended, the dawn being the vanishing moment for phantoms and forthe separation of ruffians. These four men were known under this title.When the President of the Assizes visited Lacenaire in his prison, andquestioned him concerning a misdeed which Lacenaire denied, “Who didit?” demanded the President. Lacenaire made this response, enigmaticalso far as the magistrate was concerned, but clear to the police:“Perhaps it was Patron-Minette.”

A piece can sometimes be divined on the enunciation of the personages;in the same manner a band can almost be judged from the list ofruffians composing it. Here are the appellations to which the principalmembers of Patron-Minette answered,—for the names have survived inspecial memoirs.
Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille.
Brujon. [There was a Brujon dynasty; we cannot refrain frominterpolating this word.]
Boulatruelle, the road-mender already introduced.
Laveuve.
Finistère.
Homère-Hogu, a negro.
Mardisoir. (Tuesday evening.)
Dépêche. (Make haste.)
Fauntleroy, alias Bouquetière (the Flower Girl).
Glorieux, a discharged convict.
Barrecarrosse (Stop-carriage), called Monsieur Dupont.
L’Esplanade-du-Sud.
Poussagrive.
Carmagnolet.
Kruideniers, called Bizarro.
Mangedentelle. (Lace-eater.)
Les-pieds-en-l’Air. (Feet in the air.)
Demi-Liard, called Deux-Milliards.
Etc., etc.
We pass over some, and not the worst of them. These names have facesattached. They do not express merely beings, but species. Each one ofthese names corresponds to a variety of those misshapen fungi from theunder side of civilization.
Those beings, who were not very lavish with their countenances, werenot among the men whom one sees passing along the streets. Fatigued bythe wild nights which they passed, they went off by day to sleep,sometimes in the lime-kilns, sometimes in the abandoned quarries ofMontmatre or Montrouge, sometimes in the sewers. They ran to earth.
What became of these men? They still exist. They have always existed.Horace speaks of them: _Ambubaiarum collegia, pharmacopolæ, mendici,mimæ_; and so long as society remains what it is, they will remain whatthey are. Beneath the obscure roof of their cavern, they arecontinually born again from the social ooze. They return, spectres, butalways identical; only, they no longer bear the same names and they areno longer in the same skins. The individuals extirpated, the tribesubsists.
They always have the same faculties. From the vagrant to the tramp, therace is maintained in its purity. They divine purses in pockets, theyscent out watches in fobs. Gold and silver possess an odor for them.There exist ingenuous bourgeois, of whom it might be said, that theyhave a “stealable” air. These men patiently pursue these bourgeois.They experience the quivers of a spider at the passage of a stranger orof a man from the country.
These men are terrible, when one encounters them, or catches a glimpseof them, towards midnight, on a deserted boulevard. They do not seem tobe men but forms composed of living mists; one would say that theyhabitually constitute one mass with the shadows, that they are in nowise distinct from them, that they possess no other soul than thedarkness, and that it is only momentarily and for the purpose of livingfor a few minutes a monstrous life, that they have separated from thenight.
What is necessary to cause these spectres to vanish? Light. Light infloods. Not a single bat can resist the dawn. Light up society frombelow.



BOOK EIGHTH—THE WICKED POOR MAN



CHAPTER I—MARIUS, WHILE SEEKING A GIRL IN A BONNET, ENCOUNTERS A MAN INA CAP

Summer passed, then the autumn; winter came. Neither M. Leblanc nor theyoung girl had again set foot in the Luxembourg garden. Thenceforth,Marius had but one thought,—to gaze once more on that sweet andadorable face. He sought constantly, he sought everywhere; he foundnothing. He was no longer Marius, the enthusiastic dreamer, the firm,resolute, ardent man, the bold defier of fate, the brain which erectedfuture on future, the young spirit encumbered with plans, withprojects, with pride, with ideas and wishes; he was a lost dog. He fellinto a black melancholy. All was over. Work disgusted him, walkingtired him. Vast nature, formerly so filled with forms, lights, voices,counsels, perspectives, horizons, teachings, now lay empty before him.It seemed to him that everything had disappeared.
He thought incessantly, for he could not do otherwise; but he no longertook pleasure in his thoughts. To everything that they proposed to himin a whisper, he replied in his darkness: “What is the use?”

He heaped a hundred reproaches on himself. “Why did I follow her? I wasso happy at the mere sight of her! She looked at me; was not thatimmense? She had the air of loving me. Was not that everything? Iwished to have, what? There was nothing after that. I have been absurd.It is my own fault,” etc., etc. Courfeyrac, to whom he confidednothing,—it was his nature,—but who made some little guess ateverything,—that was his nature,—had begun by congratulating him onbeing in love, though he was amazed at it; then, seeing Marius fallinto this melancholy state, he ended by saying to him: “I see that youhave been simply an animal. Here, come to the Chaumière.”

Once, having confidence in a fine September sun, Marius had allowedhimself to be taken to the ball at Sceaux by Courfeyrac, Bossuet, andGrantaire, hoping, what a dream! that he might, perhaps, find herthere. Of course he did not see the one he sought.—“But this is theplace, all the same, where all lost women are found,” grumbledGrantaire in an aside. Marius left his friends at the ball and returnedhome on foot, alone, through the night, weary, feverish, with sad andtroubled eyes, stunned by the noise and dust of the merry wagons filledwith singing creatures on their way home from the feast, which passedclose to him, as he, in his discouragement, breathed in the acrid scentof the walnut-trees, along the road, in order to refresh his head.
He took to living more and more alone, utterly overwhelmed, whollygiven up to his inward anguish, going and coming in his pain like thewolf in the trap, seeking the absent one everywhere, stupefied by love.
On another occasion, he had an encounter which produced on him asingular effect. He met, in the narrow streets in the vicinity of theBoulevard des Invalides, a man dressed like a workingman and wearing acap with a long visor, which allowed a glimpse of locks of very whitehair. Marius was struck with the beauty of this white hair, andscrutinized the man, who was walking slowly and as though absorbed inpainful meditation. Strange to say, he thought that he recognized M.Leblanc. The hair was the same, also the profile, so far as the cappermitted a view of it, the mien identical, only more depressed. Butwhy these workingman’s clothes? What was the meaning of this? Whatsignified that disguise? Marius was greatly astonished. When herecovered himself, his first impulse was to follow the man; who knowswhether he did not hold at last the clue which he was seeking? In anycase, he must see the man near at hand, and clear up the mystery. Butthe idea occurred to him too late, the man was no longer there. He hadturned into some little side street, and Marius could not find him.This encounter occupied his mind for three days and then was effaced.“After all,” he said to himself, “it was probably only a resemblance.”




CHAPTER II—TREASURE TROVE

Marius had not left the Gorbeau house. He paid no attention to any onethere.
At that epoch, to tell the truth, there were no other inhabitants inthe house, except himself and those Jondrettes whose rent he had oncepaid, without, moreover, ever having spoken to either father, mother,or daughters. The other lodgers had moved away or had died, or had beenturned out in default of payment.
One day during that winter, the sun had shown itself a little in theafternoon, but it was the 2d of February, that ancient Candlemas daywhose treacherous sun, the precursor of a six weeks’ cold spell,inspired Mathieu Laensberg with these two lines, which have withjustice remained classic:—
Qu’il luise ou qu’il luiserne,L’ours rentre dans en sa caverne.26

Marius had just emerged from his: night was falling. It was the hourfor his dinner; for he had been obliged to take to dining again, alas!oh, infirmities of ideal passions!
He had just crossed his threshold, where Ma’am Bougon was sweeping atthe moment, as she uttered this memorable monologue:—
“What is there that is cheap now? Everything is dear. There is nothingin the world that is cheap except trouble; you can get that fornothing, the trouble of the world!”

Marius slowly ascended the boulevard towards the barrier, in order toreach the Rue Saint-Jacques. He was walking along with drooping head.
All at once, he felt some one elbow him in the dusk; he wheeled round,and saw two young girls clad in rags, the one tall and slim, the othera little shorter, who were passing rapidly, all out of breath, interror, and with the appearance of fleeing; they had been coming tomeet him, had not seen him, and had jostled him as they passed. Throughthe twilight, Marius could distinguish their livid faces, their wildheads, their dishevelled hair, their hideous bonnets, their raggedpetticoats, and their bare feet. They were talking as they ran. Thetaller said in a very low voice:—
“The bobbies have come. They came near nabbing me at the half-circle.”The other answered: “I saw them. I bolted, bolted, bolted!”

Through this repulsive slang, Marius understood that gendarmes or thepolice had come near apprehending these two children, and that thelatter had escaped.
They plunged among the trees of the boulevard behind him, and therecreated, for a few minutes, in the gloom, a sort of vague white spot,then disappeared.
Marius had halted for a moment.
He was about to pursue his way, when his eye lighted on a littlegrayish package lying on the ground at his feet. He stooped and pickedit up. It was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers.
“Good,” he said to himself, “those unhappy girls dropped it.”

He retraced his steps, he called, he did not find them; he reflectedthat they must already be far away, put the package in his pocket, andwent off to dine.
On the way, he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard, a child’s coffin,covered with a black cloth resting on three chairs, and illuminated bya candle. The two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind.
“Poor mothers!” he thought. “There is one thing sadder than to seeone’s children die; it is to see them leading an evil life.”

Then those shadows which had varied his melancholy vanished from histhoughts, and he fell back once more into his habitual preoccupations.He fell to thinking once more of his six months of love and happinessin the open air and the broad daylight, beneath the beautiful trees ofLuxembourg.
“How gloomy my life has become!” he said to himself. “Young girls arealways appearing to me, only formerly they were angels and now they areghouls.”




CHAPTER III—QUADRIFRONS

That evening, as he was undressing preparatory to going to bed, hishand came in contact, in the pocket of his coat, with the packet whichhe had picked up on the boulevard. He had forgotten it. He thought thatit would be well to open it, and that this package might possiblycontain the address of the young girls, if it really belonged to them,and, in any case, the information necessary to a restitution to theperson who had lost it.
He opened the envelope.
It was not sealed and contained four letters, also unsealed.
They bore addresses.
All four exhaled a horrible odor of tobacco.
The first was addressed: _“To Madame, Madame la Marquise de Grucheray,the place opposite the Chamber of Deputies, No.—”_
Marius said to himself, that he should probably find in it theinformation which he sought, and that, moreover, the letter being open,it was probable that it could be read without impropriety.
It was conceived as follows:—
Madame la Marquise: The virtue of clemency and piety is that which mostclosely unites sosiety. Turn your Christian spirit and cast a look ofcompassion on this unfortunate Spanish victim of loyalty and attachmentto the sacred cause of legitimacy, who has given with his blood,consecrated his fortune, evverything, to defend that cause, and to-dayfinds himself in the greatest missery. He doubts not that yourhonorable person will grant succor to preserve an existence exteremelypainful for a military man of education and honor full of wounds,counts in advance on the humanity which animates you and on theinterest which Madame la Marquise bears to a nation so unfortunate.Their prayer will not be in vain, and their gratitude will preservetheirs charming souvenir.
My respectful sentiments, with which I have the honor to beMadame,Don Alvarès, Spanish Captainof Cavalry, a royalist whohas take refuge in France,who finds himself on travellsfor his country, and theresources are lacking him tocontinue his travells.

No address was joined to the signature. Marius hoped to find theaddress in the second letter, whose superscription read: _À Madame,Madame la Comtesse de Montvernet, Rue Cassette, No. 9_. This is whatMarius read in it:—
Madame la Comtesse:  It is an unhappy mother of a family of sixchildren the last of which is only eight months old.  I sicksince my last confinement, abandoned by my husband five months ago,haveing no resources in the world the most frightful indigance.
In the hope of Madame la Comtesse, she has the honor to be,Madame, with profound respect,Mistress Balizard.

Marius turned to the third letter, which was a petition like thepreceding; he read:—
Monsieur Pabourgeot, Elector, wholesale stocking merchant,Rue Saint-Denis on the corner of the Rue aux Fers.
I permit myself to address you this letter to beg you to grant methe pretious favor of your simpaties and to interest yourself in a manof letters who has just sent a drama to the Théâtre-Français. The subjectis historical, and the action takes place in Auvergne in the timeof the Empire; the style, I think, is natural, laconic, and may havesome merit.  There are couplets to be sung in four places.  The comic,the serious, the unexpected, are mingled in a variety of characters,and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread through all the intriguewhich proceeds misteriously, and ends, after striking altarations,in the midst of many beautiful strokes of brilliant scenes.
My principal object is to satisfi the desire which progressivelyanimates the man of our century, that is to say, the fashion,that capritious and bizarre weathervane which changes at almostevery new wind.
In spite of these qualities I have reason to fear that jealousy,the egotism of priviliged authors, may obtaine my exclusion fromthe theatre, for I am not ignorant of the mortifications with whichnewcomers are treated.
Monsiuer Pabourgeot, your just reputation as an enlightened protectorof men of litters emboldens me to send you my daughter who willexplain our indigant situation to you, lacking bread and firein this wynter season.  When I say to you that I beg you to acceptthe dedication of my drama which I desire to make to you and of allthose that I shall make, is to prove to you how great is my ambitionto have the honor of sheltering myself under your protection,and of adorning my writings with your name.  If you deign to honorme with the most modest offering, I shall immediately occupy myselfin making a piesse of verse to pay you my tribute of gratitude.Which I shall endeavor to render this piesse as perfect as possible,will be sent to you before it is inserted at the beginning of thedrama and delivered on the stage.To Monsieurand Madame Pabourgeot,My most respectful complements,Genflot, man of letters.P. S. Even if it is only forty sous.
Excuse me for sending my daughter and not presenting myself,but sad motives connected with the toilet do not permit me,alas! to go out.

Finally, Marius opened the fourth letter. The address ran: _To thebenevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-haut-Pas_. Itcontained the following lines:—
Benevolent Man:  If you deign to accompany my daughter, you willbehold a misserable calamity, and I will show you my certificates.
At the aspect of these writings your generous soul will be movedwith a sentiment of obvious benevolence, for true philosophersalways feel lively emotions.
Admit, compassionate man, that it is necessary to suffer the mostcruel need, and that it is very painful, for the sake of obtaininga little relief, to get oneself attested by the authorities as thoughone were not free to suffer and to die of inanition while waitingto have our misery relieved.  Destinies are very fatal for severaland too prodigal or too protecting for others.
I await your presence or your offering, if you deign to make one,and I beseech you to accept the respectful sentiments with which Ihave the honor to be,truly magnanimous man,your very humbleand very obedient servant,P. Fabantou, dramatic artist.

After perusing these four letters, Marius did not find himself muchfurther advanced than before.
In the first place, not one of the signers gave his address.
Then, they seemed to come from four different individuals, Don Alvarès,Mistress Balizard, the poet Genflot, and dramatic artist Fabantou; butthe singular thing about these letters was, that all four were writtenby the same hand.
What conclusion was to be drawn from this, except that they all comefrom the same person?
Moreover, and this rendered the conjecture all the more probable, thecoarse and yellow paper was the same in all four, the odor of tobaccowas the same, and, although an attempt had been made to vary the style,the same orthographical faults were reproduced with the greatesttranquillity, and the man of letters Genflot was no more exempt fromthem than the Spanish captain.
It was waste of trouble to try to solve this petty mystery. Had it notbeen a chance find, it would have borne the air of a mystification.Marius was too melancholy to take even a chance pleasantry well, and tolend himself to a game which the pavement of the street seemed desirousof playing with him. It seemed to him that he was playing the part ofthe blind man in blind man’s buff between the four letters, and thatthey were making sport of him.
Nothing, however, indicated that these letters belonged to the twoyoung girls whom Marius had met on the boulevard. After all, they wereevidently papers of no value. Marius replaced them in their envelope,flung the whole into a corner and went to bed. About seven o’clock inthe morning, he had just risen and breakfasted, and was trying tosettle down to work, when there came a soft knock at his door.
As he owned nothing, he never locked his door, unless occasionally,though very rarely, when he was engaged in some pressing work. Evenwhen absent he left his key in the lock. “You will be robbed,” saidMa’am Bougon. “Of what?” said Marius. The truth is, however, that hehad, one day, been robbed of an old pair of boots, to the great triumphof Ma’am Bougon.
There came a second knock, as gentle as the first.
“Come in,” said Marius.
The door opened.
“What do you want, Ma’am Bougon?” asked Marius, without raising hiseyes from the books and manuscripts on his table.
A voice which did not belong to Ma’am Bougon replied:—
“Excuse me, sir—”

It was a dull, broken, hoarse, strangled voice, the voice of an oldman, roughened with brandy and liquor.
Marius turned round hastily, and beheld a young girl.



CHAPTER IV—A ROSE IN MISERY


  Enlarge
Rose in Misery  3b8-4-rose-in-misery

A very young girl was standing in the half-open door. The dormer windowof the garret, through which the light fell, was precisely opposite thedoor, and illuminated the figure with a wan light. She was a frail,emaciated, slender creature; there was nothing but a chemise and apetticoat upon that chilled and shivering nakedness. Her girdle was astring, her head ribbon a string, her pointed shoulders emerged fromher chemise, a blond and lymphatic pallor, earth-colored collar-bones,red hands, a half-open and degraded mouth, missing teeth, dull, bold,base eyes; she had the form of a young girl who has missed her youth,and the look of a corrupt old woman; fifty years mingled with fifteen;one of those beings which are both feeble and horrible, and which causethose to shudder whom they do not cause to weep.
Marius had risen, and was staring in a sort of stupor at this being,who was almost like the forms of the shadows which traverse dreams.
The most heart-breaking thing of all was, that this young girl had notcome into the world to be homely. In her early childhood she must evenhave been pretty. The grace of her age was still struggling against thehideous, premature decrepitude of debauchery and poverty. The remainsof beauty were dying away in that face of sixteen, like the palesunlight which is extinguished under hideous clouds at dawn on awinter’s day.
That face was not wholly unknown to Marius. He thought he rememberedhaving seen it somewhere.
“What do you wish, Mademoiselle?” he asked.
The young girl replied in her voice of a drunken convict:—
“Here is a letter for you, Monsieur Marius.”

She called Marius by his name; he could not doubt that he was theperson whom she wanted; but who was this girl? How did she know hisname?
Without waiting for him to tell her to advance, she entered. Sheentered resolutely, staring, with a sort of assurance that made theheart bleed, at the whole room and the unmade bed. Her feet were bare.Large holes in her petticoat permitted glimpses of her long legs andher thin knees. She was shivering.
She held a letter in her hand, which she presented to Marius.
Marius, as he opened the letter, noticed that the enormous wafer whichsealed it was still moist. The message could not have come from adistance. He read:—
My amiable neighbor, young man:  I have learned of your goodness to me,that you paid my rent six months ago.  I bless you, young man.My eldest daughter will tell you that we have been without a morselof bread for two days, four persons and my spouse ill.  If I amnot deseaved in my opinion, I think I may hope that your generousheart will melt at this statement and the desire will subjugate youto be propitious to me by daigning to lavish on me a slight favor.
I am with the distinguished consideration which is due to thebenefactors of humanity,—
Jondrette.
P.S. My eldest daughter will await your orders, dear Monsieur Marius.

This letter, coming in the very midst of the mysterious adventure whichhad occupied Marius’ thoughts ever since the preceding evening, waslike a candle in a cellar. All was suddenly illuminated.
This letter came from the same place as the other four. There was thesame writing, the same style, the same orthography, the same paper, thesame odor of tobacco.
There were five missives, five histories, five signatures, and a singlesigner. The Spanish Captain Don Alvarès, the unhappy Mistress Balizard,the dramatic poet Genflot, the old comedian Fabantou, were all fournamed Jondrette, if, indeed, Jondrette himself were named Jondrette.
Marius had lived in the house for a tolerably long time, and he hadhad, as we have said, but very rare occasion to see, to even catch aglimpse of, his extremely mean neighbors. His mind was elsewhere, andwhere the mind is, there the eyes are also. He had been obliged morethan once to pass the Jondrettes in the corridor or on the stairs; butthey were mere forms to him; he had paid so little heed to them, that,on the preceding evening, he had jostled the Jondrette girls on theboulevard, without recognizing them, for it had evidently been they,and it was with great difficulty that the one who had just entered hisroom had awakened in him, in spite of disgust and pity, a vaguerecollection of having met her elsewhere.
Now he saw everything clearly. He understood that his neighborJondrette, in his distress, exercised the industry of speculating onthe charity of benevolent persons, that he procured addresses, and thathe wrote under feigned names to people whom he judged to be wealthy andcompassionate, letters which his daughters delivered at their risk andperil, for this father had come to such a pass, that he risked hisdaughters; he was playing a game with fate, and he used them as thestake. Marius understood that probably, judging from their flight onthe evening before, from their breathless condition, from their terrorand from the words of slang which he had overheard, these unfortunatecreatures were plying some inexplicably sad profession, and that theresult of the whole was, in the midst of human society, as it is nowconstituted, two miserable beings who were neither girls nor women, aspecies of impure and innocent monsters produced by misery.
Sad creatures, without name, or sex, or age, to whom neither good norevil were any longer possible, and who, on emerging from childhood,have already nothing in this world, neither liberty, nor virtue, norresponsibility. Souls which blossomed out yesterday, and are fadedto-day, like those flowers let fall in the streets, which are soiledwith every sort of mire, while waiting for some wheel to crush them.Nevertheless, while Marius bent a pained and astonished gaze on her,the young girl was wandering back and forth in the garret with theaudacity of a spectre. She kicked about, without troubling herself asto her nakedness. Occasionally her chemise, which was untied and torn,fell almost to her waist. She moved the chairs about, she disarrangedthe toilet articles which stood on the commode, she handled Marius’clothes, she rummaged about to see what there was in the corners.
“Hullo!” said she, “you have a mirror!”

And she hummed scraps of vaudevilles, as though she had been alone,frolicsome refrains which her hoarse and guttural voice renderedlugubrious.
An indescribable constraint, weariness, and humiliation wereperceptible beneath this hardihood. Effrontery is a disgrace.
Nothing could be more melancholy than to see her sport about the room,and, so to speak, flit with the movements of a bird which is frightenedby the daylight, or which has broken its wing. One felt that underother conditions of education and destiny, the gay and over-free mienof this young girl might have turned out sweet and charming. Never,even among animals, does the creature born to be a dove change into anosprey. That is only to be seen among men.
Marius reflected, and allowed her to have her way.
She approached the table.
“Ah!” said she, “books!”

A flash pierced her glassy eye. She resumed, and her accent expressedthe happiness which she felt in boasting of something, to which nohuman creature is insensible:—
“I know how to read, I do!”

She eagerly seized a book which lay open on the table, and read withtolerable fluency:—
“—General Bauduin received orders to take the château of Hougomontwhich stands in the middle of the plain of Waterloo, with fivebattalions of his brigade.”

She paused.
“Ah! Waterloo! I know about that. It was a battle long ago. My fatherwas there. My father has served in the armies. We are fine Bonapartistsin our house, that we are! Waterloo was against the English.”

She laid down the book, caught up a pen, and exclaimed:—
“And I know how to write, too!”

She dipped her pen in the ink, and turning to Marius:—
“Do you want to see? Look here, I’m going to write a word to show you.”

And before he had time to answer, she wrote on a sheet of white paper,which lay in the middle of the table: “The bobbies are here.”

Then throwing down the pen:—
“There are no faults of orthography. You can look. We have received aneducation, my sister and I. We have not always been as we are now. Wewere not made—”

Here she paused, fixed her dull eyes on Marius, and burst out laughing,saying, with an intonation which contained every form of anguish,stifled by every form of cynicism:—
“Bah!”

And she began to hum these words to a gay air:—
“J’ai faim, mon père.”      I am hungry, father.Pas de fricot.             I have no food.J’ai froid, ma mère.       I am cold, mother.Pas de tricot.             I have no clothes.Grelotte,                  Lolotte!Lolotte!                   Shiver,Sanglote,                  Sob,Jacquot!”                  Jacquot!”

She had hardly finished this couplet, when she exclaimed:—
“Do you ever go to the play, Monsieur Marius? I do. I have a littlebrother who is a friend of the artists, and who gives me ticketssometimes. But I don’t like the benches in the galleries. One iscramped and uncomfortable there. There are rough people theresometimes; and people who smell bad.”

Then she scrutinized Marius, assumed a singular air and said:—
“Do you know, Mr. Marius, that you are a very handsome fellow?”

And at the same moment the same idea occurred to them both, and madeher smile and him blush. She stepped up to him, and laid her hand onhis shoulder: “You pay no heed to me, but I know you, Mr. Marius. Imeet you here on the staircase, and then I often see you going to aperson named Father Mabeuf who lives in the direction of Austerlitz,sometimes when I have been strolling in that quarter. It is verybecoming to you to have your hair tumbled thus.”

She tried to render her voice soft, but only succeeded in making itvery deep. A portion of her words was lost in the transit from herlarynx to her lips, as though on a piano where some notes are missing.
Marius had retreated gently.
“Mademoiselle,” said he, with his cool gravity, “I have here a packagewhich belongs to you, I think. Permit me to return it to you.”

And he held out the envelope containing the four letters.
She clapped her hands and exclaimed:—
“We have been looking everywhere for that!”

Then she eagerly seized the package and opened the envelope, saying asshe did so:—
“Dieu de Dieu! how my sister and I have hunted! And it was you whofound it! On the boulevard, was it not? It must have been on theboulevard? You see, we let it fall when we were running. It was thatbrat of a sister of mine who was so stupid. When we got home, we couldnot find it anywhere. As we did not wish to be beaten, as that isuseless, as that is entirely useless, as that is absolutely useless, wesaid that we had carried the letters to the proper persons, and thatthey had said to us: ‘Nix.’ So here they are, those poor letters! Andhow did you find out that they belonged to me? Ah! yes, the writing. Soit was you that we jostled as we passed last night. We couldn’t see. Isaid to my sister: ‘Is it a gentleman?’ My sister said to me: ‘I thinkit is a gentleman.’”

In the meanwhile she had unfolded the petition addressed to “thebenevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.”

“Here!” said she, “this is for that old fellow who goes to mass. By theway, this is his hour. I’ll go and carry it to him. Perhaps he willgive us something to breakfast on.”

Then she began to laugh again, and added:—
“Do you know what it will mean if we get a breakfast today? It willmean that we shall have had our breakfast of the day before yesterday,our breakfast of yesterday, our dinner of to-day, and all that at once,and this morning. Come! Parbleu! if you are not satisfied, dogs,burst!”

This reminded Marius of the wretched girl’s errand to himself. Hefumbled in his waistcoat pocket, and found nothing there.
The young girl went on, and seemed to have no consciousness of Marius’presence.
“I often go off in the evening. Sometimes I don’t come home again. Lastwinter, before we came here, we lived under the arches of the bridges.We huddled together to keep from freezing. My little sister cried. Howmelancholy the water is! When I thought of drowning myself, I said tomyself: ‘No, it’s too cold.’ I go out alone, whenever I choose, Isometimes sleep in the ditches. Do you know, at night, when I walkalong the boulevard, I see the trees like forks, I see houses, allblack and as big as Notre Dame, I fancy that the white walls are theriver, I say to myself: ‘Why, there’s water there!’ The stars are likethe lamps in illuminations, one would say that they smoked and that thewind blew them out, I am bewildered, as though horses were breathing inmy ears; although it is night, I hear hand-organs andspinning-machines, and I don’t know what all. I think people areflinging stones at me, I flee without knowing whither, everythingwhirls and whirls. You feel very queer when you have had no food.”

And then she stared at him with a bewildered air.
By dint of searching and ransacking his pockets, Marius had finallycollected five francs sixteen sous. This was all he owned in the worldfor the moment. “At all events,” he thought, “there is my dinner forto-day, and to-morrow we will see.” He kept the sixteen sous, andhanded the five francs to the young girl.
She seized the coin.
“Good!” said she, “the sun is shining!”

And, as though the sun had possessed the property of melting theavalanches of slang in her brain, she went on:—
“Five francs! the shiner! a monarch! in this hole! Ain’t this fine!You’re a jolly thief! I’m your humble servant! Bravo for the goodfellows! Two days’ wine! and meat! and stew! we’ll have a royal feast!and a good fill!”

She pulled her chemise up on her shoulders, made a low bow to Marius,then a familiar sign with her hand, and went towards the door, saying:—
“Good morning, sir. It’s all right. I’ll go and find my old man.”

As she passed, she caught sight of a dry crust of bread on the commode,which was moulding there amid the dust; she flung herself upon it andbit into it, muttering:—
“That’s good! it’s hard! it breaks my teeth!”

Then she departed.



CHAPTER V—A PROVIDENTIAL PEEP-HOLE

Marius had lived for five years in poverty, in destitution, even indistress, but he now perceived that he had not known real misery. Truemisery he had but just had a view of. It was its spectre which had justpassed before his eyes. In fact, he who has only beheld the misery ofman has seen nothing; the misery of woman is what he must see; he whohas seen only the misery of woman has seen nothing; he must see themisery of the child.
When a man has reached his last extremity, he has reached his lastresources at the same time. Woe to the defenceless beings who surroundhim! Work, wages, bread, fire, courage, good will, all fail himsimultaneously. The light of day seems extinguished without, the morallight within; in these shadows man encounters the feebleness of thewoman and the child, and bends them violently to ignominy.
Then all horrors become possible. Despair is surrounded with fragilepartitions which all open on either vice or crime.
Health, youth, honor, all the shy delicacies of the young body, theheart, virginity, modesty, that epidermis of the soul, are manipulatedin sinister wise by that fumbling which seeks resources, whichencounters opprobrium, and which accommodates itself to it. Fathers,mothers, children, brothers, sisters, men, women, daughters, adhere andbecome incorporated, almost like a mineral formation, in that duskypromiscuousness of sexes, relationships, ages, infamies, andinnocences. They crouch, back to back, in a sort of hut of fate. Theyexchange woe-begone glances. Oh, the unfortunate wretches! How palethey are! How cold they are! It seems as though they dwelt in a planetmuch further from the sun than ours.
This young girl was to Marius a sort of messenger from the realm of sadshadows. She revealed to him a hideous side of the night.
Marius almost reproached himself for the preoccupations of reverie andpassion which had prevented his bestowing a glance on his neighbors upto that day. The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement,which any one would have yielded to; but he, Marius, should have donebetter than that. What! only a wall separated him from those abandonedbeings who lived gropingly in the dark outside the pale of the rest ofthe world, he was elbow to elbow with them, he was, in some sort, thelast link of the human race which they touched, he heard them live, orrather, rattle in the death agony beside him, and he paid no heed tothem! Every day, every instant, he heard them walking on the other sideof the wall, he heard them go, and come, and speak, and he did not evenlend an ear! And groans lay in those words, and he did not even listento them, his thoughts were elsewhere, given up to dreams, to impossibleradiances, to loves in the air, to follies; and all the while, humancreatures, his brothers in Jesus Christ, his brothers in the people,were agonizing in vain beside him! He even formed a part of theirmisfortune, and he aggravated it. For if they had had another neighborwho was less chimerical and more attentive, any ordinary and charitableman, evidently their indigence would have been noticed, their signalsof distress would have been perceived, and they would have been takenhold of and rescued! They appeared very corrupt and very depraved, nodoubt, very vile, very odious even; but those who fall without becomingdegraded are rare; besides, there is a point where the unfortunate andthe infamous unite and are confounded in a single word, a fatal word,_the miserable_; whose fault is this? And then should not the charitybe all the more profound, in proportion as the fall is great?
While reading himself this moral lesson, for there were occasions onwhich Marius, like all truly honest hearts, was his own pedagogue andscolded himself more than he deserved, he stared at the wall whichseparated him from the Jondrettes, as though he were able to make hisgaze, full of pity, penetrate that partition and warm these wretchedpeople. The wall was a thin layer of plaster upheld by lathes andbeams, and, as the reader had just learned, it allowed the sound ofvoices and words to be clearly distinguished. Only a man as dreamy asMarius could have failed to perceive this long before. There was nopaper pasted on the wall, either on the side of the Jondrettes or onthat of Marius; the coarse construction was visible in its nakedness.Marius examined the partition, almost unconsciously; sometimes reverieexamines, observes, and scrutinizes as thought would. All at once hesprang up; he had just perceived, near the top, close to the ceiling, atriangular hole, which resulted from the space between three lathes.The plaster which should have filled this cavity was missing, and bymounting on the commode, a view could be had through this aperture intothe Jondrettes’ attic. Commiseration has, and should have, itscuriosity. This aperture formed a sort of peep-hole. It is permissibleto gaze at misfortune like a traitor in order to succor it.27
“Let us get some little idea of what these people are like,” thoughtMarius, “and in what condition they are.”

He climbed upon the commode, put his eye to the crevice, and looked.



CHAPTER VI—THE WILD MAN IN HIS LAIR

Cities, like forests, have their caverns in which all the most wickedand formidable creatures which they contain conceal themselves. Only,in cities, that which thus conceals itself is ferocious, unclean, andpetty, that is to say, ugly; in forests, that which conceals itself isferocious, savage, and grand, that is to say, beautiful. Taking onelair with another, the beast’s is preferable to the man’s. Caverns arebetter than hovels.
What Marius now beheld was a hovel.
Marius was poor, and his chamber was poverty-stricken, but as hispoverty was noble, his garret was neat. The den upon which his eye nowrested was abject, dirty, fetid, pestiferous, mean, sordid. The onlyfurniture consisted of a straw chair, an infirm table, some old bits ofcrockery, and in two of the corners, two indescribable pallets; all thelight was furnished by a dormer window of four panes, draped withspiders’ webs. Through this aperture there penetrated just enough lightto make the face of a man appear like the face of a phantom. The wallshad a leprous aspect, and were covered with seams and scars, like avisage disfigured by some horrible malady; a repulsive moisture exudedfrom them. Obscene sketches roughly sketched with charcoal could bedistinguished upon them.
The chamber which Marius occupied had a dilapidated brick pavement;this one was neither tiled nor planked; its inhabitants steppeddirectly on the antique plaster of the hovel, which had grown blackunder the long-continued pressure of feet. Upon this uneven floor,where the dirt seemed to be fairly incrusted, and which possessed butone virginity, that of the broom, were capriciously groupedconstellations of old shoes, socks, and repulsive rags; however, thisroom had a fireplace, so it was let for forty francs a year. There wasevery sort of thing in that fireplace, a brazier, a pot, broken boards,rags suspended from nails, a bird-cage, ashes, and even a little fire.Two brands were smouldering there in a melancholy way.
One thing which added still more to the horrors of this garret was,that it was large. It had projections and angles and black holes, thelower sides of roofs, bays, and promontories. Hence horrible,unfathomable nooks where it seemed as though spiders as big as one’sfist, wood-lice as large as one’s foot, and perhaps even—whoknows?—some monstrous human beings, must be hiding.
One of the pallets was near the door, the other near the window. Oneend of each touched the fireplace and faced Marius. In a corner nearthe aperture through which Marius was gazing, a colored engraving in ablack frame was suspended to a nail on the wall, and at its bottom, inlarge letters, was the inscription: THE DREAM. This represented asleeping woman, and a child, also asleep, the child on the woman’s lap,an eagle in a cloud, with a crown in his beak, and the woman thrustingthe crown away from the child’s head, without awaking the latter; inthe background, Napoleon in a glory, leaning on a very blue column witha yellow capital ornamented with this inscription:
MARINGOAUSTERLITSIENAWAGRAMMEELOT

Beneath this frame, a sort of wooden panel, which was no longer than itwas broad, stood on the ground and rested in a sloping attitude againstthe wall. It had the appearance of a picture with its face turned tothe wall, of a frame probably showing a daub on the other side, of somepier-glass detached from a wall and lying forgotten there while waitingto be rehung.
Near the table, upon which Marius descried a pen, ink, and paper, sat aman about sixty years of age, small, thin, livid, haggard, with acunning, cruel, and uneasy air; a hideous scoundrel.
If Lavater had studied this visage, he would have found the vulturemingled with the attorney there, the bird of prey and the pettifoggerrendering each other mutually hideous and complementing each other; thepettifogger making the bird of prey ignoble, the bird of prey makingthe pettifogger horrible.
This man had a long gray beard. He was clad in a woman’s chemise, whichallowed his hairy breast and his bare arms, bristling with gray hair,to be seen. Beneath this chemise, muddy trousers and boots throughwhich his toes projected were visible.
He had a pipe in his mouth and was smoking. There was no bread in thehovel, but there was still tobacco.
He was writing probably some more letters like those which Marius hadread.
On the corner of the table lay an ancient, dilapidated, reddish volume,and the size, which was the antique 12mo of reading-rooms, betrayed aromance. On the cover sprawled the following title, printed in largecapitals: GOD; THE KING; HONOR AND THE LADIES; BY DUCRAY DUMINIL, 1814.
As the man wrote, he talked aloud, and Marius heard his words:—
“The idea that there is no equality, even when you are dead! Just lookat Père-Lachaise! The great, those who are rich, are up above, in theacacia alley, which is paved. They can reach it in a carriage. Thelittle people, the poor, the unhappy, well, what of them? they are putdown below, where the mud is up to your knees, in the damp places. Theyare put there so that they will decay the sooner! You cannot go to seethem without sinking into the earth.”

He paused, smote the table with his fist, and added, as he ground histeeth:—
“Oh! I could eat the whole world!”

A big woman, who might be forty years of age, or a hundred, wascrouching near the fireplace on her bare heels.
She, too, was clad only in a chemise and a knitted petticoat patchedwith bits of old cloth. A coarse linen apron concealed the half of herpetticoat. Although this woman was doubled up and bent together, itcould be seen that she was of very lofty stature. She was a sort ofgiant, beside her husband. She had hideous hair, of a reddish blondwhich was turning gray, and which she thrust back from time to time,with her enormous shining hands, with their flat nails.
Beside her, on the floor, wide open, lay a book of the same form as theother, and probably a volume of the same romance.
On one of the pallets, Marius caught a glimpse of a sort of tall paleyoung girl, who sat there half naked and with pendant feet, and who didnot seem to be listening or seeing or living.
No doubt the younger sister of the one who had come to his room.
She seemed to be eleven or twelve years of age. On closer scrutiny itwas evident that she really was fourteen. She was the child who hadsaid, on the boulevard the evening before: “I bolted, bolted, bolted!”

She was of that puny sort which remains backward for a long time, thensuddenly starts up rapidly. It is indigence which produces thesemelancholy human plants. These creatures have neither childhood noryouth. At fifteen years of age they appear to be twelve, at sixteenthey seem twenty. To-day a little girl, to-morrow a woman. One mightsay that they stride through life, in order to get through with it themore speedily.
At this moment, this being had the air of a child.
Moreover, no trace of work was revealed in that dwelling; nohandicraft, no spinning-wheel, not a tool. In one corner lay someironmongery of dubious aspect. It was the dull listlessness whichfollows despair and precedes the death agony.
Marius gazed for a while at this gloomy interior, more terrifying thanthe interior of a tomb, for the human soul could be felt flutteringthere, and life was palpitating there. The garret, the cellar, thelowly ditch where certain indigent wretches crawl at the very bottom ofthe social edifice, is not exactly the sepulchre, but only itsantechamber; but, as the wealthy display their greatest magnificence atthe entrance of their palaces, it seems that death, which standsdirectly side by side with them, places its greatest miseries in thatvestibule.
The man held his peace, the woman spoke no word, the young girl did noteven seem to breathe. The scratching of the pen on the paper wasaudible.
The man grumbled, without pausing in his writing. “Canaille! canaille!everybody is canaille!”

This variation to Solomon’s exclamation elicited a sigh from the woman.
“Calm yourself, my little friend,” she said. “Don’t hurt yourself, mydear. You are too good to write to all those people, husband.”

Bodies press close to each other in misery, as in cold, but hearts drawapart. This woman must have loved this man, to all appearance, judgingfrom the amount of love within her; but probably, in the daily andreciprocal reproaches of the horrible distress which weighed on thewhole group, this had become extinct. There no longer existed in heranything more than the ashes of affection for her husband.Nevertheless, caressing appellations had survived, as is often thecase. She called him: _My dear, my little friend, my good man_, etc.,with her mouth while her heart was silent.
The man resumed his writing.



CHAPTER VII—STRATEGY AND TACTICS

Marius, with a load upon his breast, was on the point of descendingfrom the species of observatory which he had improvised, when a soundattracted his attention and caused him to remain at his post.
The door of the attic had just burst open abruptly. The eldest girlmade her appearance on the threshold. On her feet, she had large,coarse, men’s shoes, bespattered with mud, which had splashed even toher red ankles, and she was wrapped in an old mantle which hung intatters. Marius had not seen it on her an hour previously, but she hadprobably deposited it at his door, in order that she might inspire themore pity, and had picked it up again on emerging. She entered, pushedthe door to behind her, paused to take breath, for she was completelybreathless, then exclaimed with an expression of triumph and joy:—
“He is coming!”

The father turned his eyes towards her, the woman turned her head, thelittle sister did not stir.
“Who?” demanded her father.
“The gentleman!”

“The philanthropist?”

“Yes.”

“From the church of Saint-Jacques?”

“Yes.”

“That old fellow?”

“Yes.”

“And he is coming?”

“He is following me.”

“You are sure?”

“I am sure.”

“There, truly, he is coming?”

“He is coming in a fiacre.”

“In a fiacre. He is Rothschild.”

The father rose.
“How are you sure? If he is coming in a fiacre, how is it that youarrive before him? You gave him our address at least? Did you tell himthat it was the last door at the end of the corridor, on the right? Ifhe only does not make a mistake! So you found him at the church? Did heread my letter? What did he say to you?”

“Ta, ta, ta,” said the girl, “how you do gallop on, my good man! Seehere: I entered the church, he was in his usual place, I made him areverence, and I handed him the letter; he read it and said to me:‘Where do you live, my child?’ I said: ‘Monsieur, I will show you.’ Hesaid to me: ‘No, give me your address, my daughter has some purchasesto make, I will take a carriage and reach your house at the same timethat you do.’ I gave him the address. When I mentioned the house, heseemed surprised and hesitated for an instant, then he said: ‘Nevermind, I will come.’ When the mass was finished, I watched him leave thechurch with his daughter, and I saw them enter a carriage. I certainlydid tell him the last door in the corridor, on the right.”

“And what makes you think that he will come?”

“I have just seen the fiacre turn into the Rue Petit-Banquier. That iswhat made me run so.”

“How do you know that it was the same fiacre?”

“Because I took notice of the number, so there!”

“What was the number?”

“440.”

“Good, you are a clever girl.”

The girl stared boldly at her father, and showing the shoes which shehad on her feet:—
“A clever girl, possibly; but I tell you I won’t put these shoes onagain, and that I won’t, for the sake of my health, in the first place,and for the sake of cleanliness, in the next. I don’t know anythingmore irritating than shoes that squelch, and go _ghi, ghi, ghi,_ thewhole time. I prefer to go barefoot.”

“You are right,” said her father, in a sweet tone which contrasted withthe young girl’s rudeness, “but then, you will not be allowed to enterchurches, for poor people must have shoes to do that. One cannot gobarefoot to the good God,” he added bitterly.
Then, returning to the subject which absorbed him:—
“So you are sure that he will come?”

“He is following on my heels,” said she.
The man started up. A sort of illumination appeared on his countenance.
“Wife!” he exclaimed, “you hear. Here is the philanthropist. Extinguishthe fire.”

The stupefied mother did not stir.
The father, with the agility of an acrobat, seized a broken-nosed jugwhich stood on the chimney, and flung the water on the brands.
Then, addressing his eldest daughter:—
“Here you! Pull the straw off that chair!”

His daughter did not understand.
He seized the chair, and with one kick he rendered it seatless. His legpassed through it.
As he withdrew his leg, he asked his daughter:—
“Is it cold?”

“Very cold. It is snowing.”

The father turned towards the younger girl who sat on the bed near thewindow, and shouted to her in a thundering voice:—
“Quick! get off that bed, you lazy thing! will you never do anything?Break a pane of glass!”

The little girl jumped off the bed with a shiver.
“Break a pane!” he repeated.
The child stood still in bewilderment.
“Do you hear me?” repeated her father, “I tell you to break a pane!”

The child, with a sort of terrified obedience, rose on tiptoe, andstruck a pane with her fist. The glass broke and fell with a loudclatter.
“Good,” said the father.
He was grave and abrupt. His glance swept rapidly over all the cranniesof the garret. One would have said that he was a general making thefinal preparation at the moment when the battle is on the point ofbeginning.
The mother, who had not said a word so far, now rose and demanded in adull, slow, languid voice, whence her words seemed to emerge in acongealed state:—
“What do you mean to do, my dear?”

“Get into bed,” replied the man.
His intonation admitted of no deliberation. The mother obeyed, andthrew herself heavily on one of the pallets.
In the meantime, a sob became audible in one corner.
“What’s that?” cried the father.
The younger daughter exhibited her bleeding fist, without quitting thecorner in which she was cowering. She had wounded herself whilebreaking the window; she went off, near her mother’s pallet and weptsilently.
It was now the mother’s turn to start up and exclaim:—
“Just see there! What follies you commit! She has cut herself breakingthat pane for you!”

“So much the better!” said the man. “I foresaw that.”

“What? So much the better?” retorted his wife.
“Peace!” replied the father, “I suppress the liberty of the press.”

Then tearing the woman’s chemise which he was wearing, he made a stripof cloth with which he hastily swathed the little girl’s bleedingwrist.
That done, his eye fell with a satisfied expression on his tornchemise.
“And the chemise too,” said he, “this has a good appearance.”

An icy breeze whistled through the window and entered the room. Theouter mist penetrated thither and diffused itself like a whitish sheetof wadding vaguely spread by invisible fingers. Through the broken panethe snow could be seen falling. The snow promised by the Candlemas sunof the preceding day had actually come.
The father cast a glance about him as though to make sure that he hadforgotten nothing. He seized an old shovel and spread ashes over thewet brands in such a manner as to entirely conceal them.
Then drawing himself up and leaning against the chimney-piece:—
“Now,” said he, “we can receive the philanthropist.”




CHAPTER VIII—THE RAY OF LIGHT IN THE HOVEL

The big girl approached and laid her hand in her father’s.
“Feel how cold I am,” said she.
“Bah!” replied the father, “I am much colder than that.”

The mother exclaimed impetuously:—
“You always have something better than any one else, so you do! evenbad things.”

“Down with you!” said the man.
The mother, being eyed after a certain fashion, held her tongue.
Silence reigned for a moment in the hovel. The elder girl was removingthe mud from the bottom of her mantle, with a careless air; her youngersister continued to sob; the mother had taken the latter’s head betweenher hands, and was covering it with kisses, whispering to her thewhile:—
“My treasure, I entreat you, it is nothing of consequence, don’t cry,you will anger your father.”

“No!” exclaimed the father, “quite the contrary! sob! sob! that’sright.”

Then turning to the elder:—
“There now! He is not coming! What if he were not to come! I shall haveextinguished my fire, wrecked my chair, torn my shirt, and broken mypane all for nothing.”

“And wounded the child!” murmured the mother.
“Do you know,” went on the father, “that it’s beastly cold in thisdevil’s garret! What if that man should not come! Oh! See there, you!He makes us wait! He says to himself: ‘Well! they will wait for me!That’s what they’re there for.’ Oh! how I hate them, and with what joy,jubilation, enthusiasm, and satisfaction I could strangle all thoserich folks! all those rich folks! These men who pretend to becharitable, who put on airs, who go to mass, who make presents to thepriesthood, _preachy, preachy_, in their skullcaps, and who thinkthemselves above us, and who come for the purpose of humiliating us,and to bring us ‘clothes,’ as they say! old duds that are not worthfour sous! And bread! That’s not what I want, pack of rascals that theyare, it’s money! Ah! money! Never! Because they say that we would gooff and drink it up, and that we are drunkards and idlers! And they!What are they, then, and what have they been in their time! Thieves!They never could have become rich otherwise! Oh! Society ought to begrasped by the four corners of the cloth and tossed into the air, allof it! It would all be smashed, very likely, but at least, no one wouldhave anything, and there would be that much gained! But what is thatblockhead of a benevolent gentleman doing? Will he come? Perhaps theanimal has forgotten the address! I’ll bet that that old beast—”

At that moment there came a light tap at the door, the man rushed to itand opened it, exclaiming, amid profound bows and smiles of adoration:—
“Enter, sir! Deign to enter, most respected benefactor, and yourcharming young lady, also.”

A man of ripe age and a young girl made their appearance on thethreshold of the attic.
Marius had not quitted his post. His feelings for the moment surpassedthe powers of the human tongue.
It was She!
Whoever has loved knows all the radiant meanings contained in thosethree letters of that word: She.
It was certainly she. Marius could hardly distinguish her through theluminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes. It was thatsweet, absent being, that star which had beamed upon him for sixmonths; it was those eyes, that brow, that mouth, that lovely vanishedface which had created night by its departure. The vision had beeneclipsed, now it reappeared.
It reappeared in that gloom, in that garret, in that misshapen attic,in all that horror.
Marius shuddered in dismay. What! It was she! The palpitations of hisheart troubled his sight. He felt that he was on the brink of burstinginto tears! What! He beheld her again at last, after having sought herso long! It seemed to him that he had lost his soul, and that he hadjust found it again.
She was the same as ever, only a little pale; her delicate face wasframed in a bonnet of violet velvet, her figure was concealed beneath apelisse of black satin. Beneath her long dress, a glimpse could becaught of her tiny foot shod in a silken boot.
She was still accompanied by M. Leblanc.
She had taken a few steps into the room, and had deposited a tolerablybulky parcel on the table.
The eldest Jondrette girl had retired behind the door, and was staringwith sombre eyes at that velvet bonnet, that silk mantle, and thatcharming, happy face.



CHAPTER IX—JONDRETTE COMES NEAR WEEPING

The hovel was so dark, that people coming from without felt on enteringit the effect produced on entering a cellar. The two newcomersadvanced, therefore, with a certain hesitation, being hardly able todistinguish the vague forms surrounding them, while they could beclearly seen and scrutinized by the eyes of the inhabitants of thegarret, who were accustomed to this twilight.
M. Leblanc approached, with his sad but kindly look, and said toJondrette the father:—
“Monsieur, in this package you will find some new clothes and somewoollen stockings and blankets.”

“Our angelic benefactor overwhelms us,” said Jondrette, bowing to thevery earth.
Then, bending down to the ear of his eldest daughter, while the twovisitors were engaged in examining this lamentable interior, he addedin a low and rapid voice:—
“Hey? What did I say? Duds! No money! They are all alike! By the way,how was the letter to that old blockhead signed?”

“Fabantou,” replied the girl.
“The dramatic artist, good!”

It was lucky for Jondrette, that this had occurred to him, for at thevery moment, M. Leblanc turned to him, and said to him with the air ofa person who is seeking to recall a name:—
“I see that you are greatly to be pitied, Monsieur—”

“Fabantou,” replied Jondrette quickly.
“Monsieur Fabantou, yes, that is it. I remember.”

“Dramatic artist, sir, and one who has had some success.”

Here Jondrette evidently judged the moment propitious for capturing the“philanthropist.” He exclaimed with an accent which smacked at the sametime of the vainglory of the mountebank at fairs, and the humility ofthe mendicant on the highway:—
“A pupil of Talma! Sir! I am a pupil of Talma! Fortune formerly smiledon me—Alas! Now it is misfortune’s turn. You see, my benefactor, nobread, no fire. My poor babes have no fire! My only chair has no seat!A broken pane! And in such weather! My spouse in bed! Ill!”

“Poor woman!” said M. Leblanc.
“My child wounded!” added Jondrette.
The child, diverted by the arrival of the strangers, had fallen tocontemplating “the young lady,” and had ceased to sob.
“Cry! bawl!” said Jondrette to her in a low voice.
At the same time he pinched her sore hand. All this was done with thetalent of a juggler.
The little girl gave vent to loud shrieks.
The adorable young girl, whom Marius, in his heart, called “hisUrsule,” approached her hastily.
“Poor, dear child!” said she.
“You see, my beautiful young lady,” pursued Jondrette “her bleedingwrist! It came through an accident while working at a machine to earnsix sous a day. It may be necessary to cut off her arm.”

“Really?” said the old gentleman, in alarm.
The little girl, taking this seriously, fell to sobbing more violentlythan ever.
“Alas! yes, my benefactor!” replied the father.
For several minutes, Jondrette had been scrutinizing “the benefactor”in a singular fashion. As he spoke, he seemed to be examining the otherattentively, as though seeking to summon up his recollections. All atonce, profiting by a moment when the newcomers were questioning thechild with interest as to her injured hand, he passed near his wife,who lay in her bed with a stupid and dejected air, and said to her in arapid but very low tone:—
“Take a look at that man!”

Then, turning to M. Leblanc, and continuing his lamentations:—
“You see, sir! All the clothing that I have is my wife’s chemise! Andall torn at that! In the depths of winter! I can’t go out for lack of acoat. If I had a coat of any sort, I would go and see MademoiselleMars, who knows me and is very fond of me. Does she not still reside inthe Rue de la Tour-des-Dames? Do you know, sir? We played together inthe provinces. I shared her laurels. Célimène would come to my succor,sir! Elmire would bestow alms on Bélisaire! But no, nothing! And not asou in the house! My wife ill, and not a sou! My daughter dangerouslyinjured, not a sou! My wife suffers from fits of suffocation. It comesfrom her age, and besides, her nervous system is affected. She ought tohave assistance, and my daughter also! But the doctor! But theapothecary! How am I to pay them? I would kneel to a penny, sir! Suchis the condition to which the arts are reduced. And do you know, mycharming young lady, and you, my generous protector, do you know, youwho breathe forth virtue and goodness, and who perfume that churchwhere my daughter sees you every day when she says her prayers?—For Ihave brought up my children religiously, sir. I did not want them totake to the theatre. Ah! the hussies! If I catch them tripping! I donot jest, that I don’t! I read them lessons on honor, on morality, onvirtue! Ask them! They have got to walk straight. They are none of yourunhappy wretches who begin by having no family, and end by espousingthe public. One is Mamselle Nobody, and one becomes Madame Everybody.Deuce take it! None of that in the Fabantou family! I mean to bringthem up virtuously, and they shall be honest, and nice, and believe inGod, by the sacred name! Well, sir, my worthy sir, do you know what isgoing to happen to-morrow? To-morrow is the fourth day of February, thefatal day, the last day of grace allowed me by my landlord; if by thisevening I have not paid my rent, to-morrow my oldest daughter, myspouse with her fever, my child with her wound,—we shall all four beturned out of here and thrown into the street, on the boulevard,without shelter, in the rain, in the snow. There, sir. I owe for fourquarters—a whole year! that is to say, sixty francs.”

Jondrette lied. Four quarters would have amounted to only forty francs,and he could not owe four, because six months had not elapsed sinceMarius had paid for two.
M. Leblanc drew five francs from his pocket and threw them on thetable.
Jondrette found time to mutter in the ear of his eldest daughter:—
“The scoundrel! What does he think I can do with his five francs? Thatwon’t pay me for my chair and pane of glass! That’s what comes ofincurring expenses!”

In the meanwhile, M. Leblanc had removed the large brown great-coatwhich he wore over his blue coat, and had thrown it over the back ofthe chair.
“Monsieur Fabantou,” he said, “these five francs are all that I haveabout me, but I shall now take my daughter home, and I will return thisevening,—it is this evening that you must pay, is it not?”

Jondrette’s face lighted up with a strange expression. He repliedvivaciously:—
“Yes, respected sir. At eight o’clock, I must be at my landlord’s.”

“I will be here at six, and I will fetch you the sixty francs.”

“My benefactor!” exclaimed Jondrette, overwhelmed. And he added, in alow tone: “Take a good look at him, wife!”

M. Leblanc had taken the arm of the young girl, once more, and hadturned towards the door.
“Farewell until this evening, my friends!” said he.
“Six o’clock?” said Jondrette.
“Six o’clock precisely.”

At that moment, the overcoat lying on the chair caught the eye of theelder Jondrette girl.
“You are forgetting your coat, sir,” said she.
Jondrette darted an annihilating look at his daughter, accompanied by aformidable shrug of the shoulders.
M. Leblanc turned back and said, with a smile:—
“I have not forgotten it, I am leaving it.”

“O my protector!” said Jondrette, “my august benefactor, I melt intotears! Permit me to accompany you to your carriage.”

“If you come out,” answered M. Leblanc, “put on this coat. It really isvery cold.”

Jondrette did not need to be told twice. He hastily donned the browngreat-coat. And all three went out, Jondrette preceding the twostrangers.



CHAPTER X—TARIFF OF LICENSED CABS: TWO FRANCS AN HOUR

Marius had lost nothing of this entire scene, and yet, in reality, hadseen nothing. His eyes had remained fixed on the young girl, his hearthad, so to speak, seized her and wholly enveloped her from the momentof her very first step in that garret. During her entire stay there, hehad lived that life of ecstasy which suspends material perceptions andprecipitates the whole soul on a single point. He contemplated, notthat girl, but that light which wore a satin pelisse and a velvetbonnet. The star Sirius might have entered the room, and he would nothave been any more dazzled.
While the young girl was engaged in opening the package, unfolding theclothing and the blankets, questioning the sick mother kindly, and thelittle injured girl tenderly, he watched her every movement, he soughtto catch her words. He knew her eyes, her brow, her beauty, her form,her walk, he did not know the sound of her voice. He had once fanciedthat he had caught a few words at the Luxembourg, but he was notabsolutely sure of the fact. He would have given ten years of his lifeto hear it, in order that he might bear away in his soul a little ofthat music. But everything was drowned in the lamentable exclamationsand trumpet bursts of Jondrette. This added a touch of genuine wrath toMarius’ ecstasy. He devoured her with his eyes. He could not believethat it really was that divine creature whom he saw in the midst ofthose vile creatures in that monstrous lair. It seemed to him that hebeheld a humming-bird in the midst of toads.
When she took her departure, he had but one thought, to follow her, tocling to her trace, not to quit her until he learned where she lived,not to lose her again, at least, after having so miraculouslyre-discovered her. He leaped down from the commode and seized his hat.As he laid his hand on the lock of the door, and was on the point ofopening it, a sudden reflection caused him to pause. The corridor waslong, the staircase steep, Jondrette was talkative, M. Leblanc had, nodoubt, not yet regained his carriage; if, on turning round in thecorridor, or on the staircase, he were to catch sight of him, Marius,in that house, he would, evidently, take the alarm, and find means toescape from him again, and this time it would be final. What was he todo? Should he wait a little? But while he was waiting, the carriagemight drive off. Marius was perplexed. At last he accepted the risk andquitted his room.
There was no one in the corridor. He hastened to the stairs. There wasno one on the staircase. He descended in all haste, and reached theboulevard in time to see a fiacre turning the corner of the Rue duPetit-Banquier, on its way back to Paris.
Marius rushed headlong in that direction. On arriving at the angle ofthe boulevard, he caught sight of the fiacre again, rapidly descendingthe Rue Mouffetard; the carriage was already a long way off, and therewas no means of overtaking it; what! run after it? Impossible; andbesides, the people in the carriage would assuredly notice anindividual running at full speed in pursuit of a fiacre, and the fatherwould recognize him. At that moment, wonderful and unprecedented goodluck, Marius perceived an empty cab passing along the boulevard. Therewas but one thing to be done, to jump into this cab and follow thefiacre. That was sure, efficacious, and free from danger.
Marius made the driver a sign to halt, and called to him:—
“By the hour?”

Marius wore no cravat, he had on his working-coat, which was destituteof buttons, his shirt was torn along one of the plaits on the bosom.
The driver halted, winked, and held out his left hand to Marius,rubbing his forefinger gently with his thumb.
“What is it?” said Marius.
“Pay in advance,” said the coachman.
Marius recollected that he had but sixteen sous about him.
“How much?” he demanded.
“Forty sous.”

“I will pay on my return.”

The driver’s only reply was to whistle the air of La Palisse and towhip up his horse.
Marius stared at the retreating cabriolet with a bewildered air. Forthe lack of four and twenty sous, he was losing his joy, his happiness,his love! He had seen, and he was becoming blind again. He reflectedbitterly, and it must be confessed, with profound regret, on the fivefrancs which he had bestowed, that very morning, on that miserablegirl. If he had had those five francs, he would have been saved, hewould have been born again, he would have emerged from the limbo anddarkness, he would have made his escape from isolation and spleen, fromhis widowed state; he might have re-knotted the black thread of hisdestiny to that beautiful golden thread, which had just floated beforehis eyes and had broken at the same instant, once more! He returned tohis hovel in despair.
He might have told himself that M. Leblanc had promised to return inthe evening, and that all he had to do was to set about the matter moreskilfully, so that he might follow him on that occasion; but, in hiscontemplation, it is doubtful whether he had heard this.
As he was on the point of mounting the staircase, he perceived, on theother side of the boulevard, near the deserted wall skirting the Rue Dela Barrière-des-Gobelins, Jondrette, wrapped in the “philanthropist’s”great-coat, engaged in conversation with one of those men ofdisquieting aspect who have been dubbed by common consent, _prowlers ofthe barriers_; people of equivocal face, of suspicious monologues, whopresent the air of having evil minds, and who generally sleep in thedaytime, which suggests the supposition that they work by night.
These two men, standing there motionless and in conversation, in thesnow which was falling in whirlwinds, formed a group that a policemanwould surely have observed, but which Marius hardly noticed.
Still, in spite of his mournful preoccupation, he could not refrainfrom saying to himself that this prowler of the barriers with whomJondrette was talking resembled a certain Panchaud, alias Printanier,alias Bigrenaille, whom Courfeyrac had once pointed out to him as avery dangerous nocturnal roamer. This man’s name the reader has learnedin the preceding book. This Panchaud, alias Printanier, aliasBigrenaille, figured later on in many criminal trials, and became anotorious rascal. He was at that time only a famous rascal. To-day heexists in the state of tradition among ruffians and assassins. He wasat the head of a school towards the end of the last reign. And in theevening, at nightfall, at the hour when groups form and talk inwhispers, he was discussed at La Force in the Fosse-aux-Lions. Onemight even, in that prison, precisely at the spot where the sewer whichserved the unprecedented escape, in broad daylight, of thirtyprisoners, in 1843, passes under the culvert, read his name, PANCHAUD,audaciously carved by his own hand on the wall of the sewer, during oneof his attempts at flight. In 1832, the police already had their eye onhim, but he had not as yet made a serious beginning.



CHAPTER XI—OFFERS OF SERVICE FROM MISERY TO WRETCHEDNESS

Marius ascended the stairs of the hovel with slow steps; at the momentwhen he was about to re-enter his cell, he caught sight of the elderJondrette girl following him through the corridor. The very sight ofthis girl was odious to him; it was she who had his five francs, it wastoo late to demand them back, the cab was no longer there, the fiacrewas far away. Moreover, she would not have given them back. As forquestioning her about the residence of the persons who had just beenthere, that was useless; it was evident that she did not know, sincethe letter signed Fabantou had been addressed “to the benevolentgentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.”

Marius entered his room and pushed the door to after him.
It did not close; he turned round and beheld a hand which held the doorhalf open.
“What is it?” he asked, “who is there?”

It was the Jondrette girl.
“Is it you?” resumed Marius almost harshly, “still you! What do youwant with me?”

She appeared to be thoughtful and did not look at him. She no longerhad the air of assurance which had characterized her that morning. Shedid not enter, but held back in the darkness of the corridor, whereMarius could see her through the half-open door.
“Come now, will you answer?” cried Marius. “What do you want with me?”

She raised her dull eyes, in which a sort of gleam seemed to flickervaguely, and said:—
“Monsieur Marius, you look sad. What is the matter with you?”

“With me!” said Marius.
“Yes, you.”

“There is nothing the matter with me.”

“Yes, there is!”

“No.”

“I tell you there is!”

“Let me alone!”

Marius gave the door another push, but she retained her hold on it.
“Stop,” said she, “you are in the wrong. Although you are not rich, youwere kind this morning. Be so again now. You gave me something to eat,now tell me what ails you. You are grieved, that is plain. I do notwant you to be grieved. What can be done for it? Can I be of anyservice? Employ me. I do not ask for your secrets, you need not tellthem to me, but I may be of use, nevertheless. I may be able to helpyou, since I help my father. When it is necessary to carry letters, togo to houses, to inquire from door to door, to find out an address, tofollow any one, I am of service. Well, you may assuredly tell me whatis the matter with you, and I will go and speak to the persons;sometimes it is enough if some one speaks to the persons, that sufficesto let them understand matters, and everything comes right. Make use ofme.”

An idea flashed across Marius’ mind. What branch does one disdain whenone feels that one is falling?
He drew near to the Jondrette girl.
“Listen—” he said to her.
She interrupted him with a gleam of joy in her eyes.
“Oh yes, do call me _thou!_ I like that better.”

“Well,” he resumed, “thou hast brought hither that old gentleman andhis daughter!”

“Yes.”

“Dost thou know their address?”

“No.”

“Find it for me.”

The Jondrette’s dull eyes had grown joyous, and they now became gloomy.
“Is that what you want?” she demanded.
“Yes.”

“Do you know them?”

“No.”

“That is to say,” she resumed quickly, “you do not know her, but youwish to know her.”

This _them_ which had turned into _her_ had something indescribablysignificant and bitter about it.
“Well, can you do it?” said Marius.
“You shall have the beautiful lady’s address.”

There was still a shade in the words “the beautiful lady” whichtroubled Marius. He resumed:—
“Never mind, after all, the address of the father and daughter. Theiraddress, indeed!”

She gazed fixedly at him.
“What will you give me?”

“Anything you like.”

“Anything I like?”

“Yes.”

“You shall have the address.”

She dropped her head; then, with a brusque movement, she pulled to thedoor, which closed behind her.
Marius found himself alone.
He dropped into a chair, with his head and both elbows on his bed,absorbed in thoughts which he could not grasp, and as though a prey tovertigo. All that had taken place since the morning, the appearance ofthe angel, her disappearance, what that creature had just said to him,a gleam of hope floating in an immense despair,—this was what filledhis brain confusedly.
All at once he was violently aroused from his reverie.
He heard the shrill, hard voice of Jondrette utter these words, whichwere fraught with a strange interest for him:—
“I tell you that I am sure of it, and that I recognized him.”

Of whom was Jondrette speaking? Whom had he recognized? M. Leblanc? Thefather of “his Ursule”? What! Did Jondrette know him? Was Marius aboutto obtain in this abrupt and unexpected fashion all the informationwithout which his life was so dark to him? Was he about to learn atlast who it was that he loved, who that young girl was? Who her fatherwas? Was the dense shadow which enwrapped them on the point of beingdispelled? Was the veil about to be rent? Ah! Heavens!
He bounded rather than climbed upon his commode, and resumed his postnear the little peep-hole in the partition wall.
Again he beheld the interior of Jondrette’s hovel.



CHAPTER XII—THE USE MADE OF M. LEBLANC’S FIVE-FRANC PIECE

Nothing in the aspect of the family was altered, except that the wifeand daughters had levied on the package and put on woollen stockingsand jackets. Two new blankets were thrown across the two beds.
Jondrette had evidently just returned. He still had the breathlessnessof out of doors. His daughters were seated on the floor near thefireplace, the elder engaged in dressing the younger’s wounded hand.His wife had sunk back on the bed near the fireplace, with a faceindicative of astonishment. Jondrette was pacing up and down the garretwith long strides. His eyes were extraordinary.
The woman, who seemed timid and overwhelmed with stupor in the presenceof her husband, turned to say:—
“What, really? You are sure?”

“Sure! Eight years have passed! But I recognize him! Ah! I recognizehim. I knew him at once! What! Didn’t it force itself on you?”

“No.”

“But I told you: ‘Pay attention!’ Why, it is his figure, it is hisface, only older,—there are people who do not grow old, I don’t knowhow they manage it,—it is the very sound of his voice. He is betterdressed, that is all! Ah! you mysterious old devil, I’ve got you, thatI have!”

He paused, and said to his daughters:—
“Get out of here, you!—It’s queer that it didn’t strike you!”

They arose to obey.
The mother stammered:—
“With her injured hand.”

“The air will do it good,” said Jondrette. “Be off.”

It was plain that this man was of the sort to whom no one offers toreply. The two girls departed.
At the moment when they were about to pass through the door, the fatherdetained the elder by the arm, and said to her with a peculiar accent:—
“You will be here at five o’clock precisely. Both of you. I shall needyou.”

Marius redoubled his attention.
On being left alone with his wife, Jondrette began to pace the roomagain, and made the tour of it two or three times in silence. Then hespent several minutes in tucking the lower part of the woman’s chemisewhich he wore into his trousers.
All at once, he turned to the female Jondrette, folded his arms andexclaimed:—
“And would you like to have me tell you something? The young lady—”

“Well, what?” retorted his wife, “the young lady?”

Marius could not doubt that it was really she of whom they werespeaking. He listened with ardent anxiety. His whole life was in hisears.
But Jondrette had bent over and spoke to his wife in a whisper. Then hestraightened himself up and concluded aloud:—
“It is she!”

“That one?” said his wife.
“That very one,” said the husband.
No expression can reproduce the significance of the mother’s words.Surprise, rage, hate, wrath, were mingled and combined in one monstrousintonation. The pronunciation of a few words, the name, no doubt, whichher husband had whispered in her ear, had sufficed to rouse this huge,somnolent woman, and from being repulsive she became terrible.
“It is not possible!” she cried. “When I think that my daughters aregoing barefoot, and have not a gown to their backs! What! A satinpelisse, a velvet bonnet, boots, and everything; more than two hundredfrancs’ worth of clothes! so that one would think she was a lady! No,you are mistaken! Why, in the first place, the other was hideous, andthis one is not so bad-looking! She really is not bad-looking! It can’tbe she!”

“I tell you that it is she. You will see.”

At this absolute assertion, the Jondrette woman raised her large, red,blonde face and stared at the ceiling with a horrible expression. Atthat moment, she seemed to Marius even more to be feared than herhusband. She was a sow with the look of a tigress.
“What!” she resumed, “that horrible, beautiful young lady, who gazed atmy daughters with an air of pity,—she is that beggar brat! Oh! I shouldlike to kick her stomach in for her!”

She sprang off of the bed, and remained standing for a moment, her hairin disorder, her nostrils dilating, her mouth half open, her fistsclenched and drawn back. Then she fell back on the bed once more. Theman paced to and fro and paid no attention to his female.
After a silence lasting several minutes, he approached the femaleJondrette, and halted in front of her, with folded arms, as he had donea moment before:—
“And shall I tell you another thing?”

“What is it?” she asked.
He answered in a low, curt voice:—
“My fortune is made.”

The woman stared at him with the look that signifies: “Is the personwho is addressing me on the point of going mad?”

He went on:—
“Thunder! It was not so very long ago that I was a parishioner of theparish ofdie-of-hunger-if-you-have-a-fire,-die-of-cold-if-you-have-bread! I havehad enough of misery! my share and other people’s share! I am notjoking any longer, I don’t find it comic any more, I’ve had enough ofpuns, good God! no more farces, Eternal Father! I want to eat till I amfull, I want to drink my fill! to gormandize! to sleep! to do nothing!I want to have my turn, so I do, come now! before I die! I want to be abit of a millionnaire!”

He took a turn round the hovel, and added:—
“Like other people.”

“What do you mean by that?” asked the woman.
He shook his head, winked, screwed up one eye, and raised his voicelike a medical professor who is about to make a demonstration:—
“What do I mean by that? Listen!”

“Hush!” muttered the woman, “not so loud! These are matters which mustnot be overheard.”

“Bah! Who’s here? Our neighbor? I saw him go out a little while ago.Besides, he doesn’t listen, the big booby. And I tell you that I sawhim go out.”

Nevertheless, by a sort of instinct, Jondrette lowered his voice,although not sufficiently to prevent Marius hearing his words. Onefavorable circumstance, which enabled Marius not to lose a word of thisconversation was the falling snow which deadened the sound of vehicleson the boulevard.
This is what Marius heard:—
“Listen carefully. The Crœsus is caught, or as good as caught! That’sall settled already. Everything is arranged. I have seen some people.He will come here this evening at six o’clock. To bring sixty francs,the rascal! Did you notice how I played that game on him, my sixtyfrancs, my landlord, my fourth of February? I don’t even owe for onequarter! Isn’t he a fool! So he will come at six o’clock! That’s thehour when our neighbor goes to his dinner. Mother Bougon is off washingdishes in the city. There’s not a soul in the house. The neighbor nevercomes home until eleven o’clock. The children shall stand on watch. Youshall help us. He will give in.”

“And what if he does not give in?” demanded his wife.
Jondrette made a sinister gesture, and said:—
“We’ll fix him.”

And he burst out laughing.
This was the first time Marius had seen him laugh. The laugh was coldand sweet, and provoked a shudder.
Jondrette opened a cupboard near the fireplace, and drew from it an oldcap, which he placed on his head, after brushing it with his sleeve.
“Now,” said he, “I’m going out. I have some more people that I mustsee. Good ones. You’ll see how well the whole thing will work. I shallbe away as short a time as possible, it’s a fine stroke of business, doyou look after the house.”

And with both fists thrust into the pockets of his trousers, he stoodfor a moment in thought, then exclaimed:—
“Do you know, it’s mighty lucky, by the way, that he didn’t recognizeme! If he had recognized me on his side, he would not have come backagain. He would have slipped through our fingers! It was my beard thatsaved us! my romantic beard! my pretty little romantic beard!”

And again he broke into a laugh.
He stepped to the window. The snow was still falling, and streaking thegray of the sky.
“What beastly weather!” said he.
Then lapping his overcoat across his breast:—
“This rind is too large for me. Never mind,” he added, “he did adevilish good thing in leaving it for me, the old scoundrel! If ithadn’t been for that, I couldn’t have gone out, and everything wouldhave gone wrong! What small points things hang on, anyway!”

And pulling his cap down over his eyes, he quitted the room.
He had barely had time to take half a dozen steps from the door, whenthe door opened again, and his savage but intelligent face made itsappearance once more in the opening.
“I came near forgetting,” said he. “You are to have a brazier ofcharcoal ready.”

And he flung into his wife’s apron the five-franc piece which the“philanthropist” had left with him.
“A brazier of charcoal?” asked his wife.
“Yes.”

“How many bushels?”

“Two good ones.”

“That will come to thirty sous. With the rest I will buy something fordinner.”

“The devil, no.”

“Why?”

“Don’t go and spend the hundred-sou piece.”

“Why?”

“Because I shall have to buy something, too.”

“What?”

“Something.”

“How much shall you need?”

“Whereabouts in the neighborhood is there an ironmonger’s shop?”

“Rue Mouffetard.”

“Ah! yes, at the corner of a street; I can see the shop.”

“But tell me how much you will need for what you have to purchase?”

“Fifty sous—three francs.”

“There won’t be much left for dinner.”

“Eating is not the point to-day. There’s something better to be done.”

“That’s enough, my jewel.”

At this word from his wife, Jondrette closed the door again, and thistime, Marius heard his step die away in the corridor of the hovel, anddescend the staircase rapidly.
At that moment, one o’clock struck from the church of Saint-Médard.



CHAPTER XIII—SOLUS CUM SOLO, IN LOCO REMOTO, NON COGITABUNTUR ORAREPATER NOSTER

Marius, dreamer as he was, was, as we have said, firm and energetic bynature. His habits of solitary meditation, while they had developed inhim sympathy and compassion, had, perhaps, diminished the faculty forirritation, but had left intact the power of waxing indignant; he hadthe kindliness of a brahmin, and the severity of a judge; he took pityupon a toad, but he crushed a viper. Now, it was into a hole of vipersthat his glance had just been directed, it was a nest of monsters thathe had beneath his eyes.
“These wretches must be stamped upon,” said he.
Not one of the enigmas which he had hoped to see solved had beenelucidated; on the contrary, all of them had been rendered more dense,if anything; he knew nothing more about the beautiful maiden of theLuxembourg and the man whom he called M. Leblanc, except that Jondrettewas acquainted with them. Athwart the mysterious words which had beenuttered, the only thing of which he caught a distinct glimpse was thefact that an ambush was in course of preparation, a dark but terribletrap; that both of them were incurring great danger, she probably, herfather certainly; that they must be saved; that the hideous plots ofthe Jondrettes must be thwarted, and the web of these spiders broken.
He scanned the female Jondrette for a moment. She had pulled an oldsheet-iron stove from a corner, and she was rummaging among the oldheap of iron.
He descended from the commode as softly as possible, taking care not tomake the least noise. Amid his terror as to what was in preparation,and in the horror with which the Jondrettes had inspired him, heexperienced a sort of joy at the idea that it might be granted to himperhaps to render a service to the one whom he loved.
But how was it to be done? How warn the persons threatened? He did notknow their address. They had reappeared for an instant before his eyes,and had then plunged back again into the immense depths of Paris.Should he wait for M. Leblanc at the door that evening at six o’clock,at the moment of his arrival, and warn him of the trap? But Jondretteand his men would see him on the watch, the spot was lonely, they werestronger than he, they would devise means to seize him or to get himaway, and the man whom Marius was anxious to save would be lost. Oneo’clock had just struck, the trap was to be sprung at six. Marius hadfive hours before him.
There was but one thing to be done.
He put on his decent coat, knotted a silk handkerchief round his neck,took his hat, and went out, without making any more noise than if hehad been treading on moss with bare feet.
Moreover, the Jondrette woman continued to rummage among her old iron.
Once outside of the house, he made for the Rue du Petit-Banquier.
He had almost reached the middle of this street, near a very low wallwhich a man can easily step over at certain points, and which abuts ona waste space, and was walking slowly, in consequence of hispreoccupied condition, and the snow deadened the sound of his steps;all at once he heard voices talking very close by. He turned his head,the street was deserted, there was not a soul in it, it was broaddaylight, and yet he distinctly heard voices.
It occurred to him to glance over the wall which he was skirting.
There, in fact, sat two men, flat on the snow, with their backs againstthe wall, talking together in subdued tones.
These two persons were strangers to him; one was a bearded man in ablouse, and the other a long-haired individual in rags. The bearded manhad on a fez, the other’s head was bare, and the snow had lodged in hishair.
By thrusting his head over the wall, Marius could hear their remarks.
The hairy one jogged the other man’s elbow and said:—
“—With the assistance of Patron-Minette, it can’t fail.”

“Do you think so?” said the bearded man.
And the long-haired one began again:—
“It’s as good as a warrant for each one, of five hundred balls, and theworst that can happen is five years, six years, ten years at the most!”

The other replied with some hesitation, and shivering beneath his fez:—
“That’s a real thing. You can’t go against such things.”

“I tell you that the affair can’t go wrong,” resumed the long-hairedman. “Father What’s-his-name’s team will be already harnessed.”

Then they began to discuss a melodrama that they had seen on thepreceding evening at the Gaîté Theatre.
Marius went his way.
It seemed to him that the mysterious words of these men, so strangelyhidden behind that wall, and crouching in the snow, could not but bearsome relation to Jondrette’s abominable projects. That must be _theaffair_.
He directed his course towards the faubourg Saint-Marceau and asked atthe first shop he came to where he could find a commissary of police.
He was directed to Rue de Pontoise, No. 14.
Thither Marius betook himself.
As he passed a baker’s shop, he bought a two-penny roll, and ate it,foreseeing that he should not dine.
On the way, he rendered justice to Providence. He reflected that had henot given his five francs to the Jondrette girl in the morning, hewould have followed M. Leblanc’s fiacre, and consequently have remainedignorant of everything, and that there would have been no obstacle tothe trap of the Jondrettes and that M. Leblanc would have been lost,and his daughter with him, no doubt.



CHAPTER XIV—IN WHICH A POLICE AGENT BESTOWS TWO FISTFULS ON A LAWYER

On arriving at No. 14, Rue de Pontoise, he ascended to the first floorand inquired for the commissary of police.
“The commissary of police is not here,” said a clerk; “but there is aninspector who takes his place. Would you like to speak to him? Are youin haste?”

“Yes,” said Marius.
The clerk introduced him into the commissary’s office. There stood atall man behind a grating, leaning against a stove, and holding up withboth hands the tails of a vast topcoat, with three collars. His facewas square, with a thin, firm mouth, thick, gray, and very ferociouswhiskers, and a look that was enough to turn your pockets inside out.Of that glance it might have been well said, not that it penetrated,but that it searched.
This man’s air was not much less ferocious nor less terrible thanJondrette’s; the dog is, at times, no less terrible to meet than thewolf.
“What do you want?” he said to Marius, without adding “monsieur.”

“Is this Monsieur le Commissaire de Police?”

“He is absent. I am here in his stead.”

“The matter is very private.”

“Then speak.”

“And great haste is required.”

“Then speak quick.”

This calm, abrupt man was both terrifying and reassuring at one and thesame time. He inspired fear and confidence. Marius related theadventure to him: That a person with whom he was not acquaintedotherwise than by sight, was to be inveigled into a trap that veryevening; that, as he occupied the room adjoining the den, he, MariusPontmercy, a lawyer, had heard the whole plot through the partition;that the wretch who had planned the trap was a certain Jondrette; thatthere would be accomplices, probably some prowlers of the barriers,among others a certain Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille;that Jondrette’s daughters were to lie in wait; that there was no wayof warning the threatened man, since he did not even know his name; andthat, finally, all this was to be carried out at six o’clock thatevening, at the most deserted point of the Boulevard de l’Hôpital, inhouse No. 50-52.
At the sound of this number, the inspector raised his head, and saidcoldly:—
“So it is in the room at the end of the corridor?”

“Precisely,” answered Marius, and he added: “Are you acquainted withthat house?”

The inspector remained silent for a moment, then replied, as he warmedthe heel of his boot at the door of the stove:—
“Apparently.”

He went on, muttering between his teeth, and not addressing Marius somuch as his cravat:—
“Patron-Minette must have had a hand in this.”

This word struck Marius.
“Patron-Minette,” said he, “I did hear that word pronounced, in fact.”

And he repeated to the inspector the dialogue between the long-hairedman and the bearded man in the snow behind the wall of the Rue duPetit-Banquier.
The inspector muttered:—
“The long-haired man must be Brujon, and the bearded one Demi-Liard,alias Deux-Milliards.”

He had dropped his eyelids again, and became absorbed in thought.
“As for Father What’s-his-name, I think I recognize him. Here, I’veburned my coat. They always have too much fire in these cursed stoves.Number 50-52. Former property of Gorbeau.”

Then he glanced at Marius.
“You saw only that bearded and that long-haired man?”

“And Panchaud.”

“You didn’t see a little imp of a dandy prowling about the premises?”

“No.”

“Nor a big lump of matter, resembling an elephant in the Jardin desPlantes?”

“No.”

“Nor a scamp with the air of an old red tail?”

“No.”

“As for the fourth, no one sees him, not even his adjutants, clerks,and employees. It is not surprising that you did not see him.”

“No. Who are all those persons?” asked Marius.
The inspector answered:—
“Besides, this is not the time for them.”

He relapsed into silence, then resumed:—
“50-52. I know that barrack. Impossible to conceal ourselves inside itwithout the artists seeing us, and then they will get off simply bycountermanding the vaudeville. They are so modest! An audienceembarrasses them. None of that, none of that. I want to hear them singand make them dance.”

This monologue concluded, he turned to Marius, and demanded, gazing athim intently the while:—
“Are you afraid?”

“Of what?” said Marius.
“Of these men?”

“No more than yourself!” retorted Marius rudely, who had begun tonotice that this police agent had not yet said “monsieur” to him.
The inspector stared still more intently at Marius, and continued withsententious solemnity:—
“There, you speak like a brave man, and like an honest man. Couragedoes not fear crime, and honesty does not fear authority.”

Marius interrupted him:—
“That is well, but what do you intend to do?”

The inspector contented himself with the remark:—
“The lodgers have pass-keys with which to get in at night. You musthave one.”

“Yes,” said Marius.
“Have you it about you?”

“Yes.”

“Give it to me,” said the inspector.
Marius took his key from his waistcoat pocket, handed it to theinspector and added:—
“If you will take my advice, you will come in force.”

The inspector cast on Marius such a glance as Voltaire might havebestowed on a provincial academician who had suggested a rhyme to him;with one movement he plunged his hands, which were enormous, into thetwo immense pockets of his top-coat, and pulled out two small steelpistols, of the sort called “knock-me-downs.” Then he presented them toMarius, saying rapidly, in a curt tone:—
“Take these. Go home. Hide in your chamber, so that you may be supposedto have gone out. They are loaded. Each one carries two balls. You willkeep watch; there is a hole in the wall, as you have informed me. Thesemen will come. Leave them to their own devices for a time. When youthink matters have reached a crisis, and that it is time to put a stopto them, fire a shot. Not too soon. The rest concerns me. A shot intothe ceiling, the air, no matter where. Above all things, not too soon.Wait until they begin to put their project into execution; you are alawyer; you know the proper point.” Marius took the pistols and putthem in the side pocket of his coat.
“That makes a lump that can be seen,” said the inspector. “Put them inyour trousers pocket.”

Marius hid the pistols in his trousers pockets.
“Now,” pursued the inspector, “there is not a minute more to be lost byany one. What time is it? Half-past two. Seven o’clock is the hour?”

“Six o’clock,” answered Marius.
“I have plenty of time,” said the inspector, “but no more than enough.Don’t forget anything that I have said to you. Bang. A pistol shot.”

“Rest easy,” said Marius.
And as Marius laid his hand on the handle of the door on his way out,the inspector called to him:—
“By the way, if you have occasion for my services between now and then,come or send here. You will ask for Inspector Javert.”




CHAPTER XV—JONDRETTE MAKES HIS PURCHASES

A few moments later, about three o’clock, Courfeyrac chanced to bepassing along the Rue Mouffetard in company with Bossuet. The snow hadredoubled in violence, and filled the air. Bossuet was just saying toCourfeyrac:—
“One would say, to see all these snow-flakes fall, that there was aplague of white butterflies in heaven.” All at once, Bossuet caughtsight of Marius coming up the street towards the barrier with apeculiar air.
“Hold!” said Bossuet. “There’s Marius.”

“I saw him,” said Courfeyrac. “Don’t let’s speak to him.”

“Why?”

“He is busy.”

“With what?”

“Don’t you see his air?”

“What air?”

“He has the air of a man who is following some one.”

“That’s true,” said Bossuet.
“Just see the eyes he is making!” said Courfeyrac.
“But who the deuce is he following?”

“Some fine, flowery bonneted wench! He’s in love.”

“But,” observed Bossuet, “I don’t see any wench nor any flowery bonnetin the street. There’s not a woman round.”

Courfeyrac took a survey, and exclaimed:—
“He’s following a man!”

A man, in fact, wearing a gray cap, and whose gray beard could bedistinguished, although they only saw his back, was walking along abouttwenty paces in advance of Marius.
This man was dressed in a great-coat which was perfectly new and toolarge for him, and in a frightful pair of trousers all hanging in ragsand black with mud.
Bossuet burst out laughing.
“Who is that man?”

“He?” retorted Courfeyrac, “he’s a poet. Poets are very fond of wearingthe trousers of dealers in rabbit skins and the overcoats of peers ofFrance.”

“Let’s see where Marius will go,” said Bossuet; “let’s see where theman is going, let’s follow them, hey?”

“Bossuet!” exclaimed Courfeyrac, “eagle of Meaux! You are a prodigiousbrute. Follow a man who is following another man, indeed!”

They retraced their steps.
Marius had, in fact, seen Jondrette passing along the Rue Mouffetard,and was spying on his proceedings.
Jondrette walked straight ahead, without a suspicion that he wasalready held by a glance.
He quitted the Rue Mouffetard, and Marius saw him enter one of the mostterrible hovels in the Rue Gracieuse; he remained there about a quarterof an hour, then returned to the Rue Mouffetard. He halted at anironmonger’s shop, which then stood at the corner of the RuePierre-Lombard, and a few minutes later Marius saw him emerge from theshop, holding in his hand a huge cold chisel with a white wood handle,which he concealed beneath his great-coat. At the top of the RuePetit-Gentilly he turned to the left and proceeded rapidly to the Ruedu Petit-Banquier. The day was declining; the snow, which had ceasedfor a moment, had just begun again. Marius posted himself on the watchat the very corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier, which was deserted, asusual, and did not follow Jondrette into it. It was lucky that he didso, for, on arriving in the vicinity of the wall where Marius had heardthe long-haired man and the bearded man conversing, Jondrette turnedround, made sure that no one was following him, did not see him, thensprang across the wall and disappeared.
The waste land bordered by this wall communicated with the back yard ofan ex-livery stable-keeper of bad repute, who had failed and who stillkept a few old single-seated berlins under his sheds.
Marius thought that it would be wise to profit by Jondrette’s absenceto return home; moreover, it was growing late; every evening, Ma’amBougon when she set out for her dish-washing in town, had a habit oflocking the door, which was always closed at dusk. Marius had given hiskey to the inspector of police; it was important, therefore, that heshould make haste.
Evening had arrived, night had almost closed in; on the horizon and inthe immensity of space, there remained but one spot illuminated by thesun, and that was the moon.
It was rising in a ruddy glow behind the low dome of Salpêtrière.
Marius returned to No. 50-52 with great strides. The door was stillopen when he arrived. He mounted the stairs on tip-toe and glided alongthe wall of the corridor to his chamber. This corridor, as the readerwill remember, was bordered on both sides by attics, all of which were,for the moment, empty and to let. Ma’am Bougon was in the habit ofleaving all the doors open. As he passed one of these attics, Mariusthought he perceived in the uninhabited cell the motionless heads offour men, vaguely lighted up by a remnant of daylight, falling througha dormer window.
Marius made no attempt to see, not wishing to be seen himself. Hesucceeded in reaching his chamber without being seen and without makingany noise. It was high time. A moment later he heard Ma’am Bougon takeher departure, locking the door of the house behind her.



CHAPTER XVI—IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE WORDS TO AN ENGLISH AIR WHICHWAS IN FASHION IN 1832

Marius seated himself on his bed. It might have been half-past fiveo’clock. Only half an hour separated him from what was about to happen.He heard the beating of his arteries as one hears the ticking of awatch in the dark. He thought of the double march which was going on atthat moment in the dark,—crime advancing on one side, justice coming upon the other. He was not afraid, but he could not think without ashudder of what was about to take place. As is the case with all thosewho are suddenly assailed by an unforeseen adventure, the entire dayproduced upon him the effect of a dream, and in order to persuadehimself that he was not the prey of a nightmare, he had to feel thecold barrels of the steel pistols in his trousers pockets.
It was no longer snowing; the moon disengaged itself more and moreclearly from the mist, and its light, mingled with the white reflectionof the snow which had fallen, communicated to the chamber a sort oftwilight aspect.
There was a light in the Jondrette den. Marius saw the hole in the wallshining with a reddish glow which seemed bloody to him.
It was true that the light could not be produced by a candle. However,there was not a sound in the Jondrette quarters, not a soul was movingthere, not a soul speaking, not a breath; the silence was glacial andprofound, and had it not been for that light, he might have thoughthimself next door to a sepulchre.
Marius softly removed his boots and pushed them under his bed.
Several minutes elapsed. Marius heard the lower door turn on itshinges; a heavy step mounted the staircase, and hastened along thecorridor; the latch of the hovel was noisily lifted; it was Jondrettereturning.
Instantly, several voices arose. The whole family was in the garret.Only, it had been silent in the master’s absence, like wolf whelps inthe absence of the wolf.
“It’s I,” said he.
“Good evening, daddy,” yelped the girls.
“Well?” said the mother.
“All’s going first-rate,” responded Jondrette, “but my feet are beastlycold. Good! You have dressed up. You have done well! You must inspireconfidence.”

“All ready to go out.”

“Don’t forget what I told you. You will do everything sure?”

“Rest easy.”

“Because—” said Jondrette. And he left the phrase unfinished.
Marius heard him lay something heavy on the table, probably the chiselwhich he had purchased.
“By the way,” said Jondrette, “have you been eating here?”

“Yes,” said the mother. “I got three large potatoes and some salt. Itook advantage of the fire to cook them.”

“Good,” returned Jondrette. “To-morrow I will take you out to dine withme. We will have a duck and fixings. You shall dine like Charles theTenth; all is going well!”

Then he added:—
“The mouse-trap is open. The cats are there.”

He lowered his voice still further, and said:—
“Put this in the fire.”

Marius heard a sound of charcoal being knocked with the tongs or someiron utensil, and Jondrette continued:—
“Have you greased the hinges of the door so that they will not squeak?”

“Yes,” replied the mother.
“What time is it?”

“Nearly six. The half-hour struck from Saint-Médard a while ago.”

“The devil!” ejaculated Jondrette; “the children must go and watch.Come you, do you listen here.”

A whispering ensued.
Jondrette’s voice became audible again:—
“Has old Bougon left?”

“Yes,” said the mother.
“Are you sure that there is no one in our neighbor’s room?”

“He has not been in all day, and you know very well that this is hisdinner hour.”

“You are sure?”

“Sure.”

“All the same,” said Jondrette, “there’s no harm in going to seewhether he is there. Here, my girl, take the candle and go there.”

Marius fell on his hands and knees and crawled silently under his bed.
Hardly had he concealed himself, when he perceived a light through thecrack of his door.
“P’pa,” cried a voice, “he is not in here.”

He recognized the voice of the eldest daughter.
“Did you go in?” demanded her father.
“No,” replied the girl, “but as his key is in the door, he must beout.”

The father exclaimed:—
“Go in, nevertheless.”

The door opened, and Marius saw the tall Jondrette come in with acandle in her hand. She was as she had been in the morning, only stillmore repulsive in this light.
She walked straight up to the bed. Marius endured an indescribablemoment of anxiety; but near the bed there was a mirror nailed to thewall, and it was thither that she was directing her steps. She raisedherself on tiptoe and looked at herself in it. In the neighboring room,the sound of iron articles being moved was audible.
She smoothed her hair with the palm of her hand, and smiled into themirror, humming with her cracked and sepulchral voice:—
Nos amours ont duré toute une semaine,Mais que du bonheur les instants sont courts!S’adorer huit jours, c‘était bien la peine!Le temps des amours devrait durer toujours!Devrait durer toujours! devrait durer toujours!28

In the meantime, Marius trembled. It seemed impossible to him that sheshould not hear his breathing.
She stepped to the window and looked out with the half-foolish way shehad.
“How ugly Paris is when it has put on a white chemise!” said she.
She returned to the mirror and began again to put on airs before it,scrutinizing herself full-face and three-quarters face in turn.
“Well!” cried her father, “what are you about there?”

“I am looking under the bed and the furniture,” she replied, continuingto arrange her hair; “there’s no one here.”

“Booby!” yelled her father. “Come here this minute! And don’t waste anytime about it!”

“Coming! Coming!” said she. “One has no time for anything in thishovel!”

She hummed:—
Vous me quittez pour aller à la gloire;Mon triste cœur suivra partout.29

She cast a parting glance in the mirror and went out, shutting the doorbehind her.
A moment more, and Marius heard the sound of the two young girls’ barefeet in the corridor, and Jondrette’s voice shouting to them:—
“Pay strict heed! One on the side of the barrier, the other at thecorner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier. Don’t lose sight for a moment ofthe door of this house, and the moment you see anything, rush here onthe instant! as hard as you can go! You have a key to get in.”

The eldest girl grumbled:—
“The idea of standing watch in the snow barefoot!”

“To-morrow you shall have some dainty little green silk boots!” saidthe father.
They ran downstairs, and a few seconds later the shock of the outerdoor as it banged to announced that they were outside.
There now remained in the house only Marius, the Jondrettes andprobably, also, the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught aglimpse in the twilight, behind the door of the unused attic.



CHAPTER XVII—THE USE MADE OF MARIUS’ FIVE-FRANC PIECE

Marius decided that the moment had now arrived when he must resume hispost at his observatory. In a twinkling, and with the agility of hisage, he had reached the hole in the partition.
He looked.
The interior of the Jondrette apartment presented a curious aspect, andMarius found an explanation of the singular light which he had noticed.A candle was burning in a candlestick covered with verdigris, but thatwas not what really lighted the chamber. The hovel was completelyilluminated, as it were, by the reflection from a rather largesheet-iron brazier standing in the fireplace, and filled with burningcharcoal, the brazier prepared by the Jondrette woman that morning. Thecharcoal was glowing hot and the brazier was red; a blue flameflickered over it, and helped him to make out the form of the chiselpurchased by Jondrette in the Rue Pierre-Lombard, where it had beenthrust into the brazier to heat. In one corner, near the door, and asthough prepared for some definite use, two heaps were visible, whichappeared to be, the one a heap of old iron, the other a heap of ropes.All this would have caused the mind of a person who knew nothing ofwhat was in preparation, to waver between a very sinister and a verysimple idea. The lair thus lighted up more resembled a forge than amouth of hell, but Jondrette, in this light, had rather the air of ademon than of a smith.
The heat of the brazier was so great, that the candle on the table wasmelting on the side next the chafing-dish, and was drooping over. Anold dark-lantern of copper, worthy of Diogenes turned Cartouche, stoodon the chimney-piece.
The brazier, placed in the fireplace itself, beside the nearly extinctbrands, sent its vapors up the chimney, and gave out no odor.
The moon, entering through the four panes of the window, cast itswhiteness into the crimson and flaming garret; and to the poetic spiritof Marius, who was dreamy even in the moment of action, it was like athought of heaven mingled with the misshapen reveries of earth.
A breath of air which made its way in through the open pane, helped todissipate the smell of the charcoal and to conceal the presence of thebrazier.
The Jondrette lair was, if the reader recalls what we have said of theGorbeau building, admirably chosen to serve as the theatre of a violentand sombre deed, and as the envelope for a crime. It was the mostretired chamber in the most isolated house on the most desertedboulevard in Paris. If the system of ambush and traps had not alreadyexisted, they would have been invented there.
The whole thickness of a house and a multitude of uninhabited roomsseparated this den from the boulevard, and the only window that existedopened on waste lands enclosed with walls and palisades.
Jondrette had lighted his pipe, seated himself on the seatless chair,and was engaged in smoking. His wife was talking to him in a low tone.
If Marius had been Courfeyrac, that is to say, one of those men wholaugh on every occasion in life, he would have burst with laughter whenhis gaze fell on the Jondrette woman. She had on a black bonnet withplumes not unlike the hats of the heralds-at-arms at the coronation ofCharles X., an immense tartan shawl over her knitted petticoat, and theman’s shoes which her daughter had scorned in the morning. It was thistoilette which had extracted from Jondrette the exclamation: “Good! Youhave dressed up. You have done well. You must inspire confidence!”

As for Jondrette, he had not taken off the new surtout, which was toolarge for him, and which M. Leblanc had given him, and his costumecontinued to present that contrast of coat and trousers whichconstituted the ideal of a poet in Courfeyrac’s eyes.
All at once, Jondrette lifted up his voice:—
“By the way! Now that I think of it. In this weather, he will come in acarriage. Light the lantern, take it and go downstairs. You will standbehind the lower door. The very moment that you hear the carriage stop,you will open the door, instantly, he will come up, you will light thestaircase and the corridor, and when he enters here, you will godownstairs again as speedily as possible, you will pay the coachman,and dismiss the fiacre.”

“And the money?” inquired the woman.
Jondrette fumbled in his trousers pocket and handed her five francs.
“What’s this?” she exclaimed.
Jondrette replied with dignity:—
“That is the monarch which our neighbor gave us this morning.”

And he added:—
“Do you know what? Two chairs will be needed here.”

“What for?”

“To sit on.”

Marius felt a cold chill pass through his limbs at hearing this mildanswer from Jondrette.
“Pardieu! I’ll go and get one of our neighbor’s.”

And with a rapid movement, she opened the door of the den, and went outinto the corridor.
Marius absolutely had not the time to descend from the commode, reachhis bed, and conceal himself beneath it.
“Take the candle,” cried Jondrette.
“No,” said she, “it would embarrass me, I have the two chairs to carry.There is moonlight.”

Marius heard Mother Jondrette’s heavy hand fumbling at his lock in thedark. The door opened. He remained nailed to the spot with the shockand with horror.
The Jondrette entered.
The dormer window permitted the entrance of a ray of moonlight betweentwo blocks of shadow. One of these blocks of shadow entirely coveredthe wall against which Marius was leaning, so that he disappearedwithin it.
Mother Jondrette raised her eyes, did not see Marius, took the twochairs, the only ones which Marius possessed, and went away, lettingthe door fall heavily to behind her.
She re-entered the lair.
“Here are the two chairs.”

“And here is the lantern. Go down as quick as you can.”

She hastily obeyed, and Jondrette was left alone.
He placed the two chairs on opposite sides of the table, turned thechisel in the brazier, set in front of the fireplace an old screenwhich masked the chafing-dish, then went to the corner where lay thepile of rope, and bent down as though to examine something. Marius thenrecognized the fact, that what he had taken for a shapeless mass was avery well-made rope-ladder, with wooden rungs and two hooks with whichto attach it.
This ladder, and some large tools, veritable masses of iron, which weremingled with the old iron piled up behind the door, had not been in theJondrette hovel in the morning, and had evidently been brought thitherin the afternoon, during Marius’ absence.
“Those are the utensils of an edge-tool maker,” thought Marius.
Had Marius been a little more learned in this line, he would haverecognized in what he took for the engines of an edge-tool maker,certain instruments which will force a lock or pick a lock, and otherswhich will cut or slice, the two families of tools which burglars call_cadets_ and _fauchants_.
The fireplace and the two chairs were exactly opposite Marius. Thebrazier being concealed, the only light in the room was now furnishedby the candle; the smallest bit of crockery on the table or on thechimney-piece cast a large shadow. There was something indescribablycalm, threatening, and hideous about this chamber. One felt that thereexisted in it the anticipation of something terrible.
Jondrette had allowed his pipe to go out, a serious sign ofpreoccupation, and had again seated himself. The candle brought out thefierce and the fine angles of his countenance. He indulged in scowlsand in abrupt unfoldings of the right hand, as though he wereresponding to the last counsels of a sombre inward monologue. In thecourse of one of these dark replies which he was making to himself, hepulled the table drawer rapidly towards him, took out a long kitchenknife which was concealed there, and tried the edge of its blade on hisnail. That done, he put the knife back in the drawer and shut it.
Marius, on his side, grasped the pistol in his right pocket, drew itout and cocked it.
The pistol emitted a sharp, clear click, as he cocked it.
Jondrette started, half rose, listened a moment, then began to laughand said:—
“What a fool I am! It’s the partition cracking!”

Marius kept the pistol in his hand.



CHAPTER XVIII—MARIUS’ TWO CHAIRS FORM A VIS-A-VIS

Suddenly, the distant and melancholy vibration of a clock shook thepanes. Six o’clock was striking from Saint-Médard.
Jondrette marked off each stroke with a toss of his head. When thesixth had struck, he snuffed the candle with his fingers.
Then he began to pace up and down the room, listened at the corridor,walked on again, then listened once more.
“Provided only that he comes!” he muttered, then he returned to hischair.
He had hardly reseated himself when the door opened.
Mother Jondrette had opened it, and now remained in the corridor makinga horrible, amiable grimace, which one of the holes of the dark-lanternilluminated from below.
“Enter, sir,” she said.
“Enter, my benefactor,” repeated Jondrette, rising hastily.
M. Leblanc made his appearance.
He wore an air of serenity which rendered him singularly venerable.
He laid four louis on the table.
“Monsieur Fabantou,” said he, “this is for your rent and your mostpressing necessities. We will attend to the rest hereafter.”

“May God requite it to you, my generous benefactor!” said Jondrette.
And rapidly approaching his wife:—
“Dismiss the carriage!”

She slipped out while her husband was lavishing salutes and offering M.Leblanc a chair. An instant later she returned and whispered in hisear:—
“‘Tis done.”

The snow, which had not ceased falling since the morning, was so deepthat the arrival of the fiacre had not been audible, and they did notnow hear its departure.
Meanwhile, M. Leblanc had seated himself.
Jondrette had taken possession of the other chair, facing M. Leblanc.
Now, in order to form an idea of the scene which is to follow, let thereader picture to himself in his own mind, a cold night, the solitudesof the Salpêtrière covered with snow and white as winding-sheets in themoonlight, the taper-like lights of the street lanterns which shoneredly here and there along those tragic boulevards, and the long rowsof black elms, not a passer-by for perhaps a quarter of a leaguearound, the Gorbeau hovel, at its highest pitch of silence, of horror,and of darkness; in that building, in the midst of those solitudes, inthe midst of that darkness, the vast Jondrette garret lighted by asingle candle, and in that den two men seated at a table, M. Leblanctranquil, Jondrette smiling and alarming, the Jondrette woman, thefemale wolf, in one corner, and, behind the partition, Marius,invisible, erect, not losing a word, not missing a single movement, hiseye on the watch, and pistol in hand.
However, Marius experienced only an emotion of horror, but no fear. Heclasped the stock of the pistol firmly and felt reassured. “I shall beable to stop that wretch whenever I please,” he thought.
He felt that the police were there somewhere in ambuscade, waiting forthe signal agreed upon and ready to stretch out their arm.
Moreover, he was in hopes, that this violent encounter betweenJondrette and M. Leblanc would cast some light on all the things whichhe was interested in learning.



CHAPTER XIX—OCCUPYING ONE’S SELF WITH OBSCURE DEPTHS

Hardly was M. Leblanc seated, when he turned his eyes towards thepallets, which were empty.
“How is the poor little wounded girl?” he inquired.
“Bad,” replied Jondrette with a heart-broken and grateful smile, “verybad, my worthy sir. Her elder sister has taken her to the Bourbe tohave her hurt dressed. You will see them presently; they will be backimmediately.”

“Madame Fabantou seems to me to be better,” went on M. Leblanc, castinghis eyes on the eccentric costume of the Jondrette woman, as she stoodbetween him and the door, as though already guarding the exit, andgazed at him in an attitude of menace and almost of combat.
“She is dying,” said Jondrette. “But what do you expect, sir! She hasso much courage, that woman has! She’s not a woman, she’s an ox.”

The Jondrette, touched by his compliment, deprecated it with theaffected airs of a flattered monster.
“You are always too good to me, Monsieur Jondrette!”

“Jondrette!” said M. Leblanc, “I thought your name was Fabantou?”

“Fabantou, alias Jondrette!” replied the husband hurriedly. “Anartistic sobriquet!”

And launching at his wife a shrug of the shoulders which M. Leblanc didnot catch, he continued with an emphatic and caressing inflection ofvoice:—
“Ah! we have had a happy life together, this poor darling and I! Whatwould there be left for us if we had not that? We are so wretched, myrespectable sir! We have arms, but there is no work! We have the will,no work! I don’t know how the government arranges that, but, on my wordof honor, sir, I am not Jacobin, sir, I am not a bousingot.30 I don’twish them any evil, but if I were the ministers, on my most sacredword, things would be different. Here, for instance, I wanted to havemy girls taught the trade of paper-box makers. You will say to me:‘What! a trade?’ Yes! A trade! A simple trade! A bread-winner! What afall, my benefactor! What a degradation, when one has been what we havebeen! Alas! There is nothing left to us of our days of prosperity! Onething only, a picture, of which I think a great deal, but which I amwilling to part with, for I must live! Item, one must live!”

While Jondrette thus talked, with an apparent incoherence whichdetracted nothing from the thoughtful and sagacious expression of hisphysiognomy, Marius raised his eyes, and perceived at the other end ofthe room a person whom he had not seen before. A man had just entered,so softly that the door had not been heard to turn on its hinges. Thisman wore a violet knitted vest, which was old, worn, spotted, cut andgaping at every fold, wide trousers of cotton velvet, wooden shoes onhis feet, no shirt, had his neck bare, his bare arms tattooed, and hisface smeared with black. He had seated himself in silence on thenearest bed, and, as he was behind Jondrette, he could only beindistinctly seen.
That sort of magnetic instinct which turns aside the gaze, caused M.Leblanc to turn round almost at the same moment as Marius. He could notrefrain from a gesture of surprise which did not escape Jondrette.
“Ah! I see!” exclaimed Jondrette, buttoning up his coat with an air ofcomplaisance, “you are looking at your overcoat? It fits me! My faith,but it fits me!”

“Who is that man?” said M. Leblanc.
“Him?” ejaculated Jondrette, “he’s a neighbor of mine. Don’t pay anyattention to him.”

The neighbor was a singular-looking individual. However, manufactoriesof chemical products abound in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. Many of theworkmen might have black faces. Besides this, M. Leblanc’s whole personwas expressive of candid and intrepid confidence.
He went on:—
“Excuse me; what were you saying, M. Fabantou?”

“I was telling you, sir, and dear protector,” replied Jondrette placinghis elbows on the table and contemplating M. Leblanc with steady andtender eyes, not unlike the eyes of the boa-constrictor, “I was tellingyou, that I have a picture to sell.”

A slight sound came from the door. A second man had just entered andseated himself on the bed, behind Jondrette.
Like the first, his arms were bare, and he had a mask of ink orlampblack.
Although this man had, literally, glided into the room, he had not beenable to prevent M. Leblanc catching sight of him.
“Don’t mind them,” said Jondrette, “they are people who belong in thehouse. So I was saying, that there remains in my possession a valuablepicture. But stop, sir, take a look at it.”

He rose, went to the wall at the foot of which stood the panel which wehave already mentioned, and turned it round, still leaving it supportedagainst the wall. It really was something which resembled a picture,and which the candle illuminated, somewhat. Marius could make nothingout of it, as Jondrette stood between the picture and him; he only sawa coarse daub, and a sort of principal personage colored with the harshcrudity of foreign canvasses and screen paintings.
“What is that?” asked M. Leblanc.
Jondrette exclaimed:—
“A painting by a master, a picture of great value, my benefactor! I amas much attached to it as I am to my two daughters; it recallssouvenirs to me! But I have told you, and I will not take it back, thatI am so wretched that I will part with it.”

Either by chance, or because he had begun to feel a dawning uneasiness,M. Leblanc’s glance returned to the bottom of the room as he examinedthe picture.
There were now four men, three seated on the bed, one standing near thedoor-post, all four with bare arms and motionless, with faces smearedwith black. One of those on the bed was leaning against the wall, withclosed eyes, and it might have been supposed that he was asleep. He wasold; his white hair contrasting with his blackened face produced ahorrible effect. The other two seemed to be young; one wore a beard,the other wore his hair long. None of them had on shoes; those who didnot wear socks were barefooted.
Jondrette noticed that M. Leblanc’s eye was fixed on these men.
“They are friends. They are neighbors,” said he. “Their faces are blackbecause they work in charcoal. They are chimney-builders. Don’t troubleyourself about them, my benefactor, but buy my picture. Have pity on mymisery. I will not ask you much for it. How much do you think it isworth?”

“Well,” said M. Leblanc, looking Jondrette full in the eye, and withthe manner of a man who is on his guard, “it is some signboard for atavern, and is worth about three francs.”

Jondrette replied sweetly:—
“Have you your pocket-book with you? I should be satisfied with athousand crowns.”

M. Leblanc sprang up, placed his back against the wall, and cast arapid glance around the room. He had Jondrette on his left, on the sidenext the window, and the Jondrette woman and the four men on his right,on the side next the door. The four men did not stir, and did not evenseem to be looking on.
Jondrette had again begun to speak in a plaintive tone, with so vaguean eye, and so lamentable an intonation, that M. Leblanc might havesupposed that what he had before him was a man who had simply gone madwith misery.
“If you do not buy my picture, my dear benefactor,” said Jondrette, “Ishall be left without resources; there will be nothing left for me butto throw myself into the river. When I think that I wanted to have mytwo girls taught the middle-class paper-box trade, the making of boxesfor New Year’s gifts! Well! A table with a board at the end to keep theglasses from falling off is required, then a special stove is needed, apot with three compartments for the different degrees of strength ofthe paste, according as it is to be used for wood, paper, or stuff, aparing-knife to cut the cardboard, a mould to adjust it, a hammer tonail the steels, pincers, how the devil do I know what all? And allthat in order to earn four sous a day! And you have to work fourteenhours a day! And each box passes through the workwoman’s hands thirteentimes! And you can’t wet the paper! And you mustn’t spot anything! Andyou must keep the paste hot. The devil, I tell you! Four sous a day!How do you suppose a man is to live?”

As he spoke, Jondrette did not look at M. Leblanc, who was observinghim. M. Leblanc’s eye was fixed on Jondrette, and Jondrette’s eye wasfixed on the door. Marius’ eager attention was transferred from one tothe other. M. Leblanc seemed to be asking himself: “Is this man anidiot?” Jondrette repeated two or three distinct times, with all mannerof varying inflections of the whining and supplicating order: “There isnothing left for me but to throw myself into the river! I went downthree steps at the side of the bridge of Austerlitz the other day forthat purpose.”

All at once his dull eyes lighted up with a hideous flash; the littleman drew himself up and became terrible, took a step toward M. Leblancand cried in a voice of thunder: “That has nothing to do with thequestion! Do you know me?”




CHAPTER XX—THE TRAP

The door of the garret had just opened abruptly, and allowed a view ofthree men clad in blue linen blouses, and masked with masks of blackpaper. The first was thin, and had a long, iron-tipped cudgel; thesecond, who was a sort of colossus, carried, by the middle of thehandle, with the blade downward, a butcher’s pole-axe for slaughteringcattle. The third, a man with thick-set shoulders, not so slender asthe first, held in his hand an enormous key stolen from the door ofsome prison.
It appeared that the arrival of these men was what Jondrette had beenwaiting for. A rapid dialogue ensued between him and the man with thecudgel, the thin one.
“Is everything ready?” said Jondrette.
“Yes,” replied the thin man.
“Where is Montparnasse?”

“The young principal actor stopped to chat with your girl.”

“Which?”

“The eldest.”

“Is there a carriage at the door?”

“Yes.”

“Is the team harnessed?”

“Yes.”

“With two good horses?”

“Excellent.”

“Is it waiting where I ordered?”

“Yes.”

“Good,” said Jondrette.
M. Leblanc was very pale. He was scrutinizing everything around him inthe den, like a man who understands what he has fallen into, and hishead, directed in turn toward all the heads which surrounded him, movedon his neck with an astonished and attentive slowness, but there wasnothing in his air which resembled fear. He had improvised anintrenchment out of the table; and the man, who but an instantpreviously, had borne merely the appearance of a kindly old man, hadsuddenly become a sort of athlete, and placed his robust fist on theback of his chair, with a formidable and surprising gesture.
This old man, who was so firm and so brave in the presence of such adanger, seemed to possess one of those natures which are as courageousas they are kind, both easily and simply. The father of a woman whom welove is never a stranger to us. Marius felt proud of that unknown man.
Three of the men, of whom Jondrette had said: “They arechimney-builders,” had armed themselves from the pile of old iron, onewith a heavy pair of shears, the second with weighing-tongs, the thirdwith a hammer, and had placed themselves across the entrance withoututtering a syllable. The old man had remained on the bed, and hadmerely opened his eyes. The Jondrette woman had seated herself besidehim.
Marius decided that in a few seconds more the moment for interventionwould arrive, and he raised his right hand towards the ceiling, in thedirection of the corridor, in readiness to discharge his pistol.
Jondrette having terminated his colloquy with the man with the cudgel,turned once more to M. Leblanc, and repeated his question, accompanyingit with that low, repressed, and terrible laugh which was peculiar tohim:—
“So you do not recognize me?”

M. Leblanc looked him full in the face, and replied:—
“No.”

Then Jondrette advanced to the table. He leaned across the candle,crossing his arms, putting his angular and ferocious jaw close to M.Leblanc’s calm face, and advancing as far as possible without forcingM. Leblanc to retreat, and, in this posture of a wild beast who isabout to bite, he exclaimed:—
“My name is not Fabantou, my name is not Jondrette, my name isThénardier. I am the inn-keeper of Montfermeil! Do you understand?Thénardier! Now do you know me?”

An almost imperceptible flush crossed M. Leblanc’s brow, and he repliedwith a voice which neither trembled nor rose above its ordinary level,with his accustomed placidity:—
“No more than before.”

Marius did not hear this reply. Any one who had seen him at that momentthrough the darkness would have perceived that he was haggard, stupid,thunder-struck. At the moment when Jondrette said: “My name isThénardier,” Marius had trembled in every limb, and had leaned againstthe wall, as though he felt the cold of a steel blade through hisheart. Then his right arm, all ready to discharge the signal shot,dropped slowly, and at the moment when Jondrette repeated, “Thénardier,do you understand?” Marius’s faltering fingers had come near lettingthe pistol fall. Jondrette, by revealing his identity, had not moved M.Leblanc, but he had quite upset Marius. That name of Thénardier, withwhich M. Leblanc did not seem to be acquainted, Marius knew well. Letthe reader recall what that name meant to him! That name he had worn onhis heart, inscribed in his father’s testament! He bore it at thebottom of his mind, in the depths of his memory, in that sacredinjunction: “A certain Thénardier saved my life. If my son encountershim, he will do him all the good that lies in his power.” That name, itwill be remembered, was one of the pieties of his soul; he mingled itwith the name of his father in his worship. What! This man was thatThénardier, that inn-keeper of Montfermeil whom he had so long and sovainly sought! He had found him at last, and how? His father’s saviourwas a ruffian! That man, to whose service Marius was burning to devotehimself, was a monster! That liberator of Colonel Pontmercy was on thepoint of committing a crime whose scope Marius did not, as yet, clearlycomprehend, but which resembled an assassination! And against whom,great God! what a fatality! What a bitter mockery of fate! His fatherhad commanded him from the depths of his coffin to do all the good inhis power to this Thénardier, and for four years Marius had cherishedno other thought than to acquit this debt of his father’s, and at themoment when he was on the eve of having a brigand seized in the veryact of crime by justice, destiny cried to him: “This is Thénardier!” Hecould at last repay this man for his father’s life, saved amid ahail-storm of grape-shot on the heroic field of Waterloo, and repay itwith the scaffold! He had sworn to himself that if ever he found thatThénardier, he would address him only by throwing himself at his feet;and now he actually had found him, but it was only to deliver him overto the executioner! His father said to him: “Succor Thénardier!” And hereplied to that adored and sainted voice by crushing Thénardier! He wasabout to offer to his father in his grave the spectacle of that man whohad torn him from death at the peril of his own life, executed on thePlace Saint-Jacques through the means of his son, of that Marius towhom he had entrusted that man by his will! And what a mockery to haveso long worn on his breast his father’s last commands, written in hisown hand, only to act in so horribly contrary a sense! But, on theother hand, now look on that trap and not prevent it! Condemn thevictim and to spare the assassin! Could one be held to any gratitudetowards so miserable a wretch? All the ideas which Marius had cherishedfor the last four years were pierced through and through, as it were,by this unforeseen blow.
He shuddered. Everything depended on him. Unknown to themselves, heheld in his hand all those beings who were moving about there beforehis eyes. If he fired his pistol, M. Leblanc was saved, and Thénardierlost; if he did not fire, M. Leblanc would be sacrificed, and, whoknows? Thénardier would escape. Should he dash down the one or allowthe other to fall? Remorse awaited him in either case.
What was he to do? What should he choose? Be false to the mostimperious souvenirs, to all those solemn vows to himself, to the mostsacred duty, to the most venerated text! Should he ignore his father’stestament, or allow the perpetration of a crime! On the one hand, itseemed to him that he heard “his Ursule” supplicating for her fatherand on the other, the colonel commending Thénardier to his care. Hefelt that he was going mad. His knees gave way beneath him. And he hadnot even the time for deliberation, so great was the fury with whichthe scene before his eyes was hastening to its catastrophe. It was likea whirlwind of which he had thought himself the master, and which wasnow sweeping him away. He was on the verge of swooning.
In the meantime, Thénardier, whom we shall henceforth call by no othername, was pacing up and down in front of the table in a sort of frenzyand wild triumph.
He seized the candle in his fist, and set it on the chimney-piece withso violent a bang that the wick came near being extinguished, and thetallow bespattered the wall.
Then he turned to M. Leblanc with a horrible look, and spit out thesewords:—
“Done for! Smoked brown! Cooked! Spitchcocked!”

And again he began to march back and forth, in full eruption.
“Ah!” he cried, “so I’ve found you again at last, Misterphilanthropist! Mister threadbare millionnaire! Mister giver of dolls!you old ninny! Ah! so you don’t recognize me! No, it wasn’t you whocame to Montfermeil, to my inn, eight years ago, on Christmas eve,1823! It wasn’t you who carried off that Fantine’s child from me! TheLark! It wasn’t you who had a yellow great-coat! No! Nor a package ofduds in your hand, as you had this morning here! Say, wife, it seems tobe his mania to carry packets of woollen stockings into houses! Oldcharity monger, get out with you! Are you a hosier, Mistermillionnaire? You give away your stock in trade to the poor, holy man!What bosh! merry Andrew! Ah! and you don’t recognize me? Well, Irecognize you, that I do! I recognized you the very moment you pokedyour snout in here. Ah! you’ll find out presently, that it isn’t allroses to thrust yourself in that fashion into people’s houses, underthe pretext that they are taverns, in wretched clothes, with the air ofa poor man, to whom one would give a sou, to deceive persons, to playthe generous, to take away their means of livelihood, and to makethreats in the woods, and you can’t call things quits becauseafterwards, when people are ruined, you bring a coat that is too large,and two miserable hospital blankets, you old blackguard, youchild-stealer!”

He paused, and seemed to be talking to himself for a moment. One wouldhave said that his wrath had fallen into some hole, like the Rhone;then, as though he were concluding aloud the things which he had beensaying to himself in a whisper, he smote the table with his fist, andshouted:—
“And with his goody-goody air!”

And, apostrophizing M. Leblanc:—
“Parbleu! You made game of me in the past! You are the cause of all mymisfortunes! For fifteen hundred francs you got a girl whom I had, andwho certainly belonged to rich people, and who had already brought in agreat deal of money, and from whom I might have extracted enough tolive on all my life! A girl who would have made up to me for everythingthat I lost in that vile cook-shop, where there was nothing but onecontinual row, and where, like a fool, I ate up my last farthing! Oh! Iwish all the wine folks drank in my house had been poison to those whodrank it! Well, never mind! Say, now! You must have thought meridiculous when you went off with the Lark! You had your cudgel in theforest. You were the stronger. Revenge. I’m the one to hold the trumpsto-day! You’re in a sorry case, my good fellow! Oh, but I can laugh!Really, I laugh! Didn’t he fall into the trap! I told him that I was anactor, that my name was Fabantou, that I had played comedy withMamselle Mars, with Mamselle Muche, that my landlord insisted on beingpaid tomorrow, the 4th of February, and he didn’t even notice that the8th of January, and not the 4th of February is the time when thequarter runs out! Absurd idiot! And the four miserable Philippes whichhe has brought me! Scoundrel! He hadn’t the heart even to go as high asa hundred francs! And how he swallowed my platitudes! That did amuseme. I said to myself: ‘Blockhead! Come, I’ve got you! I lick your pawsthis morning, but I’ll gnaw your heart this evening!’”

Thénardier paused. He was out of breath. His little, narrow chestpanted like a forge bellows. His eyes were full of the ignoblehappiness of a feeble, cruel, and cowardly creature, which finds thatit can, at last, harass what it has feared, and insult what it hasflattered, the joy of a dwarf who should be able to set his heel on thehead of Goliath, the joy of a jackal which is beginning to rend a sickbull, so nearly dead that he can no longer defend himself, butsufficiently alive to suffer still.
M. Leblanc did not interrupt him, but said to him when he paused:—
“I do not know what you mean to say. You are mistaken in me. I am avery poor man, and anything but a millionnaire. I do not know you. Youare mistaking me for some other person.”

“Ah!” roared Thénardier hoarsely, “a pretty lie! You stick to thatpleasantry, do you! You’re floundering, my old buck! Ah! You don’tremember! You don’t see who I am?”

“Excuse me, sir,” said M. Leblanc with a politeness of accent, which atthat moment seemed peculiarly strange and powerful, “I see that you area villain!”

Who has not remarked the fact that odious creatures possess asusceptibility of their own, that monsters are ticklish! At this word“villain,” the female Thénardier sprang from the bed, Thénardiergrasped his chair as though he were about to crush it in his hands.“Don’t you stir!” he shouted to his wife; and, turning to M. Leblanc:—
“Villain! Yes, I know that you call us that, you rich gentlemen! Stop!it’s true that I became bankrupt, that I am in hiding, that I have nobread, that I have not a single sou, that I am a villain! It’s threedays since I have had anything to eat, so I’m a villain! Ah! you folkswarm your feet, you have Sakoski boots, you have wadded great-coats,like archbishops, you lodge on the first floor in houses that haveporters, you eat truffles, you eat asparagus at forty francs the bunchin the month of January, and green peas, you gorge yourselves, and whenyou want to know whether it is cold, you look in the papers to see whatthe engineer Chevalier’s thermometer says about it. We, it is we whoare thermometers. We don’t need to go out and look on the quay at thecorner of the Tour de l’Horologe, to find out the number of degrees ofcold; we feel our blood congealing in our veins, and the ice forminground our hearts, and we say: ‘There is no God!’ And you come to ourcaverns, yes our caverns, for the purpose of calling us villains! Butwe’ll devour you! But we’ll devour you, poor little things! Just seehere, Mister millionnaire: I have been a solid man, I have held alicense, I have been an elector, I am a bourgeois, that I am! And it’squite possible that you are not!”

Here Thénardier took a step towards the men who stood near the door,and added with a shudder:—
“When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like acobbler!”

Then addressing M. Leblanc with a fresh outburst of frenzy:—
“And listen to this also, Mister philanthropist! I’m not a suspiciouscharacter, not a bit of it! I’m not a man whose name nobody knows, andwho comes and abducts children from houses! I’m an old French soldier,I ought to have been decorated! I was at Waterloo, so I was! And in thebattle I saved a general called the Comte of I don’t know what. He toldme his name, but his beastly voice was so weak that I didn’t hear. AllI caught was Merci [thanks]. I’d rather have had his name than histhanks. That would have helped me to find him again. The picture thatyou see here, and which was painted by David at Bruqueselles,—do youknow what it represents? It represents me. David wished to immortalizethat feat of prowess. I have that general on my back, and I am carryinghim through the grape-shot. There’s the history of it! That generalnever did a single thing for me; he was no better than the rest! Butnonetheless, I saved his life at the risk of my own, and I have thecertificate of the fact in my pocket! I am a soldier of Waterloo, byall the furies! And now that I have had the goodness to tell you allthis, let’s have an end of it. I want money, I want a deal of money, Imust have an enormous lot of money, or I’ll exterminate you, by thethunder of the good God!”

Marius had regained some measure of control over his anguish, and waslistening. The last possibility of doubt had just vanished. Itcertainly was the Thénardier of the will. Marius shuddered at thatreproach of ingratitude directed against his father, and which he wason the point of so fatally justifying. His perplexity was redoubled.
Moreover, there was in all these words of Thénardier, in his accent, inhis gesture, in his glance which darted flames at every word, therewas, in this explosion of an evil nature disclosing everything, in thatmixture of braggadocio and abjectness, of pride and pettiness, of rageand folly, in that chaos of real griefs and false sentiments, in thatimmodesty of a malicious man tasting the voluptuous delights ofviolence, in that shameless nudity of a repulsive soul, in thatconflagration of all sufferings combined with all hatreds, somethingwhich was as hideous as evil, and as heart-rending as the truth.
The picture of the master, the painting by David which he had proposedthat M. Leblanc should purchase, was nothing else, as the reader hasdivined, than the sign of his tavern painted, as it will be remembered,by himself, the only relic which he had preserved from his shipwreck atMontfermeil.
As he had ceased to intercept Marius’ visual ray, Marius could examinethis thing, and in the daub, he actually did recognize a battle, abackground of smoke, and a man carrying another man. It was the groupcomposed of Pontmercy and Thénardier; the sergeant the rescuer, thecolonel rescued. Marius was like a drunken man; this picture restoredhis father to life in some sort; it was no longer the signboard of thewine-shop at Montfermeil, it was a resurrection; a tomb had yawned, aphantom had risen there. Marius heard his heart beating in his temples,he had the cannon of Waterloo in his ears, his bleeding father, vaguelydepicted on that sinister panel terrified him, and it seemed to himthat the misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him.
When Thénardier had recovered his breath, he turned his bloodshot eyeson M. Leblanc, and said to him in a low, curt voice:—
“What have you to say before we put the handcuffs on you?”

M. Leblanc held his peace.
In the midst of this silence, a cracked voice launched this lugubrioussarcasm from the corridor:—
“If there’s any wood to be split, I’m there!”

It was the man with the axe, who was growing merry.
At the same moment, an enormous, bristling, and clayey face made itsappearance at the door, with a hideous laugh which exhibited not teeth,but fangs.
It was the face of the man with the butcher’s axe.
“Why have you taken off your mask?” cried Thénardier in a rage.
“For fun,” retorted the man.
For the last few minutes M. Leblanc had appeared to be watching andfollowing all the movements of Thénardier, who, blinded and dazzled byhis own rage, was stalking to and fro in the den with full confidencethat the door was guarded, and of holding an unarmed man fast, he beingarmed himself, of being nine against one, supposing that the femaleThénardier counted for but one man.
During his address to the man with the pole-axe, he had turned his backto M. Leblanc.
M. Leblanc seized this moment, overturned the chair with his foot andthe table with his fist, and with one bound, with prodigious agility,before Thénardier had time to turn round, he had reached the window. Toopen it, to scale the frame, to bestride it, was the work of a secondonly. He was half out when six robust fists seized him and dragged himback energetically into the hovel. These were the three“chimney-builders,” who had flung themselves upon him. At the same timethe Thénardier woman had wound her hands in his hair.
At the trampling which ensued, the other ruffians rushed up from thecorridor. The old man on the bed, who seemed under the influence ofwine, descended from the pallet and came reeling up, with astone-breaker’s hammer in his hand.
One of the “chimney-builders,” whose smirched face was lighted up bythe candle, and in whom Marius recognized, in spite of his daubing,Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, lifted above M.Leblanc’s head a sort of bludgeon made of two balls of lead, at the twoends of a bar of iron.
Marius could not resist this sight. “My father,” he thought, “forgiveme!”

And his finger sought the trigger of his pistol.
The shot was on the point of being discharged when Thénardier’s voiceshouted:—
“Don’t harm him!”

This desperate attempt of the victim, far from exasperating Thénardier,had calmed him. There existed in him two men, the ferocious man and theadroit man. Up to that moment, in the excess of his triumph in thepresence of the prey which had been brought down, and which did notstir, the ferocious man had prevailed; when the victim struggled andtried to resist, the adroit man reappeared and took the upper hand.
“Don’t hurt him!” he repeated, and without suspecting it, his firstsuccess was to arrest the pistol in the act of being discharged, and toparalyze Marius, in whose opinion the urgency of the case disappeared,and who, in the face of this new phase, saw no inconvenience in waitinga while longer.
Who knows whether some chance would not arise which would deliver himfrom the horrible alternative of allowing Ursule’s father to perish, orof destroying the colonel’s saviour?
A herculean struggle had begun. With one blow full in the chest, M.Leblanc had sent the old man tumbling, rolling in the middle of theroom, then with two backward sweeps of his hand he had overthrown twomore assailants, and he held one under each of his knees; the wretcheswere rattling in the throat beneath this pressure as under a granitemillstone; but the other four had seized the formidable old man by botharms and the back of his neck, and were holding him doubled up over thetwo “chimney-builders” on the floor.
Thus, the master of some and mastered by the rest, crushing thosebeneath him and stifling under those on top of him, endeavoring in vainto shake off all the efforts which were heaped upon him, M. Leblancdisappeared under the horrible group of ruffians like the wild boarbeneath a howling pile of dogs and hounds.
They succeeded in overthrowing him upon the bed nearest the window, andthere they held him in awe. The Thénardier woman had not released herclutch on his hair.
“Don’t you mix yourself up in this affair,” said Thénardier. “You’lltear your shawl.”

The Thénardier obeyed, as the female wolf obeys the male wolf, with agrowl.
“Now,” said Thénardier, “search him, you other fellows!”

M. Leblanc seemed to have renounced the idea of resistance.
They searched him.
He had nothing on his person except a leather purse containing sixfrancs, and his handkerchief.
Thénardier put the handkerchief into his own pocket.
“What! No pocket-book?” he demanded.
“No, nor watch,” replied one of the “chimney-builders.”

“Never mind,” murmured the masked man who carried the big key, in thevoice of a ventriloquist, “he’s a tough old fellow.”

Thénardier went to the corner near the door, picked up a bundle ofropes and threw them at the men.
“Tie him to the leg of the bed,” said he.
And, catching sight of the old man who had been stretched across theroom by the blow from M. Leblanc’s fist, and who made no movement, headded:—
“Is Boulatruelle dead?”

“No,” replied Bigrenaille, “he’s drunk.”

“Sweep him into a corner,” said Thénardier.
Two of the “chimney-builders” pushed the drunken man into the cornernear the heap of old iron with their feet.
“Babet,” said Thénardier in a low tone to the man with the cudgel, “whydid you bring so many; they were not needed.”

“What can you do?” replied the man with the cudgel, “they all wanted tobe in it. This is a bad season. There’s no business going on.”

The pallet on which M. Leblanc had been thrown was a sort of hospitalbed, elevated on four coarse wooden legs, roughly hewn.
M. Leblanc let them take their own course.
The ruffians bound him securely, in an upright attitude, with his feeton the ground at the head of the bed, the end which was most remotefrom the window, and nearest to the fireplace.
When the last knot had been tied, Thénardier took a chair and seatedhimself almost facing M. Leblanc.
Thénardier no longer looked like himself; in the course of a fewmoments his face had passed from unbridled violence to tranquil andcunning sweetness.
Marius found it difficult to recognize in that polished smile of a manin official life the almost bestial mouth which had been foaming but amoment before; he gazed with amazement on that fantastic and alarmingmetamorphosis, and he felt as a man might feel who should behold atiger converted into a lawyer.
“Monsieur—” said Thénardier.
And dismissing with a gesture the ruffians who still kept their handson M. Leblanc:—
“Stand off a little, and let me have a talk with the gentleman.”

All retired towards the door.
He went on:—
“Monsieur, you did wrong to try to jump out of the window. You mighthave broken your leg. Now, if you will permit me, we will conversequietly. In the first place, I must communicate to you an observationwhich I have made which is, that you have not uttered the faintestcry.”

Thénardier was right, this detail was correct, although it had escapedMarius in his agitation. M. Leblanc had barely pronounced a few words,without raising his voice, and even during his struggle with the sixruffians near the window he had preserved the most profound andsingular silence.
Thénardier continued:—
“Mon Dieu! You might have shouted ‘stop thief’ a bit, and I should nothave thought it improper. ‘Murder!’ That, too, is said occasionally,and, so far as I am concerned, I should not have taken it in bad part.It is very natural that you should make a little row when you findyourself with persons who don’t inspire you with sufficient confidence.You might have done that, and no one would have troubled you on thataccount. You would not even have been gagged. And I will tell you why.This room is very private. That’s its only recommendation, but it hasthat in its favor. You might fire off a mortar and it would produceabout as much noise at the nearest police station as the snores of adrunken man. Here a cannon would make a _boum_, and the thunder wouldmake a _pouf_. It’s a handy lodging. But, in short, you did not shout,and it is better so. I present you my compliments, and I will tell youthe conclusion that I draw from that fact: My dear sir, when a manshouts, who comes? The police. And after the police? Justice. Well! Youhave not made an outcry; that is because you don’t care to have thepolice and the courts come in any more than we do. It is because,—Ihave long suspected it,—you have some interest in hiding something. Onour side we have the same interest. So we can come to anunderstanding.”

As he spoke thus, it seemed as though Thénardier, who kept his eyesfixed on M. Leblanc, were trying to plunge the sharp points whichdarted from the pupils into the very conscience of his prisoner.Moreover, his language, which was stamped with a sort of moderated,subdued insolence and crafty insolence, was reserved and almost choice,and in that rascal, who had been nothing but a robber a short timepreviously, one now felt “the man who had studied for the priesthood.”

The silence preserved by the prisoner, that precaution which had beencarried to the point of forgetting all anxiety for his own life, thatresistance opposed to the first impulse of nature, which is to utter acry, all this, it must be confessed, now that his attention had beencalled to it, troubled Marius, and affected him with painfulastonishment.
Thénardier’s well-grounded observation still further obscured forMarius the dense mystery which enveloped that grave and singular personon whom Courfeyrac had bestowed the sobriquet of Monsieur Leblanc.
But whoever he was, bound with ropes, surrounded with executioners,half plunged, so to speak, in a grave which was closing in upon him tothe extent of a degree with every moment that passed, in the presenceof Thénardier’s wrath, as in the presence of his sweetness, this manremained impassive; and Marius could not refrain from admiring at sucha moment the superbly melancholy visage.
Here, evidently, was a soul which was inaccessible to terror, and whichdid not know the meaning of despair. Here was one of those men whocommand amazement in desperate circumstances. Extreme as was thecrisis, inevitable as was the catastrophe, there was nothing here ofthe agony of the drowning man, who opens his horror-filled eyes underthe water.
Thénardier rose in an unpretending manner, went to the fireplace,shoved aside the screen, which he leaned against the neighboringpallet, and thus unmasked the brazier full of glowing coals, in whichthe prisoner could plainly see the chisel white-hot and spotted hereand there with tiny scarlet stars.
Then Thénardier returned to his seat beside M. Leblanc.
“I continue,” said he. “We can come to an understanding. Let us arrangethis matter in an amicable way. I was wrong to lose my temper just now,I don’t know what I was thinking of, I went a great deal too far, Isaid extravagant things. For example, because you are a millionnaire, Itold you that I exacted money, a lot of money, a deal of money. Thatwould not be reasonable. Mon Dieu, in spite of your riches, you haveexpenses of your own—who has not? I don’t want to ruin you, I am not agreedy fellow, after all. I am not one of those people who, becausethey have the advantage of the position, profit by the fact to makethemselves ridiculous. Why, I’m taking things into consideration andmaking a sacrifice on my side. I only want two hundred thousandfrancs.”

M. Leblanc uttered not a word.
Thénardier went on:—
“You see that I put not a little water in my wine; I’m very moderate. Idon’t know the state of your fortune, but I do know that you don’tstick at money, and a benevolent man like yourself can certainly givetwo hundred thousand francs to the father of a family who is out ofluck. Certainly, you are reasonable, too; you haven’t imagined that Ishould take all the trouble I have to-day and organized this affairthis evening, which has been labor well bestowed, in the opinion ofthese gentlemen, merely to wind up by asking you for enough to go anddrink red wine at fifteen sous and eat veal at Desnoyer’s. Two hundredthousand francs—it’s surely worth all that. This trifle once out ofyour pocket, I guarantee you that that’s the end of the matter, andthat you have no further demands to fear. You will say to me: ‘But Ihaven’t two hundred thousand francs about me.’ Oh! I’m notextortionate. I don’t demand that. I only ask one thing of you. Havethe goodness to write what I am about to dictate to you.”

Here Thénardier paused; then he added, emphasizing his words, andcasting a smile in the direction of the brazier:—
“I warn you that I shall not admit that you don’t know how to write.”

A grand inquisitor might have envied that smile.
Thénardier pushed the table close to M. Leblanc, and took an inkstand,a pen, and a sheet of paper from the drawer which he left half open,and in which gleamed the long blade of the knife.
He placed the sheet of paper before M. Leblanc.
“Write,” said he.
The prisoner spoke at last.
“How do you expect me to write? I am bound.”

“That’s true, excuse me!” ejaculated Thénardier, “you are quite right.”

And turning to Bigrenaille:—
“Untie the gentleman’s right arm.”

Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, executed Thénardier’sorder.
When the prisoner’s right arm was free, Thénardier dipped the pen inthe ink and presented it to him.
“Understand thoroughly, sir, that you are in our power, at ourdiscretion, that no human power can get you out of this, and that weshall be really grieved if we are forced to proceed to disagreeableextremities. I know neither your name, nor your address, but I warnyou, that you will remain bound until the person charged with carryingthe letter which you are about to write shall have returned. Now, be sogood as to write.”

“What?” demanded the prisoner.
“I will dictate.”

M. Leblanc took the pen.
Thénardier began to dictate:—
“My daughter—”

The prisoner shuddered, and raised his eyes to Thénardier.
“Put down ‘My dear daughter’—” said Thénardier.
M. Leblanc obeyed.
Thénardier continued:—
“Come instantly—”

He paused:—
“You address her as _thou_, do you not?”

“Who?” asked M. Leblanc.
“Parbleu!” cried Thénardier, “the little one, the Lark.”

M. Leblanc replied without the slightest apparent emotion:—
“I do not know what you mean.”

“Go on, nevertheless,” ejaculated Thénardier, and he continued todictate:—
“Come immediately, I am in absolute need of thee. The person who willdeliver this note to thee is instructed to conduct thee to me. I amwaiting for thee. Come with confidence.”

M. Leblanc had written the whole of this.
Thénardier resumed:—
“Ah! erase ‘come with confidence’; that might lead her to suppose thateverything was not as it should be, and that distrust is possible.”

M. Leblanc erased the three words.
“Now,” pursued Thénardier, “sign it. What’s your name?”

The prisoner laid down the pen and demanded:—
“For whom is this letter?”

“You know well,” retorted Thénardier, “for the little one I just toldyou so.”

It was evident that Thénardier avoided naming the young girl inquestion. He said “the Lark,” he said “the little one,” but he did notpronounce her name—the precaution of a clever man guarding his secretfrom his accomplices. To mention the name was to deliver the whole“affair” into their hands, and to tell them more about it than therewas any need of their knowing.
He went on:—
“Sign. What is your name?”

“Urbain Fabre,” said the prisoner.
Thénardier, with the movement of a cat, dashed his hand into his pocketand drew out the handkerchief which had been seized on M. Leblanc. Helooked for the mark on it, and held it close to the candle.
“U. F. That’s it. Urbain Fabre. Well, sign it U. F.”

The prisoner signed.
“As two hands are required to fold the letter, give it to me, I willfold it.”

That done, Thénardier resumed:—
“Address it, ‘Mademoiselle Fabre,’ at your house. I know that you livea long distance from here, near Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, because yougo to mass there every day, but I don’t know in what street. I see thatyou understand your situation. As you have not lied about your name,you will not lie about your address. Write it yourself.”

The prisoner paused thoughtfully for a moment, then he took the pen andwrote:—
“Mademoiselle Fabre, at M. Urbain Fabre’s, Rue Saint-Dominique-D’Enfer,No. 17.”

Thénardier seized the letter with a sort of feverish convulsion.
“Wife!” he cried.
The Thénardier woman hastened to him.
“Here’s the letter. You know what you have to do. There is a carriageat the door. Set out at once, and return ditto.”

And addressing the man with the meat-axe:—
“Since you have taken off your nose-screen, accompany the mistress. Youwill get up behind the fiacre. You know where you left the team?”

“Yes,” said the man.
And depositing his axe in a corner, he followed Madame Thénardier.
As they set off, Thénardier thrust his head through the half-open door,and shouted into the corridor:—
“Above all things, don’t lose the letter! remember that you carry twohundred thousand francs with you!”

The Thénardier’s hoarse voice replied:—
“Be easy. I have it in my bosom.”

A minute had not elapsed, when the sound of the cracking of a whip washeard, which rapidly retreated and died away.
“Good!” growled Thénardier. “They’re going at a fine pace. At such agallop, the bourgeoise will be back inside three-quarters of an hour.”

He drew a chair close to the fireplace, folding his arms, andpresenting his muddy boots to the brazier.
“My feet are cold!” said he.
Only five ruffians now remained in the den with Thénardier and theprisoner.
These men, through the black masks or paste which covered their faces,and made of them, at fear’s pleasure, charcoal-burners, negroes, ordemons, had a stupid and gloomy air, and it could be felt that theyperpetrated a crime like a bit of work, tranquilly, without eitherwrath or mercy, with a sort of ennui. They were crowded together in onecorner like brutes, and remained silent.
Thénardier warmed his feet.
The prisoner had relapsed into his taciturnity. A sombre calm hadsucceeded to the wild uproar which had filled the garret but a fewmoments before.
The candle, on which a large “stranger” had formed, cast but a dimlight in the immense hovel, the brazier had grown dull, and all thosemonstrous heads cast misshapen shadows on the walls and ceiling.
No sound was audible except the quiet breathing of the old drunken man,who was fast asleep.
Marius waited in a state of anxiety that was augmented by every trifle.The enigma was more impenetrable than ever.
Who was this “little one” whom Thénardier had called the Lark? Was shehis “Ursule”? The prisoner had not seemed to be affected by that word,“the Lark,” and had replied in the most natural manner in the world: “Ido not know what you mean.” On the other hand, the two letters U. F.were explained; they meant Urbain Fabre; and Ursule was no longer namedUrsule. This was what Marius perceived most clearly of all.
A sort of horrible fascination held him nailed to his post, from whichhe was observing and commanding this whole scene. There he stood,almost incapable of movement or reflection, as though annihilated bythe abominable things viewed at such close quarters. He waited, in thehope of some incident, no matter of what nature, since he could notcollect his thoughts and did not know upon what course to decide.
“In any case,” he said, “if she is the Lark, I shall see her, for theThénardier woman is to bring her hither. That will be the end, and thenI will give my life and my blood if necessary, but I will deliver her!Nothing shall stop me.”

Nearly half an hour passed in this manner. Thénardier seemed to beabsorbed in gloomy reflections, the prisoner did not stir. Still,Marius fancied that at intervals, and for the last few moments, he hadheard a faint, dull noise in the direction of the prisoner.
All at once, Thénardier addressed the prisoner:
“By the way, Monsieur Fabre, I might as well say it to you at once.”

These few words appeared to be the beginning of an explanation. Mariusstrained his ears.
“My wife will be back shortly, don’t get impatient. I think that theLark really is your daughter, and it seems to me quite natural that youshould keep her. Only, listen to me a bit. My wife will go and hunt herup with your letter. I told my wife to dress herself in the way shedid, so that your young lady might make no difficulty about followingher. They will both enter the carriage with my comrade behind.Somewhere, outside the barrier, there is a trap harnessed to two verygood horses. Your young lady will be taken to it. She will alight fromthe fiacre. My comrade will enter the other vehicle with her, and mywife will come back here to tell us: ‘It’s done.’ As for the younglady, no harm will be done to her; the trap will conduct her to a placewhere she will be quiet, and just as soon as you have handed over to methose little two hundred thousand francs, she will be returned to you.If you have me arrested, my comrade will give a turn of his thumb tothe Lark, that’s all.”

The prisoner uttered not a syllable. After a pause, Thénardiercontinued:—
“It’s very simple, as you see. There’ll be no harm done unless you wishthat there should be harm done. I’m telling you how things stand. Iwarn you so that you may be prepared.”

He paused: the prisoner did not break the silence, and Thénardierresumed:—
“As soon as my wife returns and says to me: ‘The Lark is on the way,’we will release you, and you will be free to go and sleep at home. Yousee that our intentions are not evil.”

Terrible images passed through Marius’ mind. What! That young girl whomthey were abducting was not to be brought back? One of those monsterswas to bear her off into the darkness? Whither? And what if it wereshe!
It was clear that it was she. Marius felt his heart stop beating.
What was he to do? Discharge the pistol? Place all those scoundrels inthe hands of justice? But the horrible man with the meat-axe would,nonetheless, be out of reach with the young girl, and Marius reflectedon Thénardier’s words, of which he perceived the bloody significance:“If you have me arrested, my comrade will give a turn of his thumb tothe Lark.”

Now, it was not alone by the colonel’s testament, it was by his ownlove, it was by the peril of the one he loved, that he felt himselfrestrained.
This frightful situation, which had already lasted above half an hour,was changing its aspect every moment.
Marius had sufficient strength of mind to review in succession all themost heart-breaking conjectures, seeking hope and finding none.
The tumult of his thoughts contrasted with the funereal silence of theden.
In the midst of this silence, the door at the bottom of the staircasewas heard to open and shut again.
The prisoner made a movement in his bonds.
“Here’s the bourgeoise,” said Thénardier.
He had hardly uttered the words, when the Thénardier woman did in factrush hastily into the room, red, panting, breathless, with flamingeyes, and cried, as she smote her huge hands on her thighssimultaneously:—
“False address!”

The ruffian who had gone with her made his appearance behind her andpicked up his axe again.
She resumed:—
“Nobody there! Rue Saint-Dominique, No. 17, no Monsieur Urbain Fabre!They know not what it means!”

She paused, choking, then went on:—
“Monsieur Thénardier! That old fellow has duped you! You are too good,you see! If it had been me, I’d have chopped the beast in four quartersto begin with! And if he had acted ugly, I’d have boiled him alive! Hewould have been obliged to speak, and say where the girl is, and wherehe keeps his shiners! That’s the way I should have managed matters!People are perfectly right when they say that men are a deal stupiderthan women! Nobody at No. 17. It’s nothing but a big carriage gate! NoMonsieur Fabre in the Rue Saint-Dominique! And after all that racingand fee to the coachman and all! I spoke to both the porter and theportress, a fine, stout woman, and they know nothing about him!”

Marius breathed freely once more.
She, Ursule or the Lark, he no longer knew what to call her, was safe.
While his exasperated wife vociferated, Thénardier had seated himselfon the table.
For several minutes he uttered not a word, but swung his right foot,which hung down, and stared at the brazier with an air of savagereverie.
Finally, he said to the prisoner, with a slow and singularly ferocioustone:
“A false address? What did you expect to gain by that?”

“To gain time!” cried the prisoner in a thundering voice, and at thesame instant he shook off his bonds; they were cut. The prisoner wasonly attached to the bed now by one leg.
Before the seven men had time to collect their senses and dash forward,he had bent down into the fireplace, had stretched out his hand to thebrazier, and had then straightened himself up again, and nowThénardier, the female Thénardier, and the ruffians, huddled inamazement at the extremity of the hovel, stared at him in stupefaction,as almost free and in a formidable attitude, he brandished above hishead the red-hot chisel, which emitted a threatening glow.
The judicial examination to which the ambush in the Gorbeau houseeventually gave rise, established the fact that a large sou piece, cutand worked in a peculiar fashion, was found in the garret, when thepolice made their descent on it. This sou piece was one of thosemarvels of industry, which are engendered by the patience of thegalleys in the shadows and for the shadows, marvels which are nothingelse than instruments of escape. These hideous and delicate products ofwonderful art are to jewellers’ work what the metaphors of slang are topoetry. There are Benvenuto Cellinis in the galleys, just as there areVillons in language. The unhappy wretch who aspires to deliverancefinds means sometimes without tools, sometimes with a commonwooden-handled knife, to saw a sou into two thin plates, to hollow outthese plates without affecting the coinage stamp, and to make a furrowon the edge of the sou in such a manner that the plates will adhereagain. This can be screwed together and unscrewed at will; it is a box.In this box he hides a watch-spring, and this watch-spring, properlyhandled, cuts good-sized chains and bars of iron. The unfortunateconvict is supposed to possess merely a sou; not at all, he possessesliberty. It was a large sou of this sort which, during the subsequentsearch of the police, was found under the bed near the window. Theyalso found a tiny saw of blue steel which would fit the sou.
It is probable that the prisoner had this sou piece on his person atthe moment when the ruffians searched him, that he contrived to concealit in his hand, and that afterward, having his right hand free, heunscrewed it, and used it as a saw to cut the cords which fastened him,which would explain the faint noise and almost imperceptible movementswhich Marius had observed.
As he had not been able to bend down, for fear of betraying himself, hehad not cut the bonds of his left leg.
The ruffians had recovered from their first surprise.
“Be easy,” said Bigrenaille to Thénardier. “He still holds by one leg,and he can’t get away. I’ll answer for that. I tied that paw for him.”

In the meanwhile, the prisoner had begun to speak:—
“You are wretches, but my life is not worth the trouble of defendingit. When you think that you can make me speak, that you can make mewrite what I do not choose to write, that you can make me say what I donot choose to say—”

He stripped up his left sleeve, and added:—
“See here.”

At the same moment he extended his arm, and laid the glowing chiselwhich he held in his left hand by its wooden handle on his bare flesh.
The crackling of the burning flesh became audible, and the odorpeculiar to chambers of torture filled the hovel.

  Enlarge
Red Hot Chisel  3b8-20-red-hot-chisel

Marius reeled in utter horror, the very ruffians shuddered, hardly amuscle of the old man’s face contracted, and while the red-hot ironsank into the smoking wound, impassive and almost august, he fixed onThénardier his beautiful glance, in which there was no hatred, andwhere suffering vanished in serene majesty.
With grand and lofty natures, the revolts of the flesh and the senseswhen subjected to physical suffering cause the soul to spring forth,and make it appear on the brow, just as rebellions among the soldieryforce the captain to show himself.
“Wretches!” said he, “have no more fear of me than I have for you!”

And, tearing the chisel from the wound, he hurled it through thewindow, which had been left open; the horrible, glowing tooldisappeared into the night, whirling as it flew, and fell far away onthe snow.
The prisoner resumed:—
“Do what you please with me.” He was disarmed.
“Seize him!” said Thénardier.
Two of the ruffians laid their hands on his shoulder, and the maskedman with the ventriloquist’s voice took up his station in front of him,ready to smash his skull at the slightest movement.
At the same time, Marius heard below him, at the base of the partition,but so near that he could not see who was speaking, this colloquyconducted in a low tone:—
“There is only one thing left to do.”

“Cut his throat.”

“That’s it.”

It was the husband and wife taking counsel together.
Thénardier walked slowly towards the table, opened the drawer, and tookout the knife. Marius fretted with the handle of his pistol.Unprecedented perplexity! For the last hour he had had two voices inhis conscience, the one enjoining him to respect his father’stestament, the other crying to him to rescue the prisoner. These twovoices continued uninterruptedly that struggle which tormented him toagony. Up to that moment he had cherished a vague hope that he shouldfind some means of reconciling these two duties, but nothing within thelimits of possibility had presented itself.
However, the peril was urgent, the last bounds of delay had beenreached; Thénardier was standing thoughtfully a few paces distant fromthe prisoner.
Marius cast a wild glance about him, the last mechanical resource ofdespair. All at once a shudder ran through him.
At his feet, on the table, a bright ray of light from the full moonilluminated and seemed to point out to him a sheet of paper. On thispaper he read the following line written that very morning, in largeletters, by the eldest of the Thénardier girls:—
“THE BOBBIES ARE HERE.”

An idea, a flash, crossed Marius’ mind; this was the expedient of whichhe was in search, the solution of that frightful problem which wastorturing him, of sparing the assassin and saving the victim.
He knelt down on his commode, stretched out his arm, seized the sheetof paper, softly detached a bit of plaster from the wall, wrapped thepaper round it, and tossed the whole through the crevice into themiddle of the den.
It was high time. Thénardier had conquered his last fears or his lastscruples, and was advancing on the prisoner.
“Something is falling!” cried the Thénardier woman.
“What is it?” asked her husband.
The woman darted forward and picked up the bit of plaster. She handedit to her husband.
“Where did this come from?” demanded Thénardier.
“Pardie!” ejaculated his wife, “where do you suppose it came from?Through the window, of course.”

“I saw it pass,” said Bigrenaille.
Thénardier rapidly unfolded the paper and held it close to the candle.
“It’s in Éponine’s handwriting. The devil!”

He made a sign to his wife, who hastily drew near, and showed her theline written on the sheet of paper, then he added in a subdued voice:—
“Quick! The ladder! Let’s leave the bacon in the mousetrap and decamp!”

“Without cutting that man’s throat?” asked, the Thénardier woman.
“We haven’t the time.”

“Through what?” resumed Bigrenaille.
“Through the window,” replied Thénardier. “Since Ponine has thrown thestone through the window, it indicates that the house is not watched onthat side.”

The mask with the ventriloquist’s voice deposited his huge key on thefloor, raised both arms in the air, and opened and clenched his fists,three times rapidly without uttering a word.
This was the signal like the signal for clearing the decks for actionon board ship.
The ruffians who were holding the prisoner released him; in thetwinkling of an eye the rope ladder was unrolled outside the window,and solidly fastened to the sill by the two iron hooks.
The prisoner paid no attention to what was going on around him. Heseemed to be dreaming or praying.
As soon as the ladder was arranged, Thénardier cried:
“Come! the bourgeoise first!”

And he rushed headlong to the window.
But just as he was about to throw his leg over, Bigrenaille seized himroughly by the collar.
“Not much, come now, you old dog, after us!”

“After us!” yelled the ruffians.
“You are children,” said Thénardier, “we are losing time. The policeare on our heels.”

“Well,” said the ruffians, “let’s draw lots to see who shall go downfirst.”

Thénardier exclaimed:—
“Are you mad! Are you crazy! What a pack of boobies! You want to wastetime, do you? Draw lots, do you? By a wet finger, by a short straw!With written names! Thrown into a hat!—”

“Would you like my hat?” cried a voice on the threshold.
All wheeled round. It was Javert.
He had his hat in his hand, and was holding it out to them with asmile.



CHAPTER XXI—ONE SHOULD ALWAYS BEGIN BY ARRESTING THE VICTIMS

At nightfall, Javert had posted his men and had gone into ambushhimself between the trees of the Rue de la Barrière-des-Gobelins whichfaced the Gorbeau house, on the other side of the boulevard. He hadbegun operations by opening “his pockets,” and dropping into it the twoyoung girls who were charged with keeping a watch on the approaches tothe den. But he had only “caged” Azelma. As for Éponine, she was not ather post, she had disappeared, and he had not been able to seize her.Then Javert had made a point and had bent his ear to waiting for thesignal agreed upon. The comings and goings of the fiacres had greatlyagitated him. At last, he had grown impatient, and, _sure that therewas a nest there_, sure of being in “luck,” having recognized many ofthe ruffians who had entered, he had finally decided to go upstairswithout waiting for the pistol-shot.
It will be remembered that he had Marius’ pass-key.
He had arrived just in the nick of time.
The terrified ruffians flung themselves on the arms which they hadabandoned in all the corners at the moment of flight. In less than asecond, these seven men, horrible to behold, had grouped themselves inan attitude of defence, one with his meat-axe, another with his key,another with his bludgeon, the rest with shears, pincers, and hammers.Thénardier had his knife in his fist. The Thénardier woman snatched upan enormous paving-stone which lay in the angle of the window andserved her daughters as an ottoman.

  Enlarge
Snatched up a Paving Stone  3b8-21-paving-stone

Javert put on his hat again, and advanced a couple of paces into theroom, with arms folded, his cane under one arm, his sword in itssheath.
“Halt there,” said he. “You shall not go out by the window, you shallgo through the door. It’s less unhealthy. There are seven of you, thereare fifteen of us. Don’t let’s fall to collaring each other like men ofAuvergne.”

Bigrenaille drew out a pistol which he had kept concealed under hisblouse, and put it in Thénardier’s hand, whispering in the latter’sear:—
“It’s Javert. I don’t dare fire at that man. Do you dare?”

“Parbleu!” replied Thénardier.
“Well, then, fire.”

Thénardier took the pistol and aimed at Javert.
Javert, who was only three paces from him, stared intently at him andcontented himself with saying:—
“Come now, don’t fire. You’ll miss fire.”

Thénardier pulled the trigger. The pistol missed fire.
“Didn’t I tell you so!” ejaculated Javert.
Bigrenaille flung his bludgeon at Javert’s feet.
“You’re the emperor of the fiends! I surrender.”

“And you?” Javert asked the rest of the ruffians.
They replied:—
“So do we.”

Javert began again calmly:—
“That’s right, that’s good, I said so, you are nice fellows.”

“I only ask one thing,” said Bigrenaille, “and that is, that I may notbe denied tobacco while I am in confinement.”

“Granted,” said Javert.
And turning round and calling behind him:—
“Come in now!”

A squad of policemen, sword in hand, and agents armed with bludgeonsand cudgels, rushed in at Javert’s summons. They pinioned the ruffians.
This throng of men, sparely lighted by the single candle, filled theden with shadows.
“Handcuff them all!” shouted Javert.
“Come on!” cried a voice which was not the voice of a man, but of whichno one would ever have said: “It is a woman’s voice.”

The Thénardier woman had entrenched herself in one of the angles of thewindow, and it was she who had just given vent to this roar.
The policemen and agents recoiled.
She had thrown off her shawl, but retained her bonnet; her husband, whowas crouching behind her, was almost hidden under the discarded shawl,and she was shielding him with her body, as she elevated thepaving-stone above her head with the gesture of a giantess on the pointof hurling a rock.
“Beware!” she shouted.
All crowded back towards the corridor. A broad open space was clearedin the middle of the garret.
The Thénardier woman cast a glance at the ruffians who had allowedthemselves to be pinioned, and muttered in hoarse and gutturalaccents:—
“The cowards!”

Javert smiled, and advanced across the open space which the Thénardierwas devouring with her eyes.
“Don’t come near me,” she cried, “or I’ll crush you.”

“What a grenadier!” ejaculated Javert; “you’ve got a beard like a man,mother, but I have claws like a woman.”

And he continued to advance.
The Thénardier, dishevelled and terrible, set her feet far apart, threwherself backwards, and hurled the paving-stone at Javert’s head. Javertducked, the stone passed over him, struck the wall behind, knocked offa huge piece of plastering, and, rebounding from angle to angle acrossthe hovel, now luckily almost empty, rested at Javert’s feet.
At the same moment, Javert reached the Thénardier couple. One of hisbig hands descended on the woman’s shoulder; the other on the husband’shead.
“The handcuffs!” he shouted.
The policemen trooped in in force, and in a few seconds Javert’s orderhad been executed.
The Thénardier female, overwhelmed, stared at her pinioned hands, andat those of her husband, who had dropped to the floor, and exclaimed,weeping:—
“My daughters!”

“They are in the jug,” said Javert.
In the meanwhile, the agents had caught sight of the drunken man asleepbehind the door, and were shaking him:—
He awoke, stammering:—
“Is it all over, Jondrette?”

“Yes,” replied Javert.
The six pinioned ruffians were standing, and still preserved theirspectral mien; all three besmeared with black, all three masked.
“Keep on your masks,” said Javert.
And passing them in review with a glance of a Frederick II. at aPotsdam parade, he said to the three “chimney-builders”:—
“Good day, Bigrenaille! good day, Brujon! good day, Deuxmilliards!”

Then turning to the three masked men, he said to the man with themeat-axe:—
“Good day, Gueulemer!”

And to the man with the cudgel:—
“Good day, Babet!”

And to the ventriloquist:—
“Your health, Claquesous.”

At that moment, he caught sight of the ruffians’ prisoner, who, eversince the entrance of the police, had not uttered a word, and had heldhis head down.
“Untie the gentleman!” said Javert, “and let no one go out!”

That said, he seated himself with sovereign dignity before the table,where the candle and the writing-materials still remained, drew astamped paper from his pocket, and began to prepare his report.
When he had written the first lines, which are formulas that nevervary, he raised his eyes:—
“Let the gentleman whom these gentlemen bound step forward.”

The policemen glanced round them.
“Well,” said Javert, “where is he?”

The prisoner of the ruffians, M. Leblanc, M. Urbain Fabre, the fatherof Ursule or the Lark, had disappeared.
The door was guarded, but the window was not. As soon as he had foundhimself released from his bonds, and while Javert was drawing up hisreport, he had taken advantage of confusion, the crowd, the darkness,and of a moment when the general attention was diverted from him, todash out of the window.
An agent sprang to the opening and looked out. He saw no one outside.
The rope ladder was still shaking.
“The devil!” ejaculated Javert between his teeth, “he must have beenthe most valuable of the lot.”




CHAPTER XXII—THE LITTLE ONE WHO WAS CRYING IN VOLUME TWO

On the day following that on which these events took place in the houseon the Boulevard de l’Hôpital, a child, who seemed to be coming fromthe direction of the bridge of Austerlitz, was ascending the side-alleyon the right in the direction of the Barrière de Fontainebleau.
Night had fully come.
This lad was pale, thin, clad in rags, with linen trousers in the monthof February, and was singing at the top of his voice.
At the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier, a bent old woman wasrummaging in a heap of refuse by the light of a street lantern; thechild jostled her as he passed, then recoiled, exclaiming:—
“Hello! And I took it for an enormous, enormous dog!”

He pronounced the word _enormous_ the second time with a jeering swellof the voice which might be tolerably well represented by capitals: “anenormous, ENORMOUS dog.”

The old woman straightened herself up in a fury.
“Nasty brat!” she grumbled. “If I hadn’t been bending over, I know wellwhere I would have planted my foot on you.”

The boy was already far away.
“Kisss! kisss!” he cried. “After that, I don’t think I was mistaken!”

The old woman, choking with indignation, now rose completely upright,and the red gleam of the lantern fully lighted up her livid face, allhollowed into angles and wrinkles, with crow’s-feet meeting the cornersof her mouth.
Her body was lost in the darkness, and only her head was visible. Onewould have pronounced her a mask of Decrepitude carved out by a lightfrom the night.
The boy surveyed her.
“Madame,” said he, “does not possess that style of beauty which pleasesme.”

He then pursued his road, and resumed his song:—
“Le roi CoupdesabotS’en allait à la chasse,À la chasse aux corbeaux—”

At the end of these three lines he paused. He had arrived in front ofNo. 50-52, and finding the door fastened, he began to assault it withresounding and heroic kicks, which betrayed rather the man’s shoes thathe was wearing than the child’s feet which he owned.
In the meanwhile, the very old woman whom he had encountered at thecorner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier hastened up behind him, utteringclamorous cries and indulging in lavish and exaggerated gestures.
“What’s this? What’s this? Lord God! He’s battering the door down! He’sknocking the house down.”

The kicks continued.
The old woman strained her lungs.
“Is that the way buildings are treated nowadays?”

All at once she paused.
She had recognized the gamin.
“What! so it’s that imp!”

“Why, it’s the old lady,” said the lad. “Good day, Bougonmuche. I havecome to see my ancestors.”

The old woman retorted with a composite grimace, and a wonderfulimprovisation of hatred taking advantage of feebleness and ugliness,which was, unfortunately, wasted in the dark:—
“There’s no one here.”

“Bah!” retorted the boy, “where’s my father?”

“At La Force.”

“Come, now! And my mother?”

“At Saint-Lazare.”

“Well! And my sisters?”

“At the Madelonettes.”

The lad scratched his head behind his ear, stared at Ma’am Bougon, andsaid:—
“Ah!”

Then he executed a pirouette on his heel; a moment later, the oldwoman, who had remained on the door-step, heard him singing in hisclear, young voice, as he plunged under the black elm-trees, in thewintry wind:—
“Le roi CoupdesabotS’en allait à la chasse,À la chasse aux corbeaux,Monté sur deux échasses.Quand on passait dessous,On lui payait deux sous."31

[THE END OF VOLUME III “MARIUS”]



VOLUME IV—SAINT-DENIS


  Enlarge
Frontispiece Volume Four


  Enlarge
Titlepage Volume Four

THE IDYL IN THE RUE PLUMET AND THE EPIC IN THE RUE SAINT-DENIS



BOOK FIRST—A FEW PAGES OF HISTORY



CHAPTER I—WELL CUT

1831 and 1832, the two years which are immediately connected with theRevolution of July, form one of the most peculiar and striking momentsof history. These two years rise like two mountains midway betweenthose which precede and those which follow them. They have arevolutionary grandeur. Precipices are to be distinguished there. Thesocial masses, the very assizes of civilization, the solid group ofsuperposed and adhering interests, the century-old profiles of theancient French formation, appear and disappear in them every instant,athwart the storm clouds of systems, of passions, and of theories.These appearances and disappearances have been designated as movementand resistance. At intervals, truth, that daylight of the human soul,can be descried shining there.
This remarkable epoch is decidedly circumscribed and is beginning to besufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principallines even at the present day.
We shall make the attempt.
The Restoration had been one of those intermediate phases, hard todefine, in which there is fatigue, buzzing, murmurs, sleep, tumult, andwhich are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at ahalting-place.
These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire toconvert them to profit. In the beginning, the nation asks nothing butrepose; it thirsts for but one thing, peace; it has but one ambition,to be small. Which is the translation of remaining tranquil. Of greatevents, great hazards, great adventures, great men, thank God, we haveseen enough, we have them heaped higher than our heads. We wouldexchange Cæsar for Prusias, and Napoleon for the King of Yvetot. “Whata good little king was he!” We have marched since daybreak, we havereached the evening of a long and toilsome day; we have made our firstchange with Mirabeau, the second with Robespierre, the third withBonaparte; we are worn out. Each one demands a bed.
Devotion which is weary, heroism which has grown old, ambitions whichare sated, fortunes which are made, seek, demand, implore, solicit,what? A shelter. They have it. They take possession of peace, oftranquillity, of leisure; behold, they are content. But, at the sametime certain facts arise, compel recognition, and knock at the door intheir turn. These facts are the products of revolutions and wars, theyare, they exist, they have the right to install themselves in society,and they do install themselves therein; and most of the time, facts arethe stewards of the household and fouriers32 who do nothing but preparelodgings for principles.
This, then, is what appears to philosophical politicians:—
At the same time that weary men demand repose, accomplished factsdemand guarantees. Guarantees are the same to facts that repose is tomen.
This is what England demanded of the Stuarts after the Protector; thisis what France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire.
These guarantees are a necessity of the times. They must be accorded.Princes “grant” them, but in reality, it is the force of things whichgives them. A profound truth, and one useful to know, which the Stuartsdid not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain aglimpse of in 1814.
The predestined family, which returned to France when Napoleon fell,had the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed,and that what it had bestowed it could take back again; that the Houseof Bourbon possessed the right divine, that France possessed nothing,and that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII.was merely a branch of the right divine, was detached by the House ofBourbon and graciously given to the people until such day as it shouldplease the King to reassume it. Still, the House of Bourbon should havefelt, from the displeasure created by the gift, that it did not comefrom it.
This house was churlish to the nineteenth century. It put on anill-tempered look at every development of the nation. To make use of atrivial word, that is to say, of a popular and a true word, it lookedglum. The people saw this.
It thought it possessed strength because the Empire had been carriedaway before it like a theatrical stage-setting. It did not perceivethat it had, itself, been brought in in the same fashion. It did notperceive that it also lay in that hand which had removed Napoleon.
It thought that it had roots, because it was the past. It was mistaken;it formed a part of the past, but the whole past was France. The rootsof French society were not fixed in the Bourbons, but in the nations.These obscure and lively roots constituted, not the right of a family,but the history of a people. They were everywhere, except under thethrone.
The House of Bourbon was to France the illustrious and bleeding knot inher history, but was no longer the principal element of her destiny,and the necessary base of her politics. She could get along without theBourbons; she had done without them for two and twenty years; there hadbeen a break of continuity; they did not suspect the fact. And howshould they have suspected it, they who fancied that Louis XVII.reigned on the 9th of Thermidor, and that Louis XVIII. was reigning atthe battle of Marengo? Never, since the origin of history, had princesbeen so blind in the presence of facts and the portion of divineauthority which facts contain and promulgate. Never had that pretensionhere below which is called the right of kings denied to such a pointthe right from on high.
A capital error which led this family to lay its hand once more on theguarantees “granted” in 1814, on the concessions, as it termed them.Sad. A sad thing! What it termed its concessions were our conquests;what it termed our encroachments were our rights.
When the hour seemed to it to have come, the Restoration, supposingitself victorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country, thatis to say, believing itself to be strong and deep, abruptly decided onits plan of action, and risked its stroke. One morning it drew itselfup before the face of France, and, elevating its voice, it contestedthe collective title and the individual right of the nation tosovereignty, of the citizen to liberty. In other words, it denied tothe nation that which made it a nation, and to the citizen that whichmade him a citizen.
This is the foundation of those famous acts which are called theordinances of July. The Restoration fell.
It fell justly. But, we admit, it had not been absolutely hostile toall forms of progress. Great things had been accomplished, with italongside.
Under the Restoration, the nation had grown accustomed to calmdiscussion, which had been lacking under the Republic, and to grandeurin peace, which had been wanting under the Empire. France free andstrong had offered an encouraging spectacle to the other peoples ofEurope. The Revolution had had the word under Robespierre; the cannonhad had the word under Bonaparte; it was under Louis XVIII. and CharlesX. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word. The windceased, the torch was lighted once more. On the lofty heights, the purelight of mind could be seen flickering. A magnificent, useful, andcharming spectacle. For a space of fifteen years, those greatprinciples which are so old for the thinker, so new for the statesman,could be seen at work in perfect peace, on the public square; equalitybefore the law, liberty of conscience, liberty of speech, liberty ofthe press, the accessibility of all aptitudes to all functions. Thus itproceeded until 1830. The Bourbons were an instrument of civilizationwhich broke in the hands of Providence.
The fall of the Bourbons was full of grandeur, not on their side, buton the side of the nation. They quitted the throne with gravity, butwithout authority; their descent into the night was not one of thosesolemn disappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history; it wasneither the spectral calm of Charles I., nor the eagle scream ofNapoleon. They departed, that is all. They laid down the crown, andretained no aureole. They were worthy, but they were not august. Theylacked, in a certain measure, the majesty of their misfortune. CharlesX. during the voyage from Cherbourg, causing a round table to be cutover into a square table, appeared to be more anxious about imperilledetiquette than about the crumbling monarchy. This diminution saddeneddevoted men who loved their persons, and serious men who honored theirrace. The populace was admirable. The nation, attacked one morning withweapons, by a sort of royal insurrection, felt itself in the possessionof so much force that it did not go into a rage. It defended itself,restrained itself, restored things to their places, the government tolaw, the Bourbons to exile, alas! and then halted! It took the old kingCharles X. from beneath that dais which had sheltered Louis XIV. andset him gently on the ground. It touched the royal personages only withsadness and precaution. It was not one man, it was not a few men, itwas France, France entire, France victorious and intoxicated with hervictory, who seemed to be coming to herself, and who put into practice,before the eyes of the whole world, these grave words of Guillaume duVair after the day of the Barricades:—
“It is easy for those who are accustomed to skim the favors of thegreat, and to spring, like a bird from bough to bough, from anafflicted fortune to a flourishing one, to show themselves harshtowards their Prince in his adversity; but as for me, the fortune of myKings and especially of my afflicted Kings, will always be venerable tome.”

The Bourbons carried away with them respect, but not regret. As we havejust stated, their misfortune was greater than they were. They fadedout in the horizon.
The Revolution of July instantly had friends and enemies throughout theentire world. The first rushed toward her with joy and enthusiasm, theothers turned away, each according to his nature. At the first blush,the princes of Europe, the owls of this dawn, shut their eyes, woundedand stupefied, and only opened them to threaten. A fright which can becomprehended, a wrath which can be pardoned. This strange revolutionhad hardly produced a shock; it had not even paid to vanquished royaltythe honor of treating it as an enemy, and of shedding its blood. In theeyes of despotic governments, who are always interested in havingliberty calumniate itself, the Revolution of July committed the faultof being formidable and of remaining gentle. Nothing, however, wasattempted or plotted against it. The most discontented, the mostirritated, the most trembling, saluted it; whatever our egotism and ourrancor may be, a mysterious respect springs from events in which we aresensible of the collaboration of some one who is working above man.
The Revolution of July is the triumph of right overthrowing the fact. Athing which is full of splendor.
Right overthrowing the fact. Hence the brilliancy of the Revolution of1830, hence, also, its mildness. Right triumphant has no need of beingviolent.
Right is the just and the true.
The property of right is to remain eternally beautiful and pure. Thefact, even when most necessary to all appearances, even when mostthoroughly accepted by contemporaries, if it exist only as a fact, andif it contain only too little of right, or none at all, is infalliblydestined to become, in the course of time, deformed, impure, perhaps,even monstrous. If one desires to learn at one blow, to what degree ofhideousness the fact can attain, viewed at the distance of centuries,let him look at Machiavelli. Machiavelli is not an evil genius, nor ademon, nor a miserable and cowardly writer; he is nothing but the fact.And he is not only the Italian fact; he is the European fact, the factof the sixteenth century. He seems hideous, and so he is, in thepresence of the moral idea of the nineteenth.
This conflict of right and fact has been going on ever since the originof society. To terminate this duel, to amalgamate the pure idea withthe humane reality, to cause right to penetrate pacifically into thefact and the fact into right, that is the task of sages.



CHAPTER II—BADLY SEWED

But the task of sages is one thing, the task of clever men is another.The Revolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt.
As soon as a revolution has made the coast, the skilful make haste toprepare the shipwreck.
The skilful in our century have conferred on themselves the title ofStatesmen; so that this word, _statesmen_, has ended by becomingsomewhat of a slang word. It must be borne in mind, in fact, thatwherever there is nothing but skill, there is necessarily pettiness. Tosay “the skilful” amounts to saying “the mediocre.”

In the same way, to say “statesmen” is sometimes equivalent to saying“traitors.” If, then, we are to believe the skilful, revolutions likethe Revolution of July are severed arteries; a prompt ligature isindispensable. The right, too grandly proclaimed, is shaken. Also,right once firmly fixed, the state must be strengthened. Liberty onceassured, attention must be directed to power.
Here the sages are not, as yet, separated from the skilful, but theybegin to be distrustful. Power, very good. But, in the first place,what is power? In the second, whence comes it? The skilful do not seemto hear the murmured objection, and they continue their manœuvres.
According to the politicians, who are ingenious in putting the mask ofnecessity on profitable fictions, the first requirement of a peopleafter a revolution, when this people forms part of a monarchicalcontinent, is to procure for itself a dynasty. In this way, say they,peace, that is to say, time to dress our wounds, and to repair thehouse, can be had after a revolution. The dynasty conceals thescaffolding and covers the ambulance. Now, it is not always easy toprocure a dynasty.
If it is absolutely necessary, the first man of genius or even thefirst man of fortune who comes to hand suffices for the manufacturingof a king. You have, in the first case, Napoleon; in the second,Iturbide.
But the first family that comes to hand does not suffice to make adynasty. There is necessarily required a certain modicum of antiquityin a race, and the wrinkle of the centuries cannot be improvised.
If we place ourselves at the point of view of the “statesmen,” aftermaking all allowances, of course, after a revolution, what are thequalities of the king which result from it? He may be and it is usefulfor him to be a revolutionary; that is to say, a participant in his ownperson in that revolution, that he should have lent a hand to it, thathe should have either compromised or distinguished himself therein,that he should have touched the axe or wielded the sword in it.
What are the qualities of a dynasty? It should be national; that is tosay, revolutionary at a distance, not through acts committed, but byreason of ideas accepted. It should be composed of past and behistoric; be composed of future and be sympathetic.
All this explains why the early revolutions contented themselves withfinding a man, Cromwell or Napoleon; and why the second absolutelyinsisted on finding a family, the House of Brunswick or the House ofOrleans.
Royal houses resemble those Indian fig-trees, each branch of which,bending over to the earth, takes root and becomes a fig-tree itself.Each branch may become a dynasty. On the sole condition that it shallbend down to the people.
Such is the theory of the skilful.
Here, then, lies the great art: to make a little render to success thesound of a catastrophe in order that those who profit by it may tremblefrom it also, to season with fear every step that is taken, to augmentthe curve of the transition to the point of retarding progress, to dullthat aurora, to denounce and retrench the harshness of enthusiasm, tocut all angles and nails, to wad triumph, to muffle up right, toenvelop the giant-people in flannel, and to put it to bed veryspeedily, to impose a diet on that excess of health, to put Hercules onthe treatment of a convalescent, to dilute the event with theexpedient, to offer to spirits thirsting for the ideal that nectarthinned out with a potion, to take one’s precautions against too muchsuccess, to garnish the revolution with a shade.
1830 practised this theory, already applied to England by 1688.
1830 is a revolution arrested midway. Half of progress, quasi-right.Now, logic knows not the “almost,” absolutely as the sun knows not thecandle.
Who arrests revolutions half-way? The bourgeoisie?
Why?
Because the bourgeoisie is interest which has reached satisfaction.Yesterday it was appetite, to-day it is plenitude, to-morrow it will besatiety.
The phenomenon of 1814 after Napoleon was reproduced in 1830 afterCharles X.
The attempt has been made, and wrongly, to make a class of thebourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie is simply the contented portion of thepeople. The bourgeois is the man who now has time to sit down. A chairis not a caste.
But through a desire to sit down too soon, one may arrest the verymarch of the human race. This has often been the fault of thebourgeoisie.
One is not a class because one has committed a fault. Selfishness isnot one of the divisions of the social order.
Moreover, we must be just to selfishness. The state to which that partof the nation which is called the bourgeoisie aspired after the shockof 1830 was not the inertia which is complicated with indifference andlaziness, and which contains a little shame; it was not the slumberwhich presupposes a momentary forgetfulness accessible to dreams; itwas the halt.
The halt is a word formed of a singular double and almost contradictorysense: a troop on the march, that is to say, movement; a stand, that isto say, repose.
The halt is the restoration of forces; it is repose armed and on thealert; it is the accomplished fact which posts sentinels and holdsitself on its guard.
The halt presupposes the combat of yesterday and the combat ofto-morrow.
It is the partition between 1830 and 1848.
What we here call combat may also be designated as progress.
The bourgeoisie then, as well as the statesmen, required a man whoshould express this word Halt. An Although-Because. A compositeindividuality, signifying revolution and signifying stability, in otherterms, strengthening the present by the evident compatibility of thepast with the future.
This man was “already found.” His name was Louis Philippe d’Orleans.
The 221 made Louis Philippe King. Lafayette undertook the coronation.
He called it _the best of republics_. The town-hall of Paris took theplace of the Cathedral of Rheims.
This substitution of a half-throne for a whole throne was “the work of1830.”

When the skilful had finished, the immense vice of their solutionbecame apparent. All this had been accomplished outside the bounds ofabsolute right. Absolute right cried: “I protest!” then, terrible tosay, it retired into the darkness.



CHAPTER III—LOUIS PHILIPPE

Revolutions have a terrible arm and a happy hand, they strike firmlyand choose well. Even incomplete, even debased and abused and reducedto the state of a junior revolution like the Revolution of 1830, theynearly always retain sufficient providential lucidity to prevent themfrom falling amiss. Their eclipse is never an abdication.
Nevertheless, let us not boast too loudly; revolutions also may bedeceived, and grave errors have been seen.
Let us return to 1830. 1830, in its deviation, had good luck. In theestablishment which entitled itself order after the revolution had beencut short, the King amounted to more than royalty. Louis Philippe was arare man.
The son of a father to whom history will accord certain attenuatingcircumstances, but also as worthy of esteem as that father had been ofblame; possessing all private virtues and many public virtues; carefulof his health, of his fortune, of his person, of his affairs, knowingthe value of a minute and not always the value of a year; sober,serene, peaceable, patient; a good man and a good prince; sleeping withhis wife, and having in his palace lackeys charged with the duty ofshowing the conjugal bed to the bourgeois, an ostentation of theregular sleeping-apartment which had become useful after the formerillegitimate displays of the elder branch; knowing all the languages ofEurope, and, what is more rare, all the languages of all interests, andspeaking them; an admirable representative of the “middle class,” butoutstripping it, and in every way greater than it; possessing excellentsense, while appreciating the blood from which he had sprung, countingmost of all on his intrinsic worth, and, on the question of his race,very particular, declaring himself Orleans and not Bourbon; thoroughlythe first Prince of the Blood Royal while he was still only a SereneHighness, but a frank bourgeois from the day he became king; diffuse inpublic, concise in private; reputed, but not proved to be a miser; atbottom, one of those economists who are readily prodigal at their ownfancy or duty; lettered, but not very sensitive to letters; agentleman, but not a chevalier; simple, calm, and strong; adored by hisfamily and his household; a fascinating talker, an undeceivedstatesman, inwardly cold, dominated by immediate interest, alwaysgoverning at the shortest range, incapable of rancor and of gratitude,making use without mercy of superiority on mediocrity, clever ingetting parliamentary majorities to put in the wrong those mysteriousunanimities which mutter dully under thrones; unreserved, sometimesimprudent in his lack of reserve, but with marvellous address in thatimprudence; fertile in expedients, in countenances, in masks; makingFrance fear Europe and Europe France! Incontestably fond of hiscountry, but preferring his family; assuming more domination thanauthority and more authority than dignity, a disposition which has thisunfortunate property, that as it turns everything to success, it admitsof ruse and does not absolutely repudiate baseness, but which has thisvaluable side, that it preserves politics from violent shocks, thestate from fractures, and society from catastrophes; minute, correct,vigilant, attentive, sagacious, indefatigable; contradicting himself attimes and giving himself the lie; bold against Austria at Ancona,obstinate against England in Spain, bombarding Antwerp, and paying offPritchard; singing the Marseillaise with conviction, inaccessible todespondency, to lassitude, to the taste for the beautiful and theideal, to daring generosity, to Utopia, to chimæras, to wrath, tovanity, to fear; possessing all the forms of personal intrepidity; ageneral at Valmy; a soldier at Jemappes; attacked eight times byregicides and always smiling. Brave as a grenadier, courageous as athinker; uneasy only in the face of the chances of a European shakingup, and unfitted for great political adventures; always ready to riskhis life, never his work; disguising his will in influence, in orderthat he might be obeyed as an intelligence rather than as a king;endowed with observation and not with divination; not very attentive tominds, but knowing men, that is to say requiring to see in order tojudge; prompt and penetrating good sense, practical wisdom, easyspeech, prodigious memory; drawing incessantly on this memory, his onlypoint of resemblance with Cæsar, Alexander, and Napoleon; knowingdeeds, facts, details, dates, proper names, ignorant of tendencies,passions, the diverse geniuses of the crowd, the interior aspirations,the hidden and obscure uprisings of souls, in a word, all that can bedesignated as the invisible currents of consciences; accepted by thesurface, but little in accord with France lower down; extricatinghimself by dint of tact; governing too much and not enough; his ownfirst minister; excellent at creating out of the pettiness of realitiesan obstacle to the immensity of ideas; mingling a genuine creativefaculty of civilization, of order and organization, an indescribablespirit of proceedings and chicanery, the founder and lawyer of adynasty; having something of Charlemagne and something of an attorney;in short, a lofty and original figure, a prince who understood how tocreate authority in spite of the uneasiness of France, and power inspite of the jealousy of Europe. Louis Philippe will be classed amongthe eminent men of his century, and would be ranked among the mostillustrious governors of history had he loved glory but a little, andif he had had the sentiment of what is great to the same degree as thefeeling for what is useful.
Louis Philippe had been handsome, and in his old age he remainedgraceful; not always approved by the nation, he always was so by themasses; he pleased. He had that gift of charming. He lacked majesty; hewore no crown, although a king, and no white hair, although an old man;his manners belonged to the old regime and his habits to the new; amixture of the noble and the bourgeois which suited 1830; LouisPhilippe was transition reigning; he had preserved the ancientpronunciation and the ancient orthography which he placed at theservice of opinions modern; he loved Poland and Hungary, but he wrote_les Polonois_, and he pronounced _les Hongrais_. He wore the uniformof the national guard, like Charles X., and the ribbon of the Legion ofHonor, like Napoleon.
He went a little to chapel, not at all to the chase, never to theopera. Incorruptible by sacristans, by whippers-in, by ballet-dancers;this made a part of his bourgeois popularity. He had no heart. He wentout with his umbrella under his arm, and this umbrella long formed apart of his aureole. He was a bit of a mason, a bit of a gardener,something of a doctor; he bled a postilion who had tumbled from hishorse; Louis Philippe no more went about without his lancet, than didHenri IV. without his poniard. The Royalists jeered at this ridiculousking, the first who had ever shed blood with the object of healing.
For the grievances against Louis Philippe, there is one deduction to bemade; there is that which accuses royalty, that which accuses thereign, that which accuses the King; three columns which all givedifferent totals. Democratic right confiscated, progress becomes amatter of secondary interest, the protests of the street violentlyrepressed, military execution of insurrections, the rising passed overby arms, the Rue Transnonain, the counsels of war, the absorption ofthe real country by the legal country, on half shares with threehundred thousand privileged persons,—these are the deeds of royalty;Belgium refused, Algeria too harshly conquered, and, as in the case ofIndia by the English, with more barbarism than civilization, the breachof faith, to Abd-el-Kader, Blaye, Deutz bought, Pritchard paid,—theseare the doings of the reign; the policy which was more domestic thannational was the doing of the King.
As will be seen, the proper deduction having been made, the King’scharge is decreased.
This is his great fault; he was modest in the name of France.
Whence arises this fault?
We will state it.
Louis Philippe was rather too much of a paternal king; that incubationof a family with the object of founding a dynasty is afraid ofeverything and does not like to be disturbed; hence excessive timidity,which is displeasing to the people, who have the 14th of July in theircivil and Austerlitz in their military tradition.
Moreover, if we deduct the public duties which require to be fulfilledfirst of all, that deep tenderness of Louis Philippe towards his familywas deserved by the family. That domestic group was worthy ofadmiration. Virtues there dwelt side by side with talents. One of LouisPhilippe’s daughters, Marie d’Orleans, placed the name of her raceamong artists, as Charles d’Orleans had placed it among poets. She madeof her soul a marble which she named Jeanne d’Arc. Two of LouisPhilippe’s daughters elicited from Metternich this eulogium: “They areyoung people such as are rarely seen, and princes such as are neverseen.”

This, without any dissimulation, and also without any exaggeration, isthe truth about Louis Philippe.
To be Prince Equality, to bear in his own person the contradiction ofthe Restoration and the Revolution, to have that disquieting side ofthe revolutionary which becomes reassuring in governing power, thereinlay the fortune of Louis Philippe in 1830; never was there a morecomplete adaptation of a man to an event; the one entered into theother, and the incarnation took place. Louis Philippe is 1830 made man.Moreover, he had in his favor that great recommendation to the throne,exile. He had been proscribed, a wanderer, poor. He had lived by hisown labor. In Switzerland, this heir to the richest princely domains inFrance had sold an old horse in order to obtain bread. At Reichenau, hegave lessons in mathematics, while his sister Adelaide did wool workand sewed. These souvenirs connected with a king rendered thebourgeoisie enthusiastic. He had, with his own hands, demolished theiron cage of Mont-Saint-Michel, built by Louis XI., and used by LouisXV. He was the companion of Dumouriez, he was the friend of Lafayette;he had belonged to the Jacobins’ club; Mirabeau had slapped him on theshoulder; Danton had said to him: “Young man!” At the age of four andtwenty, in ’93, being then M. de Chartres, he had witnessed, from thedepth of a box, the trial of Louis XVI., so well named _that poortyrant_. The blind clairvoyance of the Revolution, breaking royalty inthe King and the King with royalty, did so almost without noticing theman in the fierce crushing of the idea, the vast storm of theAssembly-Tribunal, the public wrath interrogating, Capet not knowingwhat to reply, the alarming, stupefied vacillation by that royal headbeneath that sombre breath, the relative innocence of all in thatcatastrophe, of those who condemned as well as of the man condemned,—hehad looked on those things, he had contemplated that giddiness; he hadseen the centuries appear before the bar of the Assembly-Convention; hehad beheld, behind Louis XVI., that unfortunate passer-by who was maderesponsible, the terrible culprit, the monarchy, rise through theshadows; and there had lingered in his soul the respectful fear ofthese immense justices of the populace, which are almost as impersonalas the justice of God.
The trace left in him by the Revolution was prodigious. Its memory waslike a living imprint of those great years, minute by minute. One day,in the presence of a witness whom we are not permitted to doubt, herectified from memory the whole of the letter A in the alphabeticallist of the Constituent Assembly.
Louis Philippe was a king of the broad daylight. While he reigned thepress was free, the tribune was free, conscience and speech were free.The laws of September are open to sight. Although fully aware of thegnawing power of light on privileges, he left his throne exposed to thelight. History will do justice to him for this loyalty.
Louis Philippe, like all historical men who have passed from the scene,is to-day put on his trial by the human conscience. His case is, asyet, only in the lower court.
The hour when history speaks with its free and venerable accent, hasnot yet sounded for him; the moment has not come to pronounce adefinite judgment on this king; the austere and illustrious historianLouis Blanc has himself recently softened his first verdict; LouisPhilippe was elected by those two _almosts_ which are called the 221and 1830, that is to say, by a half-Parliament, and a half-revolution;and in any case, from the superior point of view where philosophy mustplace itself, we cannot judge him here, as the reader has seen above,except with certain reservations in the name of the absolute democraticprinciple; in the eyes of the absolute, outside these two rights, theright of man in the first place, the right of the people in the second,all is usurpation; but what we can say, even at the present day, thatafter making these reserves is, that to sum up the whole, and inwhatever manner he is considered, Louis Philippe, taken in himself, andfrom the point of view of human goodness, will remain, to use theantique language of ancient history, one of the best princes who eversat on a throne.
What is there against him? That throne. Take away Louis Philippe theking, there remains the man. And the man is good. He is good at timeseven to the point of being admirable. Often, in the midst of hisgravest souvenirs, after a day of conflict with the whole diplomacy ofthe continent, he returned at night to his apartments, and there,exhausted with fatigue, overwhelmed with sleep, what did he do? He tooka death sentence and passed the night in revising a criminal suit,considering it something to hold his own against Europe, but that itwas a still greater matter to rescue a man from the executioner. Heobstinately maintained his opinion against his keeper of the seals; hedisputed the ground with the guillotine foot by foot against the crownattorneys, those _chatterers of the law_, as he called them. Sometimesthe pile of sentences covered his table; he examined them all; it wasanguish to him to abandon these miserable, condemned heads. One day, hesaid to the same witness to whom we have recently referred: “I wonseven last night.” During the early years of his reign, the deathpenalty was as good as abolished, and the erection of a scaffold was aviolence committed against the King. The Grève having disappeared withthe elder branch, a bourgeois place of execution was instituted underthe name of the Barrière-Saint-Jacques; “practical men” felt thenecessity of a quasi-legitimate guillotine; and this was one of thevictories of Casimir Périer, who represented the narrow sides of thebourgeoisie, over Louis Philippe, who represented its liberal sides.Louis Philippe annotated Beccaria with his own hand. After the Fieschimachine, he exclaimed: “What a pity that I was not wounded! Then Imight have pardoned!” On another occasion, alluding to the resistanceoffered by his ministry, he wrote in connection with a politicalcriminal, who is one of the most generous figures of our day: “Hispardon is granted; it only remains for me to obtain it.” Louis Philippewas as gentle as Louis IX. and as kindly as Henri IV.
Now, to our mind, in history, where kindness is the rarest of pearls,the man who is kindly almost takes precedence of the man who is great.
Louis Philippe having been severely judged by some, harshly, perhaps,by others, it is quite natural that a man, himself a phantom at thepresent day, who knew that king, should come and testify in his favorbefore history; this deposition, whatever else it may be, is evidentlyand above all things, entirely disinterested; an epitaph penned by adead man is sincere; one shade may console another shade; the sharingof the same shadows confers the right to praise it; it is not greatlyto be feared that it will ever be said of two tombs in exile: “This oneflattered the other.”




CHAPTER IV—CRACKS BENEATH THE FOUNDATION

At the moment when the drama which we are narrating is on the point ofpenetrating into the depths of one of the tragic clouds which envelopthe beginning of Louis Philippe’s reign, it was necessary that thereshould be no equivoque, and it became requisite that this book shouldoffer some explanation with regard to this king.
Louis Philippe had entered into possession of his royal authoritywithout violence, without any direct action on his part, by virtue of arevolutionary change, evidently quite distinct from the real aim of theRevolution, but in which he, the Duc d’Orléans, exercised no personalinitiative. He had been born a Prince, and he believed himself to havebeen elected King. He had not served this mandate on himself; he hadnot taken it; it had been offered to him, and he had accepted it;convinced, wrongly, to be sure, but convinced nevertheless, that theoffer was in accordance with right and that the acceptance of it was inaccordance with duty. Hence his possession was in good faith. Now, wesay it in good conscience, Louis Philippe being in possession inperfect good faith, and the democracy being in good faith in itsattack, the amount of terror discharged by the social conflicts weighsneither on the King nor on the democracy. A clash of principlesresembles a clash of elements. The ocean defends the water, thehurricane defends the air, the King defends Royalty, the democracydefends the people; the relative, which is the monarchy, resists theabsolute, which is the republic; society bleeds in this conflict, butthat which constitutes its suffering to-day will constitute its safetylater on; and, in any case, those who combat are not to be blamed; oneof the two parties is evidently mistaken; the right is not, like theColossus of Rhodes, on two shores at once, with one foot on therepublic, and one in Royalty; it is indivisible, and all on one side;but those who are in error are so sincerely; a blind man is no more acriminal than a Vendean is a ruffian. Let us, then, impute to thefatality of things alone these formidable collisions. Whatever thenature of these tempests may be, human irresponsibility is mingled withthem.
Let us complete this exposition.
The government of 1840 led a hard life immediately. Born yesterday, itwas obliged to fight to-day.
Hardly installed, it was already everywhere conscious of vaguemovements of traction on the apparatus of July so recently laid, and solacking in solidity.
Resistance was born on the morrow; perhaps even, it was born on thepreceding evening. From month to month the hostility increased, andfrom being concealed it became patent.
The Revolution of July, which gained but little acceptance outside ofFrance by kings, had been diversely interpreted in France, as we havesaid.
God delivers over to men his visible will in events, an obscure textwritten in a mysterious tongue. Men immediately make translations ofit; translations hasty, incorrect, full of errors, of gaps, and ofnonsense. Very few minds comprehend the divine language. The mostsagacious, the calmest, the most profound, decipher slowly, and whenthey arrive with their text, the task has long been completed; thereare already twenty translations on the public place. From eachremaining springs a party, and from each misinterpretation a faction;and each party thinks that it alone has the true text, and each factionthinks that it possesses the light.
Power itself is often a faction.
There are, in revolutions, swimmers who go against the current; theyare the old parties.
For the old parties who clung to heredity by the grace of God, thinkthat revolutions, having sprung from the right to revolt, one has theright to revolt against them. Error. For in these revolutions, the onewho revolts is not the people; it is the king. Revolution is preciselythe contrary of revolt. Every revolution, being a normal outcome,contains within itself its legitimacy, which false revolutionistssometimes dishonor, but which remains even when soiled, which surviveseven when stained with blood.
Revolutions spring not from an accident, but from necessity. Arevolution is a return from the fictitious to the real. It is becauseit must be that it is.
Nonetheless did the old legitimist parties assail the Revolution of1830 with all the vehemence which arises from false reasoning. Errorsmake excellent projectiles. They strike it cleverly in its vulnerablespot, in default of a cuirass, in its lack of logic; they attacked thisrevolution in its royalty. They shouted to it: “Revolution, why thisking?” Factions are blind men who aim correctly.
This cry was uttered equally by the republicans. But coming from them,this cry was logical. What was blindness in the legitimists wasclearness of vision in the democrats. 1830 had bankrupted the people.The enraged democracy reproached it with this.
Between the attack of the past and the attack of the future, theestablishment of July struggled. It represented the minute atloggerheads on the one hand with the monarchical centuries, on theother hand with eternal right.
In addition, and beside all this, as it was no longer revolution andhad become a monarchy, 1830 was obliged to take precedence of allEurope. To keep the peace, was an increase of complication. A harmonyestablished contrary to sense is often more onerous than a war. Fromthis secret conflict, always muzzled, but always growling, was bornarmed peace, that ruinous expedient of civilization which in theharness of the European cabinets is suspicious in itself. The Royaltyof July reared up, in spite of the fact that it caught it in theharness of European cabinets. Metternich would gladly have put it inkicking-straps. Pushed on in France by progress, it pushed on themonarchies, those loiterers in Europe. After having been towed, itundertook to tow.
Meanwhile, within her, pauperism, the proletariat, salary, education,penal servitude, prostitution, the fate of the woman, wealth, misery,production, consumption, division, exchange, coin, credit, the rightsof capital, the rights of labor,—all these questions were multipliedabove society, a terrible slope.
Outside of political parties properly so called, another movementbecame manifest. Philosophical fermentation replied to democraticfermentation. The elect felt troubled as well as the masses; in anothermanner, but quite as much.
Thinkers meditated, while the soil, that is to say, the people,traversed by revolutionary currents, trembled under them withindescribably vague epileptic shocks. These dreamers, some isolated,others united in families and almost in communion, turned over socialquestions in a pacific but profound manner; impassive miners, whotranquilly pushed their galleries into the depths of a volcano, hardlydisturbed by the dull commotion and the furnaces of which they caughtglimpses.
This tranquillity was not the least beautiful spectacle of thisagitated epoch.
These men left to political parties the question of rights, theyoccupied themselves with the question of happiness.
The well-being of man, that was what they wanted to extract fromsociety.
They raised material questions, questions of agriculture, of industry,of commerce, almost to the dignity of a religion. In civilization, suchas it has formed itself, a little by the command of God, a great dealby the agency of man, interests combine, unite, and amalgamate in amanner to form a veritable hard rock, in accordance with a dynamic law,patiently studied by economists, those geologists of politics. Thesemen who grouped themselves under different appellations, but who mayall be designated by the generic title of socialists, endeavored topierce that rock and to cause it to spout forth the living waters ofhuman felicity.
From the question of the scaffold to the question of war, their worksembraced everything. To the rights of man, as proclaimed by the FrenchRevolution, they added the rights of woman and the rights of the child.
The reader will not be surprised if, for various reasons, we do nothere treat in a thorough manner, from the theoretical point of view,the questions raised by socialism. We confine ourselves to indicatingthem.
All the problems that the socialists proposed to themselves, cosmogonicvisions, reverie and mysticism being cast aside, can be reduced to twoprincipal problems.
First problem: To produce wealth.
Second problem: To share it.
The first problem contains the question of work.
The second contains the question of salary.
In the first problem the employment of forces is in question.
In the second, the distribution of enjoyment.
From the proper employment of forces results public power.
From a good distribution of enjoyments results individual happiness.
By a good distribution, not an equal but an equitable distribution mustbe understood.
From these two things combined, the public power without, individualhappiness within, results social prosperity.
Social prosperity means the man happy, the citizen free, the nationgreat.
England solves the first of these two problems. She creates wealthadmirably, she divides it badly. This solution which is complete on oneside only leads her fatally to two extremes: monstrous opulence,monstrous wretchedness. All enjoyments for some, all privations for therest, that is to say, for the people; privilege, exception, monopoly,feudalism, born from toil itself. A false and dangerous situation,which sates public power or private misery, which sets the roots of theState in the sufferings of the individual. A badly constituted grandeurin which are combined all the material elements and into which no moralelement enters.
Communism and agrarian law think that they solve the second problem.They are mistaken. Their division kills production. Equal partitionabolishes emulation; and consequently labor. It is a partition made bythe butcher, which kills that which it divides. It is thereforeimpossible to pause over these pretended solutions. Slaying wealth isnot the same thing as dividing it.
The two problems require to be solved together, to be well solved. Thetwo problems must be combined and made but one.
Solve only the first of the two problems; you will be Venice, you willbe England. You will have, like Venice, an artificial power, or, likeEngland, a material power; you will be the wicked rich man. You willdie by an act of violence, as Venice died, or by bankruptcy, as Englandwill fall. And the world will allow to die and fall all that is merelyselfishness, all that does not represent for the human race either avirtue or an idea.
It is well understood here, that by the words Venice, England, wedesignate not the peoples, but social structures; the oligarchiessuperposed on nations, and not the nations themselves. The nationsalways have our respect and our sympathy. Venice, as a people, willlive again; England, the aristocracy, will fall, but England, thenation, is immortal. That said, we continue.
Solve the two problems, encourage the wealthy, and protect the poor,suppress misery, put an end to the unjust farming out of the feeble bythe strong, put a bridle on the iniquitous jealousy of the man who ismaking his way against the man who has reached the goal, adjust,mathematically and fraternally, salary to labor, mingle gratuitous andcompulsory education with the growth of childhood, and make of sciencethe base of manliness, develop minds while keeping arms busy, be at oneand the same time a powerful people and a family of happy men, renderproperty democratic, not by abolishing it, but by making it universal,so that every citizen, without exception, may be a proprietor, aneasier matter than is generally supposed; in two words, learn how toproduce wealth and how to distribute it, and you will have at oncemoral and material greatness; and you will be worthy to call yourselfFrance.
This is what socialism said outside and above a few sects which havegone astray; that is what it sought in facts, that is what it sketchedout in minds.
Efforts worthy of admiration! Sacred attempts!
These doctrines, these theories, these resistances, the unforeseennecessity for the statesman to take philosophers into account, confusedevidences of which we catch a glimpse, a new system of politics to becreated, which shall be in accord with the old world without too muchdisaccord with the new revolutionary ideal, a situation in which itbecame necessary to use Lafayette to defend Polignac, the intuition ofprogress transparent beneath the revolt, the chambers and streets, thecompetitions to be brought into equilibrium around him, his faith inthe Revolution, perhaps an eventual indefinable resignation born of thevague acceptance of a superior definitive right, his desire to remainof his race, his domestic spirit, his sincere respect for the people,his own honesty, preoccupied Louis Philippe almost painfully, and therewere moments when strong and courageous as he was, he was overwhelmedby the difficulties of being a king.
He felt under his feet a formidable disaggregation, which was not,nevertheless, a reduction to dust, France being more France than ever.
Piles of shadows covered the horizon. A strange shade, graduallydrawing nearer, extended little by little over men, over things, overideas; a shade which came from wraths and systems. Everything which hadbeen hastily stifled was moving and fermenting. At times the conscienceof the honest man resumed its breathing, so great was the discomfort ofthat air in which sophisms were intermingled with truths. Spiritstrembled in the social anxiety like leaves at the approach of a storm.The electric tension was such that at certain instants, the firstcomer, a stranger, brought light. Then the twilight obscurity closed inagain. At intervals, deep and dull mutterings allowed a judgment to beformed as to the quantity of thunder contained by the cloud.
Twenty months had barely elapsed since the Revolution of July, the year1832 had opened with an aspect of something impending and threatening.
The distress of the people, the laborers without bread, the last Princede Condé engulfed in the shadows, Brussels expelling the Nassaus asParis did the Bourbons, Belgium offering herself to a French Prince andgiving herself to an English Prince, the Russian hatred of Nicolas,behind us the demons of the South, Ferdinand in Spain, Miguel inPortugal, the earth quaking in Italy, Metternich extending his handover Bologna, France treating Austria sharply at Ancona, at the Northno one knew what sinister sound of the hammer nailing up Poland in hercoffin, irritated glances watching France narrowly all over Europe,England, a suspected ally, ready to give a push to that which wastottering and to hurl herself on that which should fall, the peeragesheltering itself behind Beccaria to refuse four heads to the law, thefleurs-de-lys erased from the King’s carriage, the cross torn fromNotre Dame, Lafayette lessened, Laffitte ruined, Benjamin Constant deadin indigence, Casimir Périer dead in the exhaustion of his power;political and social malady breaking out simultaneously in the twocapitals of the kingdom, the one in the city of thought, the other inthe city of toil; at Paris civil war, at Lyons servile war; in the twocities, the same glare of the furnace; a crater-like crimson on thebrow of the people; the South rendered fanatic, the West troubled, theDuchesse de Berry in la Vendée, plots, conspiracies, risings, cholera,added the sombre roar of tumult of events to the sombre roar of ideas.



CHAPTER V—FACTS WHENCE HISTORY SPRINGS AND WHICH HISTORY IGNORES

Towards the end of April, everything had become aggravated. Thefermentation entered the boiling state. Ever since 1830, petty partialrevolts had been going on here and there, which were quicklysuppressed, but ever bursting forth afresh, the sign of a vastunderlying conflagration. Something terrible was in preparation.Glimpses could be caught of the features still indistinct andimperfectly lighted, of a possible revolution. France kept an eye onParis; Paris kept an eye on the Faubourg Saint-Antoine.
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine, which was in a dull glow, was beginning itsebullition.

  Enlarge
4b1-5-street-oratorTH (50K)

The wine-shops of the Rue de Charonne were, although the union of thetwo epithets seems singular when applied to wine-shops, grave andstormy.
The government was there purely and simply called in question. Therepeople publicly discussed the _question of fighting or of keepingquiet_. There were back shops where workingmen were made to swear thatthey would hasten into the street at the first cry of alarm, and “thatthey would fight without counting the number of the enemy.” Thisengagement once entered into, a man seated in the corner of thewine-shop “assumed a sonorous tone,” and said, “You understand! Youhave sworn!”

Sometimes they went upstairs, to a private room on the first floor, andthere scenes that were almost masonic were enacted. They made theinitiated take oaths _to render service to himself as well as to thefathers of families_. That was the formula.
In the tap-rooms, “subversive” pamphlets were read. _They treated thegovernment with contempt_, says a secret report of that time.
Words like the following could be heard there:—
“I don’t know the names of the leaders. We folks shall not know the dayuntil two hours beforehand.” One workman said: “There are three hundredof us, let each contribute ten sous, that will make one hundred andfifty francs with which to procure powder and shot.”

Another said: “I don’t ask for six months, I don’t ask for even two. Inless than a fortnight we shall be parallel with the government. Withtwenty-five thousand men we can face them.” Another said: “I don’tsleep at night, because I make cartridges all night.” From time totime, men “of bourgeois appearance, and in good coats” came and “causedembarrassment,” and with the air of “command,” shook hands with _themost important_, and then went away. They never stayed more than tenminutes. Significant remarks were exchanged in a low tone: “The plot isripe, the matter is arranged.” “It was murmured by all who were there,”to borrow the very expression of one of those who were present. Theexaltation was such that one day, a workingman exclaimed, before thewhole wine-shop: “We have no arms!” One of his comrades replied: “Thesoldiers have!” thus parodying without being aware of the fact,Bonaparte’s proclamation to the army in Italy: “When they had anythingof a more secret nature on hand,” adds one report, “they did notcommunicate it to each other.” It is not easy to understand what theycould conceal after what they said.
These reunions were sometimes periodical. At certain ones of them,there were never more than eight or ten persons present, and they werealways the same. In others, any one entered who wished, and the roomwas so full that they were forced to stand. Some went thither throughenthusiasm and passion; others because it _was on their way to theirwork_. As during the Revolution, there were patriotic women in some ofthese wine-shops who embraced newcomers.
Other expressive facts came to light.
A man would enter a shop, drink, and go his way with the remark:“Wine-merchant, the revolution will pay what is due to you.”

Revolutionary agents were appointed in a wine-shop facing the Rue deCharonne. The balloting was carried on in their caps.
Workingmen met at the house of a fencing-master who gave lessons in theRue de Cotte. There there was a trophy of arms formed of woodenbroadswords, canes, clubs, and foils. One day, the buttons were removedfrom the foils.
A workman said: “There are twenty-five of us, but they don’t count onme, because I am looked upon as a machine.” Later on, that machinebecame Quenisset.
The indefinite things which were brewing gradually acquired a strangeand indescribable notoriety. A woman sweeping off her doorsteps said toanother woman: “For a long time, there has been a strong force busymaking cartridges.” In the open street, proclamation could be seenaddressed to the National Guard in the departments. One of theseproclamations was signed: _Burtot, wine-merchant_.
One day a man with his beard worn like a collar and with an Italianaccent mounted a stone post at the door of a liquor-seller in theMarché Lenoir, and read aloud a singular document, which seemed toemanate from an occult power. Groups formed around him, and applauded.
The passages which touched the crowd most deeply were collected andnoted down. “—Our doctrines are trammelled, our proclamations torn, ourbill-stickers are spied upon and thrown into prison.”—“The breakdownwhich has recently taken place in cottons has converted to us manymediums.”—“The future of nations is being worked out in our obscureranks.”—“Here are the fixed terms: action or reaction, revolution orcounter-revolution. For, at our epoch, we no longer believe either ininertia or in immobility. For the people against the people, that isthe question. There is no other.”—“On the day when we cease to suityou, break us, but up to that day, help us to march on.” All this inbroad daylight.
Other deeds, more audacious still, were suspicious in the eyes of thepeople by reason of their very audacity. On the 4th of April, 1832, apasser-by mounted the post on the corner which forms the angle of theRue Sainte-Marguerite and shouted: “I am a Babouvist!” But beneathBabeuf, the people scented Gisquet.
Among other things, this man said:—
“Down with property! The opposition of the left is cowardly andtreacherous. When it wants to be on the right side, it preachesrevolution, it is democratic in order to escape being beaten, androyalist so that it may not have to fight. The republicans are beastswith feathers. Distrust the republicans, citizens of the laboringclasses.”

“Silence, citizen spy!” cried an artisan.
This shout put an end to the discourse.
Mysterious incidents occurred.
At nightfall, a workingman encountered near the canal a “very welldressed man,” who said to him: “Whither are you bound, citizen?” “Sir,”replied the workingman, “I have not the honor of your acquaintance.” “Iknow you very well, however.” And the man added: “Don’t be alarmed, Iam an agent of the committee. You are suspected of not being quitefaithful. You know that if you reveal anything, there is an eye fixedon you.” Then he shook hands with the workingman and went away, saying:“We shall meet again soon.”

The police, who were on the alert, collected singular dialogues, notonly in the wine-shops, but in the street.
“Get yourself received very soon,” said a weaver to a cabinet-maker.
“Why?”

“There is going to be a shot to fire.”

Two ragged pedestrians exchanged these remarkable replies, fraught withevident Jacquerie:—
“Who governs us?”

“M. Philippe.”

“No, it is the bourgeoisie.”

The reader is mistaken if he thinks that we take the word _Jacquerie_in a bad sense. The Jacques were the poor.
On another occasion two men were heard to say to each other as theypassed by: “We have a good plan of attack.”

Only the following was caught of a private conversation between fourmen who were crouching in a ditch of the circle of the Barrière duTrône:—
“Everything possible will be done to prevent his walking about Parisany more.”

Who was the _he?_ Menacing obscurity.
“The principal leaders,” as they said in the faubourg, held themselvesapart. It was supposed that they met for consultation in a wine-shopnear the point Saint-Eustache. A certain Aug—, chief of the Society aidfor tailors, Rue Mondétour, had the reputation of serving asintermediary central between the leaders and the FaubourgSaint-Antoine.
Nevertheless, there was always a great deal of mystery about theseleaders, and no certain fact can invalidate the singular arrogance ofthis reply made later on by a man accused before the Court of Peers:—
“Who was your leader?”

_“I knew of none and I recognized none.”_
There was nothing but words, transparent but vague; sometimes idlereports, rumors, hearsay. Other indications cropped up.
A carpenter, occupied in nailing boards to a fence around the ground onwhich a house was in process of construction, in the Rue de Reuillyfound on that plot the torn fragment of a letter on which were stilllegible the following lines:—
The committee must take measures to prevent recruiting in the sectionsfor the different societies.
And, as a postscript:—
We have learned that there are guns in the Rue duFaubourg-Poissonnière, No. 5 [bis], to the number of five or sixthousand, in the house of a gunsmith in that court. The section owns noarms.
What excited the carpenter and caused him to show this thing to hisneighbors was the fact, that a few paces further on he picked upanother paper, torn like the first, and still more significant, ofwhich we reproduce a facsimile, because of the historical interestattaching to these strange documents:—


Code Table 4b1-5 Page 26
+——————————————————————————————+| Q | C | D | E | Learn this list by heart.  After so doing| | | | | | you will tear it up.  The men admitted will do the same| | | | | | when you have transmitted their orders to them. Health and| | | | | | Fraternity, u og a’ fe L. |+——————————————————————————————+
It was only later on that the persons who were in the secret of thisfind at the time, learned the significance of those four capitalletters: _quinturions, centurions, decurions, éclaireurs_ [scouts], andthe sense of the letters: _u og a’ fe_, which was a date, and meantApril 15th, 1832. Under each capital letter were inscribed namesfollowed by very characteristic notes. Thus: Q. _Bannerel_. 8 guns, 83cartridges. A safe man.—C. _Boubière_. 1 pistol, 40 cartridges.—D._Rollet_. 1 foil, 1 pistol, 1 pound of powder.—E. _Tessier_. 1 sword, 1cartridge-box. Exact.— _Terreur_. 8 guns. Brave, etc.
Finally, this carpenter found, still in the same enclosure, a thirdpaper on which was written in pencil, but very legibly, this sort ofenigmatical list:—
Unité:  Blanchard: Arbre-Sec. 6.Barra.  Soize.  Salle-au-Comte.Kosciusko. Aubry the Butcher?J. J. R.Caius Gracchus.Right of revision.  Dufond.  Four.Fall of the Girondists.  Derbac.  Maubuée.Washington.  Pinson.  1 pistol, 86 cartridges.Marseillaise.Sovereignty of the people. Michel. Quincampoix. Sword.Hoche.Marceau.  Plato.  Arbre-Sec.Warsaw.  Tilly, crier of the Populaire.

The honest bourgeois into whose hands this list fell knew itssignificance. It appears that this list was the complete nomenclatureof the sections of the fourth arondissement of the Society of theRights of Man, with the names and dwellings of the chiefs of sections.To-day, when all these facts which were obscure are nothing more thanhistory, we may publish them. It should be added, that the foundationof the Society of the Rights of Man seems to have been posterior to thedate when this paper was found. Perhaps this was only a rough draft.
Still, according to all the remarks and the words, according to writtennotes, material facts begin to make their appearance.
In the Rue Popincourt, in the house of a dealer in bric-à-brac, therewere seized seven sheets of gray paper, all folded alike lengthwise andin four; these sheets enclosed twenty-six squares of this same graypaper folded in the form of a cartridge, and a card, on which waswritten the following:—
Saltpetre . . . . . . . . . . .  12 ounces.Sulphur   . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces.Charcoal  . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces and a half.Water     . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces.

The report of the seizure stated that the drawer exhaled a strong smellof powder.
A mason returning from his day’s work, left behind him a little packageon a bench near the bridge of Austerlitz. This package was taken to thepolice station. It was opened, and in it were found two printeddialogues, signed _Lahautière_, a song entitled: “Workmen, bandtogether,” and a tin box full of cartridges.
One artisan drinking with a comrade made the latter feel him to see howwarm he was; the other man felt a pistol under his waistcoat.
In a ditch on the boulevard, between Père-Lachaise and the Barrière duTrône, at the most deserted spot, some children, while playing,discovered beneath a mass of shavings and refuse bits of wood, a bagcontaining a bullet-mould, a wooden punch for the preparation ofcartridges, a wooden bowl, in which there were grains ofhunting-powder, and a little cast-iron pot whose interior presentedevident traces of melted lead.
Police agents, making their way suddenly and unexpectedly at fiveo’clock in the morning, into the dwelling of a certain Pardon, who wasafterwards a member of the Barricade-Merry section and got himselfkilled in the insurrection of April, 1834, found him standing near hisbed, and holding in his hand some cartridges which he was in the act ofpreparing.
Towards the hour when workingmen repose, two men were seen to meetbetween the Barrière Picpus and the Barrière Charenton in a little lanebetween two walls, near a wine-shop, in front of which there was a “Jeude Siam."33 One drew a pistol from beneath his blouse and handed it tothe other. As he was handing it to him, he noticed that theperspiration of his chest had made the powder damp. He primed thepistol and added more powder to what was already in the pan. Then thetwo men parted.
A certain Gallais, afterwards killed in the Rue Beaubourg in the affairof April, boasted of having in his house seven hundred cartridges andtwenty-four flints.
The government one day received a warning that arms and two hundredthousand cartridges had just been distributed in the faubourg. On thefollowing week thirty thousand cartridges were distributed. Theremarkable point about it was, that the police were not able to seize asingle one.
An intercepted letter read: “The day is not far distant when, withinfour hours by the clock, eighty thousand patriots will be under arms.”

All this fermentation was public, one might almost say tranquil. Theapproaching insurrection was preparing its storm calmly in the face ofthe government. No singularity was lacking to this still subterraneancrisis, which was already perceptible. The bourgeois talked peaceablyto the working-classes of what was in preparation. They said: “How isthe rising coming along?” in the same tone in which they would havesaid: “How is your wife?”

A furniture-dealer, of the Rue Moreau, inquired: “Well, when are yougoing to make the attack?”

Another shop-keeper said:—
“The attack will be made soon.”

“I know it. A month ago, there were fifteen thousand of you, now thereare twenty-five thousand.” He offered his gun, and a neighbor offered asmall pistol which he was willing to sell for seven francs.
Moreover, the revolutionary fever was growing. Not a point in Paris norin France was exempt from it. The artery was beating everywhere. Likethose membranes which arise from certain inflammations and form in thehuman body, the network of secret societies began to spread all overthe country. From the associations of the Friends of the People, whichwas at the same time public and secret, sprang the Society of theRights of Man, which also dated from one of the orders of the day:_Pluviôse, Year 40 of the republican era_, which was destined tosurvive even the mandate of the Court of Assizes which pronounced itsdissolution, and which did not hesitate to bestow on its sectionssignificant names like the following:—
Pikes.Tocsin.Signal cannon.Phrygian cap.January 21.The beggars.The vagabonds.Forward march.Robespierre.Level.Ça Ira.

The Society of the Rights of Man engendered the Society of Action.These were impatient individuals who broke away and hastened ahead.Other associations sought to recruit themselves from the great mothersocieties. The members of sections complained that they were tornasunder. Thus, the Gallic Society, and the committee of organization ofthe Municipalities. Thus the associations for the liberty of the press,for individual liberty, for the instruction of the people againstindirect taxes. Then the Society of Equal Workingmen which was dividedinto three fractions, the levellers, the communists, the reformers.Then the Army of the Bastilles, a sort of cohort organized on amilitary footing, four men commanded by a corporal, ten by a sergeant,twenty by a sub-lieutenant, forty by a lieutenant; there were nevermore than five men who knew each other. Creation where precaution iscombined with audacity and which seemed stamped with the genius ofVenice.
The central committee, which was at the head, had two arms, the Societyof Action, and the Army of the Bastilles.
A legitimist association, the Chevaliers of Fidelity, stirred aboutamong these the republican affiliations. It was denounced andrepudiated there.
The Parisian societies had ramifications in the principal cities,Lyons, Nantes, Lille, Marseilles, and each had its Society of theRights of Man, the Charbonnière, and The Free Men. All had arevolutionary society which was called the Cougourde. We have alreadymentioned this word.
In Paris, the Faubourg Saint-Marceau kept up an equal buzzing with theFaubourg Saint-Antoine, and the schools were no less moved than thefaubourgs. A café in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the_Seven Billiards_, Rue des Mathurins-Saint-Jacques, served as rallyingpoints for the students. The Society of the Friends of the A B Caffiliated to the Mutualists of Angers, and to the Cougourde of Aix,met, as we have seen, in the Café Musain. These same young menassembled also, as we have stated already, in a restaurant wine-shop ofthe Rue Mondétour which was called Corinthe. These meetings weresecret. Others were as public as possible, and the reader can judge oftheir boldness from these fragments of an interrogatory undergone inone of the ulterior prosecutions: “Where was this meeting held?” “Inthe Rue de la Paix.” “At whose house?” “In the street.” “What sectionswere there?” “Only one.” “Which?” “The Manuel section.” “Who was itsleader?” “I.” “You are too young to have decided alone upon the boldcourse of attacking the government. Where did your instructions comefrom?” “From the central committee.”

The army was mined at the same time as the population, as was provedsubsequently by the operations of Béford, Luneville, and Épinard. Theycounted on the fifty-second regiment, on the fifth, on the eighth, onthe thirty-seventh, and on the twentieth light cavalry. In Burgundy andin the southern towns they planted the liberty tree; that is to say, apole surmounted by a red cap.
Such was the situation.
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine, more than any other group of thepopulation, as we stated in the beginning, accentuated this situationand made it felt. That was the sore point. This old faubourg, peopledlike an ant-hill, laborious, courageous, and angry as a hive of bees,was quivering with expectation and with the desire for a tumult.Everything was in a state of agitation there, without any interruption,however, of the regular work. It is impossible to convey an idea ofthis lively yet sombre physiognomy. In this faubourg exists poignantdistress hidden under attic roofs; there also exist rare and ardentminds. It is particularly in the matter of distress and intelligencethat it is dangerous to have extremes meet.
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine had also other causes to tremble; for itreceived the counter-shock of commercial crises, of failures, strikes,slack seasons, all inherent to great political disturbances. In timesof revolution misery is both cause and effect. The blow which it dealsrebounds upon it. This population full of proud virtue, capable to thehighest degree of latent heat, always ready to fly to arms, prompt toexplode, irritated, deep, undermined, seemed to be only awaiting thefall of a spark. Whenever certain sparks float on the horizon chased bythe wind of events, it is impossible not to think of the FaubourgSaint-Antoine and of the formidable chance which has placed at the verygates of Paris that powder-house of suffering and ideas.
The wine-shops of the _Faubourg Antoine_, which have been more thanonce drawn in the sketches which the reader has just perused, possesshistorical notoriety. In troublous times people grow intoxicated theremore on words than on wine. A sort of prophetic spirit and an afflatusof the future circulates there, swelling hearts and enlarging souls.The cabarets of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine resemble those taverns ofMont Aventine erected on the cave of the Sibyl and communicating withthe profound and sacred breath; taverns where the tables were almosttripods, and where was drunk what Ennius calls the _sibylline wine_.
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine is a reservoir of people. Revolutionaryagitations create fissures there, through which trickles the popularsovereignty. This sovereignty may do evil; it can be mistaken like anyother; but, even when led astray, it remains great. We may say of it asof the blind cyclops, _Ingens_.
In ’93, according as the idea which was floating about was good orevil, according as it was the day of fanaticism or of enthusiasm, thereleaped forth from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine now savage legions, nowheroic bands.
Savage. Let us explain this word. When these bristling men, who in theearly days of the revolutionary chaos, tattered, howling, wild, withuplifted bludgeon, pike on high, hurled themselves upon ancient Parisin an uproar, what did they want? They wanted an end to oppression, anend to tyranny, an end to the sword, work for men, instruction for thechild, social sweetness for the woman, liberty, equality, fraternity,bread for all, the idea for all, the Edenizing of the world. Progress;and that holy, sweet, and good thing, progress, they claimed interrible wise, driven to extremities as they were, half naked, club infist, a roar in their mouths. They were savages, yes; but the savagesof civilization.
They proclaimed right furiously; they were desirous, if only with fearand trembling, to force the human race to paradise. They seemedbarbarians, and they were saviours. They demanded light with the maskof night.
Facing these men, who were ferocious, we admit, and terrifying, butferocious and terrifying for good ends, there are other men, smiling,embroidered, gilded, beribboned, starred, in silk stockings, in whiteplumes, in yellow gloves, in varnished shoes, who, with their elbows ona velvet table, beside a marble chimney-piece, insist gently ondemeanor and the preservation of the past, of the Middle Ages, ofdivine right, of fanaticism, of innocence, of slavery, of the deathpenalty, of war, glorifying in low tones and with politeness, thesword, the stake, and the scaffold. For our part, if we were forced tomake a choice between the barbarians of civilization and the civilizedmen of barbarism, we should choose the barbarians.
But, thank Heaven, still another choice is possible. No perpendicularfall is necessary, in front any more than in the rear.
Neither despotism nor terrorism. We desire progress with a gentleslope.
God takes care of that. God’s whole policy consists in rendering slopesless steep.



CHAPTER VI—ENJOLRAS AND HIS LIEUTENANTS

It was about this epoch that Enjolras, in view of a possiblecatastrophe, instituted a kind of mysterious census.
All were present at a secret meeting at the Café Musain.
Enjolras said, mixing his words with a few half-enigmatical butsignificant metaphors:—
“It is proper that we should know where we stand and on whom we maycount. If combatants are required, they must be provided. It can do noharm to have something with which to strike. Passers-by always havemore chance of being gored when there are bulls on the road than whenthere are none. Let us, therefore, reckon a little on the herd. Howmany of us are there? There is no question of postponing this taskuntil to-morrow. Revolutionists should always be hurried; progress hasno time to lose. Let us mistrust the unexpected. Let us not be caughtunprepared. We must go over all the seams that we have made and seewhether they hold fast. This business ought to be concluded to-day.Courfeyrac, you will see the polytechnic students. It is their day togo out. To-day is Wednesday. Feuilly, you will see those of theGlacière, will you not? Combeferre has promised me to go to Picpus.There is a perfect swarm and an excellent one there. Bahorel will visitthe Estrapade. Prouvaire, the masons are growing lukewarm; you willbring us news from the lodge of the Rue de Grenelle-Saint-Honoré. Jolywill go to Dupuytren’s clinical lecture, and feel the pulse of themedical school. Bossuet will take a little turn in the court and talkwith the young law licentiates. I will take charge of the Cougourdemyself.”

“That arranges everything,” said Courfeyrac.
“No.”

“What else is there?”

“A very important thing.”

“What is that?” asked Courfeyrac.
“The Barrière du Maine,” replied Enjolras.
Enjolras remained for a moment as though absorbed in reflection, thenhe resumed:—
“At the Barrière du Maine there are marble-workers, painters, andjourneymen in the studios of sculptors. They are an enthusiasticfamily, but liable to cool off. I don’t know what has been the matterwith them for some time past. They are thinking of something else. Theyare becoming extinguished. They pass their time playing dominoes. Thereis urgent need that some one should go and talk with them a little, butwith firmness. They meet at Richefeu’s. They are to be found therebetween twelve and one o’clock. Those ashes must be fanned into a glow.For that errand I had counted on that abstracted Marius, who is a goodfellow on the whole, but he no longer comes to us. I need some one forthe Barrière du Maine. I have no one.”

“What about me?” said Grantaire. “Here am I.”

“You?”

“I.”

“You indoctrinate republicans! you warm up hearts that have grown coldin the name of principle!”

“Why not?”

“Are you good for anything?”

“I have a vague ambition in that direction,” said Grantaire.
“You do not believe in everything.”

“I believe in you.”

“Grantaire will you do me a service?”

“Anything. I’ll black your boots.”

“Well, don’t meddle with our affairs. Sleep yourself sober from yourabsinthe.”

“You are an ingrate, Enjolras.”

“You the man to go to the Barrière du Maine! You capable of it!”

“I am capable of descending the Rue de Grès, of crossing the PlaceSaint-Michel, of sloping through the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince, of takingthe Rue de Vaugirard, of passing the Carmelites, of turning into theRue d’Assas, of reaching the Rue du Cherche-Midi, of leaving behind methe Conseil de Guerre, of pacing the Rue des Vieilles-Tuileries, ofstriding across the boulevard, of following the Chaussée du Maine, ofpassing the barrier, and entering Richefeu’s. I am capable of that. Myshoes are capable of that.”

“Do you know anything of those comrades who meet at Richefeu’s?”

“Not much. We only address each other as _thou_.”

“What will you say to them?”

“I will speak to them of Robespierre, pardi! Of Danton. Of principles.”

“You?”

“I. But I don’t receive justice. When I set about it, I am terrible. Ihave read Prudhomme, I know the Social Contract, I know my constitutionof the year Two by heart. ‘The liberty of one citizen ends where theliberty of another citizen begins.’ Do you take me for a brute? I havean old bank-bill of the Republic in my drawer. The Rights of Man, thesovereignty of the people, sapristi! I am even a bit of a Hébertist. Ican talk the most superb twaddle for six hours by the clock, watch inhand.”

“Be serious,” said Enjolras.
“I am wild,” replied Grantaire.
Enjolras meditated for a few moments, and made the gesture of a man whohas taken a resolution.
“Grantaire,” he said gravely, “I consent to try you. You shall go tothe Barrière du Maine.”

Grantaire lived in furnished lodgings very near the Café Musain. Hewent out, and five minutes later he returned. He had gone home to puton a Robespierre waistcoat.
“Red,” said he as he entered, and he looked intently at Enjolras. Then,with the palm of his energetic hand, he laid the two scarlet points ofthe waistcoat across his breast.
And stepping up to Enjolras, he whispered in his ear:—
“Be easy.”

He jammed his hat on resolutely and departed.
A quarter of an hour later, the back room of the Café Musain wasdeserted. All the friends of the A B C were gone, each in his owndirection, each to his own task. Enjolras, who had reserved theCougourde of Aix for himself, was the last to leave.
Those members of the Cougourde of Aix who were in Paris then met on theplain of Issy, in one of the abandoned quarries which are so numerousin that side of Paris.
As Enjolras walked towards this place, he passed the whole situation inreview in his own mind. The gravity of events was self-evident. Whenfacts, the premonitory symptoms of latent social malady, move heavily,the slightest complication stops and entangles them. A phenomenonwhence arises ruin and new births. Enjolras descried a luminousuplifting beneath the gloomy skirts of the future. Who knows? Perhapsthe moment was at hand. The people were again taking possession ofright, and what a fine spectacle! The revolution was again majesticallytaking possession of France and saying to the world: “The sequelto-morrow!” Enjolras was content. The furnace was being heated. He hadat that moment a powder train of friends scattered all over Paris. Hecomposed, in his own mind, with Combeferre’s philosophical andpenetrating eloquence, Feuilly’s cosmopolitan enthusiasm, Courfeyrac’sdash, Bahorel’s smile, Jean Prouvaire’s melancholy, Joly’s science,Bossuet’s sarcasms, a sort of electric spark which took fire nearlyeverywhere at once. All hands to work. Surely, the result would answerto the effort. This was well. This made him think of Grantaire.
“Hold,” said he to himself, “the Barrière du Maine will not take me farout of my way. What if I were to go on as far as Richefeu’s? Let ushave a look at what Grantaire is about, and see how he is getting on.”

One o’clock was striking from the Vaugirard steeple when Enjolrasreached the Richefeu smoking-room.
He pushed open the door, entered, folded his arms, letting the doorfall to and strike his shoulders, and gazed at that room filled withtables, men, and smoke.
A voice broke forth from the mist of smoke, interrupted by anothervoice. It was Grantaire holding a dialogue with an adversary.
Grantaire was sitting opposite another figure, at a marble Saint-Annetable, strewn with grains of bran and dotted with dominos. He washammering the table with his fist, and this is what Enjolras heard:—
“Double-six.”

“Fours.”

“The pig! I have no more.”

“You are dead. A two.”

“Six.”

“Three.”

“One.”

“It’s my move.”

“Four points.”

“Not much.”

“It’s your turn.”

“I have made an enormous mistake.”

“You are doing well.”

“Fifteen.”

“Seven more.”

“That makes me twenty-two.” [Thoughtfully, “Twenty-two!”]
“You weren’t expecting that double-six. If I had placed it at thebeginning, the whole play would have been changed.”

“A two again.”

“One.”

“One! Well, five.”

“I haven’t any.”

“It was your play, I believe?”

“Yes.”

“Blank.”

“What luck he has! Ah! You are lucky! [Long reverie.] Two.”

“One.”

“Neither five nor one. That’s bad for you.”

“Domino.”

“Plague take it!”




BOOK SECOND—ÉPONINE



CHAPTER I—THE LARK’S MEADOW

Marius had witnessed the unexpected termination of the ambush uponwhose track he had set Javert; but Javert had no sooner quitted thebuilding, bearing off his prisoners in three hackney-coaches, thanMarius also glided out of the house. It was only nine o’clock in theevening. Marius betook himself to Courfeyrac. Courfeyrac was no longerthe imperturbable inhabitant of the Latin Quarter, he had gone to livein the Rue de la Verrerie “for political reasons”; this quarter was onewhere, at that epoch, insurrection liked to install itself. Marius saidto Courfeyrac: “I have come to sleep with you.” Courfeyrac dragged amattress off his bed, which was furnished with two, spread it out onthe floor, and said: “There.”

At seven o’clock on the following morning, Marius returned to thehovel, paid the quarter’s rent which he owed to Ma’am Bougon, had hisbooks, his bed, his table, his commode, and his two chairs loaded on ahand-cart and went off without leaving his address, so that when Javertreturned in the course of the morning, for the purpose of questioningMarius as to the events of the preceding evening, he found only Ma’amBougon, who answered: “Moved away!”

Ma’am Bougon was convinced that Marius was to some extent an accompliceof the robbers who had been seized the night before. “Who would everhave said it?” she exclaimed to the portresses of the quarter, “a youngman like that, who had the air of a girl!”

Marius had two reasons for this prompt change of residence. The firstwas, that he now had a horror of that house, where he had beheld, soclose at hand, and in its most repulsive and most ferociousdevelopment, a social deformity which is, perhaps, even more terriblethan the wicked rich man, the wicked poor man. The second was, that hedid not wish to figure in the lawsuit which would insue in allprobability, and be brought in to testify against Thénardier.
Javert thought that the young man, whose name he had forgotten, wasafraid, and had fled, or perhaps, had not even returned home at thetime of the ambush; he made some efforts to find him, however, butwithout success.
A month passed, then another. Marius was still with Courfeyrac. He hadlearned from a young licentiate in law, an habitual frequenter of thecourts, that Thénardier was in close confinement. Every Monday, Mariushad five francs handed in to the clerk’s office of La Force forThénardier.
As Marius had no longer any money, he borrowed the five francs fromCourfeyrac. It was the first time in his life that he had ever borrowedmoney. These periodical five francs were a double riddle to Courfeyracwho lent and to Thénardier who received them. “To whom can they go?”thought Courfeyrac. “Whence can this come to me?” Thénardier askedhimself.
Moreover, Marius was heart-broken. Everything had plunged through atrap-door once more. He no longer saw anything before him; his life wasagain buried in mystery where he wandered fumblingly. He had for amoment beheld very close at hand, in that obscurity, the young girlwhom he loved, the old man who seemed to be her father, those unknownbeings, who were his only interest and his only hope in this world;and, at the very moment when he thought himself on the point ofgrasping them, a gust had swept all these shadows away. Not a spark ofcertainty and truth had been emitted even in the most terrible ofcollisions. No conjecture was possible. He no longer knew even the namethat he thought he knew. It certainly was not Ursule. And the Lark wasa nickname. And what was he to think of the old man? Was he actually inhiding from the police? The white-haired workman whom Marius hadencountered in the vicinity of the Invalides recurred to his mind. Itnow seemed probable that that workingman and M. Leblanc were one andthe same person. So he disguised himself? That man had his heroic andhis equivocal sides. Why had he not called for help? Why had he fled?Was he, or was he not, the father of the young girl? Was he, in short,the man whom Thénardier thought that he recognized? Thénardier mighthave been mistaken. These formed so many insoluble problems. All this,it is true, detracted nothing from the angelic charms of the young girlof the Luxembourg. Heart-rending distress; Marius bore a passion in hisheart, and night over his eyes. He was thrust onward, he was drawn, andhe could not stir. All had vanished, save love. Of love itself he hadlost the instincts and the sudden illuminations. Ordinarily, this flamewhich burns us lights us also a little, and casts some useful gleamswithout. But Marius no longer even heard these mute counsels ofpassion. He never said to himself: “What if I were to go to such aplace? What if I were to try such and such a thing?” The girl whom hecould no longer call Ursule was evidently somewhere; nothing warnedMarius in what direction he should seek her. His whole life was nowsummed up in two words; absolute uncertainty within an impenetrablefog. To see her once again; he still aspired to this, but he no longerexpected it.
To crown all, his poverty had returned. He felt that icy breath closeto him, on his heels. In the midst of his torments, and long beforethis, he had discontinued his work, and nothing is more dangerous thandiscontinued work; it is a habit which vanishes. A habit which is easyto get rid of, and difficult to take up again.
A certain amount of dreaming is good, like a narcotic in discreetdoses. It lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor, which aresometimes severe, and produces in the spirit a soft and fresh vaporwhich corrects the over-harsh contours of pure thought, fills in gapshere and there, binds together and rounds off the angles of the ideas.But too much dreaming sinks and drowns. Woe to the brain-worker whoallows himself to fall entirely from thought into reverie! He thinksthat he can re-ascend with equal ease, and he tells himself that, afterall, it is the same thing. Error!
Thought is the toil of the intelligence, reverie its voluptuousness. Toreplace thought with reverie is to confound a poison with a food.
Marius had begun in that way, as the reader will remember. Passion hadsupervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimæraswithout object or bottom. One no longer emerges from one’s self exceptfor the purpose of going off to dream. Idle production. Tumultuous andstagnant gulf. And, in proportion as labor diminishes, needs increase.This is a law. Man, in a state of reverie, is generally prodigal andslack; the unstrung mind cannot hold life within close bounds.
There is, in that mode of life, good mingled with evil, for ifenervation is baleful, generosity is good and healthful. But the poorman who is generous and noble, and who does not work, is lost.Resources are exhausted, needs crop up.
Fatal declivity down which the most honest and the firmest as well asthe most feeble and most vicious are drawn, and which ends in one oftwo holds, suicide or crime.
By dint of going outdoors to think, the day comes when one goes out tothrow one’s self in the water.
Excess of reverie breeds men like Escousse and Lebras.
Marius was descending this declivity at a slow pace, with his eyesfixed on the girl whom he no longer saw. What we have just writtenseems strange, and yet it is true. The memory of an absent beingkindles in the darkness of the heart; the more it has disappeared, themore it beams; the gloomy and despairing soul sees this light on itshorizon; the star of the inner night. She—that was Marius’ wholethought. He meditated of nothing else; he was confusedly conscious thathis old coat was becoming an impossible coat, and that his new coat wasgrowing old, that his shirts were wearing out, that his hat was wearingout, that his boots were giving out, and he said to himself: “If Icould but see her once again before I die!”

One sweet idea alone was left to him, that she had loved him, that herglance had told him so, that she did not know his name, but that shedid know his soul, and that, wherever she was, however mysterious theplace, she still loved him perhaps. Who knows whether she were notthinking of him as he was thinking of her? Sometimes, in thoseinexplicable hours such as are experienced by every heart that loves,though he had no reasons for anything but sadness and yet felt anobscure quiver of joy, he said to himself: “It is her thoughts that arecoming to me!” Then he added: “Perhaps my thoughts reach her also.”

This illusion, at which he shook his head a moment later, wassufficient, nevertheless, to throw beams, which at times resembledhope, into his soul. From time to time, especially at that evening hourwhich is the most depressing to even the dreamy, he allowed the purest,the most impersonal, the most ideal of the reveries which filled hisbrain, to fall upon a notebook which contained nothing else. He calledthis “writing to her.”

It must not be supposed that his reason was deranged. Quite thecontrary. He had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmlytowards any fixed goal, but he was endowed with more clear-sightednessand rectitude than ever. Marius surveyed by a calm and real, althoughpeculiar light, what passed before his eyes, even the most indifferentdeeds and men; he pronounced a just criticism on everything with a sortof honest dejection and candid disinterestedness. His judgment, whichwas almost wholly disassociated from hope, held itself aloof and soaredon high.
In this state of mind nothing escaped him, nothing deceived him, andevery moment he was discovering the foundation of life, of humanity,and of destiny. Happy, even in the midst of anguish, is he to whom Godhas given a soul worthy of love and of unhappiness! He who has notviewed the things of this world and the heart of man under this doublelight has seen nothing and knows nothing of the true.
The soul which loves and suffers is in a state of sublimity.
However, day followed day, and nothing new presented itself. It merelyseemed to him, that the sombre space which still remained to betraversed by him was growing shorter with every instant. He thoughtthat he already distinctly perceived the brink of the bottomless abyss.
“What!” he repeated to himself, “shall I not see her again beforethen!”

When you have ascended the Rue Saint-Jacques, left the barrier on oneside and followed the old inner boulevard for some distance, you reachthe Rue de la Santé, then the Glacière, and, a little while beforearriving at the little river of the Gobelins, you come to a sort offield which is the only spot in the long and monotonous chain of theboulevards of Paris, where Ruysdael would be tempted to sit down.
There is something indescribable there which exhales grace, a greenmeadow traversed by tightly stretched lines, from which flutter ragsdrying in the wind, and an old market-gardener’s house, built in thetime of Louis XIII., with its great roof oddly pierced with dormerwindows, dilapidated palisades, a little water amid poplar-trees,women, voices, laughter; on the horizon the Panthéon, the pole of theDeaf-Mutes, the Val-de-Grâce, black, squat, fantastic, amusing,magnificent, and in the background, the severe square crests of thetowers of Notre Dame.
As the place is worth looking at, no one goes thither. Hardly one cartor wagoner passes in a quarter of an hour.
It chanced that Marius’ solitary strolls led him to this plot ofground, near the water. That day, there was a rarity on the boulevard,a passer-by. Marius, vaguely impressed with the almost savage beauty ofthe place, asked this passer-by:—“What is the name of this spot?”

The person replied: “It is the Lark’s meadow.”

And he added: “It was here that Ulbach killed the shepherdess of Ivry.”

But after the word “Lark” Marius heard nothing more. These suddencongealments in the state of reverie, which a single word suffices toevoke, do occur. The entire thought is abruptly condensed around anidea, and it is no longer capable of perceiving anything else.
The Lark was the appellation which had replaced Ursule in the depths ofMarius’ melancholy.—“Stop,” said he with a sort of unreasoning stuporpeculiar to these mysterious asides, “this is her meadow. I shall knowwhere she lives now.”

It was absurd, but irresistible.
And every day he returned to that meadow of the Lark.



CHAPTER II—EMBRYONIC FORMATION OF CRIMES IN THE INCUBATION OF PRISONS

Javert’s triumph in the Gorbeau hovel seemed complete, but had not beenso.
In the first place, and this constituted the principal anxiety, Javerthad not taken the prisoner prisoner. The assassinated man who flees ismore suspicious than the assassin, and it is probable that thispersonage, who had been so precious a capture for the ruffians, wouldbe no less fine a prize for the authorities.
And then, Montparnasse had escaped Javert.
Another opportunity of laying hands on that “devil’s dandy” must bewaited for. Montparnasse had, in fact, encountered Éponine as she stoodon the watch under the trees of the boulevard, and had led her off,preferring to play Nemorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhanneswith the father. It was well that he did so. He was free. As forÉponine, Javert had caused her to be seized; a mediocre consolation.Éponine had joined Azelma at Les Madelonettes.
And finally, on the way from the Gorbeau house to La Force, one of theprincipal prisoners, Claquesous, had been lost. It was not known howthis had been effected, the police agents and the sergeants “could notunderstand it at all.” He had converted himself into vapor, he hadslipped through the handcuffs, he had trickled through the crevices ofthe carriage, the fiacre was cracked, and he had fled; all that theywere able to say was, that on arriving at the prison, there was noClaquesous. Either the fairies or the police had had a hand in it. HadClaquesous melted into the shadows like a snow-flake in water? Hadthere been unavowed connivance of the police agents? Did this manbelong to the double enigma of order and disorder? Was he concentricwith infraction and repression? Had this sphinx his fore paws in crimeand his hind paws in authority? Javert did not accept suchcomminations, and would have bristled up against such compromises; buthis squad included other inspectors besides himself, who were moreinitiated than he, perhaps, although they were his subordinates in thesecrets of the Prefecture, and Claquesous had been such a villain thathe might make a very good agent. It is an excellent thing forruffianism and an admirable thing for the police to be on such intimatejuggling terms with the night. These double-edged rascals do exist.However that may be, Claquesous had gone astray and was not foundagain. Javert appeared to be more irritated than amazed at this.
As for Marius, “that booby of a lawyer,” who had probably becomefrightened, and whose name Javert had forgotten, Javert attached verylittle importance to him. Moreover, a lawyer can be hunted up at anytime. But was he a lawyer after all?
The investigation had begun.
The magistrate had thought it advisable not to put one of these men ofthe band of Patron Minette in close confinement, in the hope that hewould chatter. This man was Brujon, the long-haired man of the Rue duPetit-Banquier. He had been let loose in the Charlemagne courtyard, andthe eyes of the watchers were fixed on him.
This name of Brujon is one of the souvenirs of La Force. In thathideous courtyard, called the court of the Bâtiment-Neuf (NewBuilding), which the administration called the court Saint-Bernard, andwhich the robbers called the Fosse-aux-Lions (The Lion’s Ditch), onthat wall covered with scales and leprosy, which rose on the left to alevel with the roofs, near an old door of rusty iron which led to theancient chapel of the ducal residence of La Force, then turned in adormitory for ruffians, there could still be seen, twelve years ago, asort of fortress roughly carved in the stone with a nail, and beneathit this signature:—
BRUJON, 1811.
The Brujon of 1811 was the father of the Brujon of 1832.
The latter, of whom the reader caught but a glimpse at the Gorbeauhouse, was a very cunning and very adroit young spark, with abewildered and plaintive air. It was in consequence of this plaintiveair that the magistrate had released him, thinking him more useful inthe Charlemagne yard than in close confinement.
Robbers do not interrupt their profession because they are in the handsof justice. They do not let themselves be put out by such a trifle asthat. To be in prison for one crime is no reason for not beginning onanother crime. They are artists, who have one picture in the salon, andwho toil, nonetheless, on a new work in their studios.
Brujon seemed to be stupefied by prison. He could sometimes be seenstanding by the hour together in front of the sutler’s window in theCharlemagne yard, staring like an idiot at the sordid list of priceswhich began with: _garlic_, 62 _centimes_, and ended with: _cigar_, 5_centimes_. Or he passed his time in trembling, chattering his teeth,saying that he had a fever, and inquiring whether one of the eight andtwenty beds in the fever ward was vacant.
All at once, towards the end of February, 1832, it was discovered thatBrujon, that somnolent fellow, had had three different commissionsexecuted by the errand-men of the establishment, not under his ownname, but in the name of three of his comrades; and they had cost himin all fifty sous, an exorbitant outlay which attracted the attentionof the prison corporal.
Inquiries were instituted, and on consulting the tariff of commissionsposted in the convict’s parlor, it was learned that the fifty souscould be analyzed as follows: three commissions; one to the Panthéon,ten sous; one to Val-de-Grâce, fifteen sous; and one to the Barrière deGrenelle, twenty-five sous. This last was the dearest of the wholetariff. Now, at the Panthéon, at the Val-de-Grâce, and at the Barrièrede Grenelle were situated the domiciles of the three very redoubtableprowlers of the barriers, Kruideniers, alias Bizarro, Glorieux, anex-convict, and Barre-Carosse, upon whom the attention of the policewas directed by this incident. It was thought that these men weremembers of Patron Minette; two of those leaders, Babet and Gueulemer,had been captured. It was supposed that the messages, which had beenaddressed, not to houses, but to people who were waiting for them inthe street, must have contained information with regard to some crimethat had been plotted. They were in possession of other indications;they laid hand on the three prowlers, and supposed that they hadcircumvented some one or other of Brujon’s machinations.
About a week after these measures had been taken, one night, as thesuperintendent of the watch, who had been inspecting the lowerdormitory in the Bâtiment-Neuf, was about to drop his chestnut in thebox—this was the means adopted to make sure that the watchmen performedtheir duties punctually; every hour a chestnut must be dropped into allthe boxes nailed to the doors of the dormitories—a watchman lookedthrough the peep-hole of the dormitory and beheld Brujon sitting on hisbed and writing something by the light of the hall-lamp. The guardianentered, Brujon was put in a solitary cell for a month, but they werenot able to seize what he had written. The police learned nothingfurther about it.
What is certain is, that on the following morning, a “postilion” wasflung from the Charlemagne yard into the Lions’ Ditch, over thefive-story building which separated the two court-yards.
What prisoners call a “postilion” is a pallet of bread artisticallymoulded, which is sent _into Ireland_, that is to say, over the roofsof a prison, from one courtyard to another. Etymology: over England;from one land to another; _into Ireland_. This little pellet falls inthe yard. The man who picks it up opens it and finds in it a noteaddressed to some prisoner in that yard. If it is a prisoner who findsthe treasure, he forwards the note to its destination; if it is akeeper, or one of the prisoners secretly sold who are called _sheep_ inprisons and _foxes_ in the galleys, the note is taken to the office andhanded over to the police.
On this occasion, the postilion reached its address, although theperson to whom it was addressed was, at that moment, in solitaryconfinement. This person was no other than Babet, one of the four headsof Patron Minette.
The postilion contained a roll of paper on which only these two lineswere written:—
“Babet. There is an affair in the Rue Plumet. A gate on a garden.”

This is what Brujon had written the night before.
In spite of male and female searchers, Babet managed to pass the noteon from La Force to the Salpêtrière, to a “good friend” whom he had andwho was shut up there. This woman in turn transmitted the note toanother woman of her acquaintance, a certain Magnon, who was stronglysuspected by the police, though not yet arrested. This Magnon, whosename the reader has already seen, had relations with the Thénardier,which will be described in detail later on, and she could, by going tosee Éponine, serve as a bridge between the Salpêtrière and LesMadelonettes.
It happened, that at precisely that moment, as proofs were wanting inthe investigation directed against Thénardier in the matter of hisdaughters, Éponine and Azelma were released. When Éponine came out,Magnon, who was watching the gate of the Madelonettes, handed herBrujon’s note to Babet, charging her to look into the matter.
Éponine went to the Rue Plumet, recognized the gate and the garden,observed the house, spied, lurked, and, a few days later, brought toMagnon, who delivers in the Rue Clocheperce, a biscuit, which Magnontransmitted to Babet’s mistress in the Salpêtrière. A biscuit, in theshady symbolism of prisons, signifies: Nothing to be done.
So that in less than a week from that time, as Brujon and Babet met inthe circle of La Force, the one on his way to the examination, theother on his way from it:—
“Well?” asked Brujon, “the Rue P.?”

“Biscuit,” replied Babet. Thus did the fœtus of crime engendered byBrujon in La Force miscarry.
This miscarriage had its consequences, however, which were perfectlydistinct from Brujon’s programme. The reader will see what they were.
Often when we think we are knotting one thread, we are tying quiteanother.



CHAPTER III—APPARITION TO FATHER MABEUF

Marius no longer went to see any one, but he sometimes encounteredFather Mabeuf by chance.
While Marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may becalled the cellar stairs, and which lead to places without light, wherethe happy can be heard walking overhead, M. Mabeuf was descending onhis side.
The _Flora of Cauteretz_ no longer sold at all. The experiments onindigo had not been successful in the little garden of Austerlitz,which had a bad exposure. M. Mabeuf could cultivate there only a fewplants which love shade and dampness. Nevertheless, he did not becomediscouraged. He had obtained a corner in the Jardin des Plantes, with agood exposure, to make his trials with indigo “at his own expense.” Forthis purpose he had pawned his copperplates of the _Flora_. He hadreduced his breakfast to two eggs, and he left one of these for his oldservant, to whom he had paid no wages for the last fifteen months. Andoften his breakfast was his only meal. He no longer smiled with hisinfantile smile, he had grown morose and no longer received visitors.Marius did well not to dream of going thither. Sometimes, at the hourwhen M. Mabeuf was on his way to the Jardin des Plantes, the old manand the young man passed each other on the Boulevard de l’Hôpital. Theydid not speak, and only exchanged a melancholy sign of the head. Aheart-breaking thing it is that there comes a moment when misery loosesbonds! Two men who have been friends become two chance passers-by.
Royol the bookseller was dead. M. Mabeuf no longer knew his books, hisgarden, or his indigo: these were the three forms which happiness,pleasure, and hope had assumed for him. This sufficed him for hisliving. He said to himself: “When I shall have made my balls ofblueing, I shall be rich, I will withdraw my copperplates from thepawn-shop, I will put my _Flora_ in vogue again with trickery, plentyof money and advertisements in the newspapers and I will buy, I knowwell where, a copy of Pierre de Médine’s _Art de Naviguer_, withwood-cuts, edition of 1655.” In the meantime, he toiled all day overhis plot of indigo, and at night he returned home to water his garden,and to read his books. At that epoch, M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty yearsof age.
One evening he had a singular apparition.
He had returned home while it was still broad daylight. MotherPlutarque, whose health was declining, was ill and in bed. He had dinedon a bone, on which a little meat lingered, and a bit of bread that hehad found on the kitchen table, and had seated himself on an overturnedstone post, which took the place of a bench in his garden.
Near this bench there rose, after the fashion in orchard-gardens, asort of large chest, of beams and planks, much dilapidated, arabbit-hutch on the ground floor, a fruit-closet on the first. Therewas nothing in the hutch, but there were a few apples in thefruit-closet,—the remains of the winter’s provision.
M. Mabeuf had set himself to turning over and reading, with the aid ofhis glasses, two books of which he was passionately fond and in which,a serious thing at his age, he was interested. His natural timidityrendered him accessible to the acceptance of superstitions in a certaindegree. The first of these books was the famous treatise of PresidentDelancre, _De l’Inconstance des Démons_; the other was a quarto byMutor de la Rubaudière, _Sur les Diables de Vauvert et les Gobelins dela Bièvre_. This last-mentioned old volume interested him all the more,because his garden had been one of the spots haunted by goblins informer times. The twilight had begun to whiten what was on high and toblacken all below. As he read, over the top of the book which he heldin his hand, Father Mabeuf was surveying his plants, and among others amagnificent rhododendron which was one of his consolations; four daysof heat, wind, and sun without a drop of rain, had passed; the stalkswere bending, the buds drooping, the leaves falling; all this neededwater, the rhododendron was particularly sad. Father Mabeuf was one ofthose persons for whom plants have souls. The old man had toiled allday over his indigo plot, he was worn out with fatigue, but he rose,laid his books on the bench, and walked, all bent over and withtottering footsteps, to the well, but when he had grasped the chain, hecould not even draw it sufficiently to unhook it. Then he turned roundand cast a glance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studdedwith stars.
The evening had that serenity which overwhelms the troubles of manbeneath an indescribably mournful and eternal joy. The night promisedto be as arid as the day had been.
“Stars everywhere!” thought the old man; “not the tiniest cloud! Not adrop of water!”

And his head, which had been upraised for a moment, fell back upon hisbreast.
He raised it again, and once more looked at the sky, murmuring:—
“A tear of dew! A little pity!”

He tried again to unhook the chain of the well, and could not.
At that moment, he heard a voice saying:—
“Father Mabeuf, would you like to have me water your garden for you?”

At the same time, a noise as of a wild animal passing became audible inthe hedge, and he beheld emerging from the shrubbery a sort of tall,slender girl, who drew herself up in front of him and stared boldly athim. She had less the air of a human being than of a form which hadjust blossomed forth from the twilight.
Before Father Mabeuf, who was easily terrified, and who was, as we havesaid, quick to take alarm, was able to reply by a single syllable, thisbeing, whose movements had a sort of odd abruptness in the darkness,had unhooked the chain, plunged in and withdrawn the bucket, and filledthe watering-pot, and the goodman beheld this apparition, which hadbare feet and a tattered petticoat, running about among the flower-bedsdistributing life around her. The sound of the watering-pot on theleaves filled Father Mabeuf’s soul with ecstasy. It seemed to him thatthe rhododendron was happy now.
The first bucketful emptied, the girl drew a second, then a third. Shewatered the whole garden.
There was something about her, as she thus ran about among paths, whereher outline appeared perfectly black, waving her angular arms, and withher fichu all in rags, that resembled a bat.
When she had finished, Father Mabeuf approached her with tears in hiseyes, and laid his hand on her brow.
“God will bless you,” said he, “you are an angel since you take care ofthe flowers.”

“No,” she replied. “I am the devil, but that’s all the same to me.”

The old man exclaimed, without either waiting for or hearing herresponse:—
“What a pity that I am so unhappy and so poor, and that I can donothing for you!”

“You can do something,” said she.
“What?”

“Tell me where M. Marius lives.”

The old man did not understand. “What Monsieur Marius?”

He raised his glassy eyes and seemed to be seeking something that hadvanished.
“A young man who used to come here.”

In the meantime, M. Mabeuf had searched his memory.
“Ah! yes—” he exclaimed. “I know what you mean. Wait! MonsieurMarius—the Baron Marius Pontmercy, parbleu! He lives,—or rather, he nolonger lives,—ah well, I don’t know.”

As he spoke, he had bent over to train a branch of rhododendron, and hecontinued:—
“Hold, I know now. He very often passes along the boulevard, and goesin the direction of the Glacière, Rue Croulebarbe. The meadow of theLark. Go there. It is not hard to meet him.”

When M. Mabeuf straightened himself up, there was no longer any onethere; the girl had disappeared.
He was decidedly terrified.
“Really,” he thought, “if my garden had not been watered, I shouldthink that she was a spirit.”

An hour later, when he was in bed, it came back to him, and as he fellasleep, at that confused moment when thought, like that fabulous birdwhich changes itself into a fish in order to cross the sea, little bylittle assumes the form of a dream in order to traverse slumber, hesaid to himself in a bewildered way:—
“In sooth, that greatly resembles what Rubaudière narrates of thegoblins. Could it have been a goblin?”




CHAPTER IV—AN APPARITION TO MARIUS

Some days after this visit of a “spirit” to Farmer Mabeuf, onemorning,—it was on a Monday, the day when Marius borrowed thehundred-sou piece from Courfeyrac for Thénardier—Marius had put thiscoin in his pocket, and before carrying it to the clerk’s office, hehad gone “to take a little stroll,” in the hope that this would makehim work on his return. It was always thus, however. As soon as herose, he seated himself before a book and a sheet of paper in order toscribble some translation; his task at that epoch consisted in turninginto French a celebrated quarrel between Germans, the Gans and Savignycontroversy; he took Savigny, he took Gans, read four lines, tried towrite one, could not, saw a star between him and his paper, and rosefrom his chair, saying: “I shall go out. That will put me in spirits.”

And off he went to the Lark’s meadow.
There he beheld more than ever the star, and less than ever Savigny andGans.
He returned home, tried to take up his work again, and did not succeed;there was no means of re-knotting a single one of the threads whichwere broken in his brain; then he said to himself: “I will not go outto-morrow. It prevents my working.” And he went out every day.
He lived in the Lark’s meadow more than in Courfeyrac’s lodgings. Thatwas his real address: Boulevard de la Santé, at the seventh tree fromthe Rue Croulebarbe.
That morning he had quitted the seventh tree and had seated himself onthe parapet of the River des Gobelins. A cheerful sunlight penetratedthe freshly unfolded and luminous leaves.
He was dreaming of “Her.” And his meditation turning to a reproach,fell back upon himself; he reflected dolefully on his idleness, hisparalysis of soul, which was gaining on him, and of that night whichwas growing more dense every moment before him, to such a point that heno longer even saw the sun.
Nevertheless, athwart this painful extrication of indistinct ideaswhich was not even a monologue, so feeble had action become in him, andhe had no longer the force to care to despair, athwart this melancholyabsorption, sensations from without did reach him. He heard behind him,beneath him, on both banks of the river, the laundresses of theGobelins beating their linen, and above his head, the birds chatteringand singing in the elm-trees. On the one hand, the sound of liberty,the careless happiness of the leisure which has wings; on the other,the sound of toil. What caused him to meditate deeply, and almostreflect, were two cheerful sounds.
All at once, in the midst of his dejected ecstasy, he heard a familiarvoice saying:—
“Come! Here he is!”

He raised his eyes, and recognized that wretched child who had come tohim one morning, the elder of the Thénardier daughters, Éponine; heknew her name now. Strange to say, she had grown poorer and prettier,two steps which it had not seemed within her power to take. She hadaccomplished a double progress, towards the light and towards distress.She was barefooted and in rags, as on the day when she had soresolutely entered his chamber, only her rags were two months oldernow, the holes were larger, the tatters more sordid. It was the sameharsh voice, the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan, the same free,wild, and vacillating glance. She had besides, more than formerly, inher face that indescribably terrified and lamentable something whichsojourn in a prison adds to wretchedness.
She had bits of straw and hay in her hair, not like Ophelia throughhaving gone mad from the contagion of Hamlet’s madness, but because shehad slept in the loft of some stable.
And in spite of it all, she was beautiful. What a star art thou, Oyouth!
In the meantime, she had halted in front of Marius with a trace of joyin her livid countenance, and something which resembled a smile.
She stood for several moments as though incapable of speech.
“So I have met you at last!” she said at length. “Father Mabeuf wasright, it was on this boulevard! How I have hunted for you! If you onlyknew! Do you know? I have been in the jug. A fortnight! They let meout! seeing that there was nothing against me, and that, moreover, Ihad not reached years of discretion. I lack two months of it. Oh! how Ihave hunted for you! These six weeks! So you don’t live down there anymore?”

“No,” said Marius.
“Ah! I understand. Because of that affair. Those take-downs aredisagreeable. You cleared out. Come now! Why do you wear old hats likethis! A young man like you ought to have fine clothes. Do you know,Monsieur Marius, Father Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius, I don’t knowwhat. It isn’t true that you are a baron? Barons are old fellows, theygo to the Luxembourg, in front of the château, where there is the mostsun, and they read the _Quotidienne_ for a sou. I once carried a letterto a baron of that sort. He was over a hundred years old. Say, where doyou live now?”

Marius made no reply.
“Ah!” she went on, “you have a hole in your shirt. I must sew it up foryou.”

She resumed with an expression which gradually clouded over:—
“You don’t seem glad to see me.”

Marius held his peace; she remained silent for a moment, thenexclaimed:—
“But if I choose, nevertheless, I could force you to look glad!”

“What?” demanded Marius. “What do you mean?”

“Ah! you used to call me _thou_,” she retorted.
“Well, then, what dost thou mean?”

She bit her lips; she seemed to hesitate, as though a prey to some sortof inward conflict. At last she appeared to come to a decision.
“So much the worse, I don’t care. You have a melancholy air, I want youto be pleased. Only promise me that you will smile. I want to see yousmile and hear you say: ‘Ah, well, that’s good.’ Poor Mr. Marius! youknow? You promised me that you would give me anything I like—”

“Yes! Only speak!”

She looked Marius full in the eye, and said:—
“I have the address.”

Marius turned pale. All the blood flowed back to his heart.
“What address?”

“The address that you asked me to get!”

She added, as though with an effort:—
“The address—you know very well!”

“Yes!” stammered Marius.
“Of that young lady.”

This word uttered, she sighed deeply.
Marius sprang from the parapet on which he had been sitting and seizedher hand distractedly.
“Oh! Well! lead me thither! Tell me! Ask of me anything you wish! Whereis it?”

“Come with me,” she responded. “I don’t know the street or number verywell; it is in quite the other direction from here, but I know thehouse well, I will take you to it.”

She withdrew her hand and went on, in a tone which could have rent theheart of an observer, but which did not even graze Marius in hisintoxicated and ecstatic state:—
“Oh! how glad you are!”

A cloud swept across Marius’ brow. He seized Éponine by the arm:—
“Swear one thing to me!”

“Swear!” said she, “what does that mean? Come! You want me to swear?”

And she laughed.
“Your father! promise me, Éponine! Swear to me that you will not givethis address to your father!”

She turned to him with a stupefied air.
“Éponine! How do you know that my name is Éponine?”

“Promise what I tell you!”

But she did not seem to hear him.
“That’s nice! You have called me Éponine!”

Marius grasped both her arms at once.
“But answer me, in the name of Heaven! pay attention to what I amsaying to you, swear to me that you will not tell your father thisaddress that you know!”

“My father!” said she. “Ah yes, my father! Be at ease. He’s in closeconfinement. Besides, what do I care for my father!”

“But you do not promise me!” exclaimed Marius.
“Let go of me!” she said, bursting into a laugh, “how you do shake me!Yes! Yes! I promise that! I swear that to you! What is that to me? Iwill not tell my father the address. There! Is that right? Is that it?”

“Nor to any one?” said Marius.
“Nor to any one.”

“Now,” resumed Marius, “take me there.”

“Immediately?”

“Immediately.”

“Come along. Ah! how pleased he is!” said she.
After a few steps she halted.
“You are following me too closely, Monsieur Marius. Let me go on ahead,and follow me so, without seeming to do it. A nice young man like youmust not be seen with a woman like me.”

No tongue can express all that lay in that word, _woman_, thuspronounced by that child.
She proceeded a dozen paces and then halted once more; Marius joinedher. She addressed him sideways, and without turning towards him:—
“By the way, you know that you promised me something?”

Marius fumbled in his pocket. All that he owned in the world was thefive francs intended for Thénardier the father. He took them and laidthem in Éponine’s hand.
She opened her fingers and let the coin fall to the ground, and gazedat him with a gloomy air.
“I don’t want your money,” said she.



BOOK THIRD—THE HOUSE IN THE RUE PLUMET



CHAPTER I—THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET

About the middle of the last century, a chief justice in the Parliamentof Paris having a mistress and concealing the fact, for at that periodthe grand seignors displayed their mistresses, and the bourgeoisconcealed them, had “a little house” built in the FaubourgSaint-Germain, in the deserted Rue Blomet, which is now called RuePlumet, not far from the spot which was then designated as _Combat desAnimaux_.
This house was composed of a single-storied pavilion; two rooms on theground floor, two chambers on the first floor, a kitchen downstairs, aboudoir upstairs, an attic under the roof, the whole preceded by agarden with a large gate opening on the street. This garden was aboutan acre and a half in extent. This was all that could be seen bypassers-by; but behind the pavilion there was a narrow courtyard, andat the end of the courtyard a low building consisting of two rooms anda cellar, a sort of preparation destined to conceal a child and nursein case of need. This building communicated in the rear by a maskeddoor which opened by a secret spring, with a long, narrow, pavedwinding corridor, open to the sky, hemmed in with two lofty walls,which, hidden with wonderful art, and lost as it were between gardenenclosures and cultivated land, all of whose angles and detours itfollowed, ended in another door, also with a secret lock which opened aquarter of a league away, almost in another quarter, at the solitaryextremity of the Rue du Babylone.
Through this the chief justice entered, so that even those who werespying on him and following him would merely have observed that thejustice betook himself every day in a mysterious way somewhere, andwould never have suspected that to go to the Rue de Babylone was to goto the Rue Blomet. Thanks to clever purchasers of land, the magistratehad been able to make a secret, sewer-like passage on his own property,and consequently, without interference. Later on, he had sold in littleparcels, for gardens and market gardens, the lots of ground adjoiningthe corridor, and the proprietors of these lots on both sides thoughtthey had a party wall before their eyes, and did not even suspect thelong, paved ribbon winding between two walls amid their flower-beds andtheir orchards. Only the birds beheld this curiosity. It is probablethat the linnets and tomtits of the last century gossiped a great dealabout the chief justice.
The pavilion, built of stone in the taste of Mansard, wainscoted andfurnished in the Watteau style, rocaille on the inside, old-fashionedon the outside, walled in with a triple hedge of flowers, had somethingdiscreet, coquettish, and solemn about it, as befits a caprice of loveand magistracy.
This house and corridor, which have now disappeared, were in existencefifteen years ago. In ’93 a coppersmith had purchased the house withthe idea of demolishing it, but had not been able to pay the price; thenation made him bankrupt. So that it was the house which demolished thecoppersmith. After that, the house remained uninhabited, and fellslowly to ruin, as does every dwelling to which the presence of mandoes not communicate life. It had remained fitted with its oldfurniture, was always for sale or to let, and the ten or a dozen peoplewho passed through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellowand illegible bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since1819.
Towards the end of the Restoration, these same passers-by might havenoticed that the bill had disappeared, and even that the shutters onthe first floor were open. The house was occupied, in fact. The windowshad short curtains, a sign that there was a woman about.
In the month of October, 1829, a man of a certain age had presentedhimself and had hired the house just as it stood, including, of course,the back building and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone. Hehad had the secret openings of the two doors to this passage repaired.The house, as we have just mentioned, was still very nearly furnishedwith the justice’s old fitting; the new tenant had ordered somerepairs, had added what was lacking here and there, had replaced thepaving-stones in the yard, bricks in the floors, steps in the stairs,missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows,and had finally installed himself there with a young girl and anelderly maid-servant, without commotion, rather like a person who isslipping in than like a man who is entering his own house. Theneighbors did not gossip about him, for the reason that there were noneighbors.
This unobtrusive tenant was Jean Valjean, the young girl was Cosette.The servant was a woman named Toussaint, whom Jean Valjean had savedfrom the hospital and from wretchedness, and who was elderly, astammerer, and from the provinces, three qualities which had decidedJean Valjean to take her with him. He had hired the house under thename of M. Fauchelevent, independent gentleman. In all that has beenrelated heretofore, the reader has, doubtless, been no less prompt thanThénardier to recognize Jean Valjean.
Why had Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Petit-Picpus? What hadhappened?
Nothing had happened.
It will be remembered that Jean Valjean was happy in the convent, sohappy that his conscience finally took the alarm. He saw Cosette everyday, he felt paternity spring up and develop within him more and more,he brooded over the soul of that child, he said to himself that she washis, that nothing could take her from him, that this would lastindefinitely, that she would certainly become a nun, being theretogently incited every day, that thus the convent was henceforth theuniverse for her as it was for him, that he should grow old there, andthat she would grow up there, that she would grow old there, and thathe should die there; that, in short, delightful hope, no separation waspossible. On reflecting upon this, he fell into perplexity. Heinterrogated himself. He asked himself if all that happiness werereally his, if it were not composed of the happiness of another, of thehappiness of that child which he, an old man, was confiscating andstealing; if that were not theft? He said to himself, that this childhad a right to know life before renouncing it, that to deprive her inadvance, and in some sort without consulting her, of all joys, underthe pretext of saving her from all trials, to take advantage of herignorance of her isolation, in order to make an artificial vocationgerminate in her, was to rob a human creature of its nature and to lieto God. And who knows if, when she came to be aware of all this someday, and found herself a nun to her sorrow, Cosette would not come tohate him? A last, almost selfish thought, and less heroic than therest, but which was intolerable to him. He resolved to quit theconvent.
He resolved on this; he recognized with anguish, the fact that it wasnecessary. As for objections, there were none. Five years’ sojournbetween these four walls and of disappearance had necessarily destroyedor dispersed the elements of fear. He could return tranquilly amongmen. He had grown old, and all had undergone a change. Who wouldrecognize him now? And then, to face the worst, there was danger onlyfor himself, and he had no right to condemn Cosette to the cloister forthe reason that he had been condemned to the galleys. Besides, what isdanger in comparison with the right? Finally, nothing prevented hisbeing prudent and taking his precautions.
As for Cosette’s education, it was almost finished and complete.
His determination once taken, he awaited an opportunity. It was notlong in presenting itself. Old Fauchelevent died.
Jean Valjean demanded an audience with the revered prioress and toldher that, having come into a little inheritance at the death of hisbrother, which permitted him henceforth to live without working, heshould leave the service of the convent and take his daughter with him;but that, as it was not just that Cosette, since she had not taken thevows, should have received her education gratuitously, he humbly beggedthe Reverend Prioress to see fit that he should offer to the community,as indemnity, for the five years which Cosette had spent there, the sumof five thousand francs.
It was thus that Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the PerpetualAdoration.
On leaving the convent, he took in his own arms the little valise thekey to which he still wore on his person, and would permit no porter totouch it. This puzzled Cosette, because of the odor of embalming whichproceeded from it.
Let us state at once, that this trunk never quitted him more. He alwayshad it in his chamber. It was the first and only thing sometimes, thathe carried off in his moving when he moved about. Cosette laughed atit, and called this valise his _inseparable_, saying: “I am jealous ofit.”

Nevertheless, Jean Valjean did not reappear in the open air withoutprofound anxiety.
He discovered the house in the Rue Plumet, and hid himself from sightthere. Henceforth he was in the possession of the name:—UltimeFauchelevent.
At the same time he hired two other apartments in Paris, in order thathe might attract less attention than if he were to remain always in thesame quarter, and so that he could, at need, take himself off at theslightest disquietude which should assail him, and in short, so that hemight not again be caught unprovided as on the night when he had somiraculously escaped from Javert. These two apartments were verypitiable, poor in appearance, and in two quarters which were far remotefrom each other, the one in the Rue de l’Ouest, the other in the Rue del’Homme Armé.
He went from time to time, now to the Rue de l’Homme Armé, now to theRue de l’Ouest, to pass a month or six weeks, without taking Toussaint.He had himself served by the porters, and gave himself out as agentleman from the suburbs, living on his funds, and having a littletemporary resting-place in town. This lofty virtue had three domicilesin Paris for the sake of escaping from the police.



CHAPTER II—JEAN VALJEAN AS A NATIONAL GUARD

However, properly speaking, he lived in the Rue Plumet, and he hadarranged his existence there in the following fashion:—
Cosette and the servant occupied the pavilion; she had the bigsleeping-room with the painted pier-glasses, the boudoir with thegilded fillets, the justice’s drawing-room furnished with tapestriesand vast armchairs; she had the garden. Jean Valjean had a canopied bedof antique damask in three colors and a beautiful Persian rug purchasedin the Rue du Figuier-Saint-Paul at Mother Gaucher’s, put intoCosette’s chamber, and, in order to redeem the severity of thesemagnificent old things, he had amalgamated with this bric-à-brac allthe gay and graceful little pieces of furniture suitable to younggirls, an étagère, a bookcase filled with gilt-edged books, aninkstand, a blotting-book, paper, a work-table incrusted with mother ofpearl, a silver-gilt dressing-case, a toilet service in Japaneseporcelain. Long damask curtains with a red foundation and three colors,like those on the bed, hung at the windows of the first floor. On theground floor, the curtains were of tapestry. All winter long, Cosette’slittle house was heated from top to bottom. Jean Valjean inhabited thesort of porter’s lodge which was situated at the end of the backcourtyard, with a mattress on a folding-bed, a white wood table, twostraw chairs, an earthenware water-jug, a few old volumes on a shelf,his beloved valise in one corner, and never any fire. He dined withCosette, and he had a loaf of black bread on the table for his own use.
When Toussaint came, he had said to her: “It is the young lady who isthe mistress of this house.”—“And you, monsieur?” Toussaint replied inamazement.—“I am a much better thing than the master, I am the father.”

Cosette had been taught housekeeping in the convent, and she regulatedtheir expenditure, which was very modest. Every day, Jean Valjean puthis arm through Cosette’s and took her for a walk. He led her to theLuxembourg, to the least frequented walk, and every Sunday he took herto mass at Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, because that was a long way off.As it was a very poor quarter, he bestowed alms largely there, and thepoor people surrounded him in church, which had drawn down upon himThénardier’s epistle: “To the benevolent gentleman of the church ofSaint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.” He was fond of taking Cosette to visit thepoor and the sick. No stranger ever entered the house in the RuePlumet. Toussaint brought their provisions, and Jean Valjean wenthimself for water to a fountain nearby on the boulevard. Their wood andwine were put into a half-subterranean hollow lined with rock-workwhich lay near the Rue de Babylone and which had formerly served thechief-justice as a grotto; for at the epoch of follies and “LittleHouses” no love was without a grotto.
In the door opening on the Rue de Babylone, there was a box destinedfor the reception of letters and papers; only, as the three inhabitantsof the pavilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters,the entire usefulness of that box, formerly the go-between of a loveaffair, and the confidant of a love-lorn lawyer, was now limited to thetax-collector’s notices, and the summons of the guard. For M.Fauchelevent, independent gentleman, belonged to the national guard; hehad not been able to escape through the fine meshes of the census of1831. The municipal information collected at that time had even reachedthe convent of the Petit-Picpus, a sort of impenetrable and holy cloud,whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise, and, consequently,worthy of mounting guard in the eyes of the town-hall.
Three or four times a year, Jean Valjean donned his uniform and mountedguard; he did this willingly, however; it was a correct disguise whichmixed him with every one, and yet left him solitary. Jean Valjean hadjust attained his sixtieth birthday, the age of legal exemption; but hedid not appear to be over fifty; moreover, he had no desire to escapehis sergeant-major nor to quibble with Comte de Lobau; he possessed nocivil status, he was concealing his name, he was concealing hisidentity, so he concealed his age, he concealed everything; and, as wehave just said, he willingly did his duty as a national guard; the sumof his ambition lay in resembling any other man who paid his taxes.This man had for his ideal, within, the angel, without, the bourgeois.
Let us note one detail, however; when Jean Valjean went out withCosette, he dressed as the reader has already seen, and had the air ofa retired officer. When he went out alone, which was generally atnight, he was always dressed in a workingman’s trousers and blouse, andwore a cap which concealed his face. Was this precaution or humility?Both. Cosette was accustomed to the enigmatical side of her destiny,and hardly noticed her father’s peculiarities. As for Toussaint, shevenerated Jean Valjean, and thought everything he did right.
One day, her butcher, who had caught a glimpse of Jean Valjean, said toher: “That’s a queer fish.” She replied: “He’s a saint.”

Neither Jean Valjean nor Cosette nor Toussaint ever entered or emergedexcept by the door on the Rue de Babylone. Unless seen through thegarden gate it would have been difficult to guess that they lived inthe Rue Plumet. That gate was always closed. Jean Valjean had left thegarden uncultivated, in order not to attract attention.
In this, possibly, he made a mistake.



CHAPTER III—FOLIIS AC FRONDIBUS

The garden thus left to itself for more than half a century had becomeextraordinary and charming. The passers-by of forty years ago halted togaze at it, without a suspicion of the secrets which it hid in itsfresh and verdant depths. More than one dreamer of that epoch oftenallowed his thoughts and his eyes to penetrate indiscreetly between thebars of that ancient, padlocked gate, twisted, tottering, fastened totwo green and moss-covered pillars, and oddly crowned with a pedimentof undecipherable arabesque.
There was a stone bench in one corner, one or two mouldy statues,several lattices which had lost their nails with time, were rotting onthe wall, and there were no walks nor turf; but there was enough grasseverywhere. Gardening had taken its departure, and nature had returned.Weeds abounded, which was a great piece of luck for a poor corner ofland. The festival of gilliflowers was something splendid. Nothing inthis garden obstructed the sacred effort of things towards life;venerable growth reigned there among them. The trees had bent overtowards the nettles, the plant had sprung upward, the branch hadinclined, that which crawls on the earth had gone in search of thatwhich expands in the air, that which floats on the wind had bent overtowards that which trails in the moss; trunks, boughs, leaves, fibres,clusters, tendrils, shoots, spines, thorns, had mingled, crossed,married, confounded themselves in each other; vegetation in a deep andclose embrace, had celebrated and accomplished there, under thewell-pleased eye of the Creator, in that enclosure three hundred feetsquare, the holy mystery of fraternity, symbol of the human fraternity.This garden was no longer a garden, it was a colossal thicket, that isto say, something as impenetrable as a forest, as peopled as a city,quivering like a nest, sombre like a cathedral, fragrant like abouquet, solitary as a tomb, living as a throng.
In Floréal34 this enormous thicket, free behind its gate and within itsfour walls, entered upon the secret labor of germination, quivered inthe rising sun, almost like an animal which drinks in the breaths ofcosmic love, and which feels the sap of April rising and boiling in itsveins, and shakes to the wind its enormous wonderful green locks,sprinkled on the damp earth, on the defaced statues, on the crumblingsteps of the pavilion, and even on the pavement of the deserted street,flowers like stars, dew like pearls, fecundity, beauty, life, joy,perfumes. At midday, a thousand white butterflies took refuge there,and it was a divine spectacle to see that living summer snow whirlingabout there in flakes amid the shade. There, in those gay shadows ofverdure, a throng of innocent voices spoke sweetly to the soul, andwhat the twittering forgot to say the humming completed. In theevening, a dreamy vapor exhaled from the garden and enveloped it; ashroud of mist, a calm and celestial sadness covered it; theintoxicating perfume of the honeysuckles and convolvulus poured outfrom every part of it, like an exquisite and subtle poison; the lastappeals of the woodpeckers and the wagtails were audible as they dozedamong the branches; one felt the sacred intimacy of the birds and thetrees; by day the wings rejoice the leaves, by night the leaves protectthe wings.
In winter the thicket was black, dripping, bristling, shivering, andallowed some glimpse of the house. Instead of flowers on the branchesand dew in the flowers, the long silvery tracks of the snails werevisible on the cold, thick carpet of yellow leaves; but in any fashion,under any aspect, at all seasons, spring, winter, summer, autumn, thistiny enclosure breathed forth melancholy, contemplation, solitude,liberty, the absence of man, the presence of God; and the rusty oldgate had the air of saying: “This garden belongs to me.”

It was of no avail that the pavements of Paris were there on everyside, the classic and splendid hotels of the Rue de Varennes a coupleof paces away, the dome of the Invalides close at hand, the Chamber ofDeputies not far off; the carriages of the Rue de Bourgogne and of theRue Saint-Dominique rumbled luxuriously, in vain, in the vicinity, invain did the yellow, brown, white, and red omnibuses cross each other’scourse at the neighboring crossroads; the Rue Plumet was the desert;and the death of the former proprietors, the revolution which hadpassed over it, the crumbling away of ancient fortunes, absence,forgetfulness, forty years of abandonment and widowhood, had sufficedto restore to this privileged spot ferns, mulleins, hemlock, yarrow,tall weeds, great crimped plants, with large leaves of pale greencloth, lizards, beetles, uneasy and rapid insects; to cause to springforth from the depths of the earth and to reappear between those fourwalls a certain indescribable and savage grandeur; and for nature,which disconcerts the petty arrangements of man, and which shedsherself always thoroughly where she diffuses herself at all, in the antas well as in the eagle, to blossom out in a petty little Parisiangarden with as much rude force and majesty as in a virgin forest of theNew World.
Nothing is small, in fact; any one who is subject to the profound andpenetrating influence of nature knows this. Although no absolutesatisfaction is given to philosophy, either to circumscribe the causeor to limit the effect, the contemplator falls into those unfathomableecstasies caused by these decompositions of force terminating in unity.Everything toils at everything.
Algebra is applied to the clouds; the radiation of the star profits therose; no thinker would venture to affirm that the perfume of thehawthorn is useless to the constellations. Who, then, can calculate thecourse of a molecule? How do we know that the creation of worlds is notdetermined by the fall of grains of sand? Who knows the reciprocal ebband flow of the infinitely great and the infinitely little, thereverberations of causes in the precipices of being, and the avalanchesof creation? The tiniest worm is of importance; the great is little,the little is great; everything is balanced in necessity; alarmingvision for the mind. There are marvellous relations between beings andthings; in that inexhaustible whole, from the sun to the grub, nothingdespises the other; all have need of each other. The light does notbear away terrestrial perfumes into the azure depths, without knowingwhat it is doing; the night distributes stellar essences to thesleeping flowers. All birds that fly have round their leg the thread ofthe infinite. Germination is complicated with the bursting forth of ameteor and with the peck of a swallow cracking its egg, and it placeson one level the birth of an earthworm and the advent of Socrates.Where the telescope ends, the microscope begins. Which of the twopossesses the larger field of vision? Choose. A bit of mould is apleiad of flowers; a nebula is an ant-hill of stars. The samepromiscuousness, and yet more unprecedented, exists between the thingsof the intelligence and the facts of substance. Elements and principlesmingle, combine, wed, multiply with each other, to such a point thatthe material and the moral world are brought eventually to the sameclearness. The phenomenon is perpetually returning upon itself. In thevast cosmic exchanges the universal life goes and comes in unknownquantities, rolling entirely in the invisible mystery of effluvia,employing everything, not losing a single dream, not a single slumber,sowing an animalcule here, crumbling to bits a planet there,oscillating and winding, making of light a force and of thought anelement, disseminated and invisible, dissolving all, except thatgeometrical point, the _I_; bringing everything back to the soul-atom;expanding everything in God, entangling all activity, from summit tobase, in the obscurity of a dizzy mechanism, attaching the flight of aninsect to the movement of the earth, subordinating, who knows? Were itonly by the identity of the law, the evolution of the comet in thefirmament to the whirling of the infusoria in the drop of water. Amachine made of mind. Enormous gearing, the prime motor of which is thegnat, and whose final wheel is the zodiac.



CHAPTER IV—CHANGE OF GATE

It seemed that this garden, created in olden days to conceal wantonmysteries, had been transformed and become fitted to shelter chastemysteries. There were no longer either arbors, or bowling greens, ortunnels, or grottos; there was a magnificent, dishevelled obscurityfalling like a veil over all. Paphos had been made over into Eden. Itis impossible to say what element of repentance had rendered thisretreat wholesome. This flower-girl now offered her blossom to thesoul. This coquettish garden, formerly decidedly compromised, hadreturned to virginity and modesty. A justice assisted by a gardener, agoodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lamoignon, andanother goodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lenôtre, hadturned it about, cut, ruffled, decked, moulded it to gallantry; naturehad taken possession of it once more, had filled it with shade, and hadarranged it for love.
There was, also, in this solitude, a heart which was quite ready. Lovehad only to show himself; he had here a temple composed of verdure,grass, moss, the sight of birds, tender shadows, agitated branches, anda soul made of sweetness, of faith, of candor, of hope, of aspiration,and of illusion.
Cosette had left the convent when she was still almost a child; she wasa little more than fourteen, and she was at the “ungrateful age”; wehave already said, that with the exception of her eyes, she was homelyrather than pretty; she had no ungraceful feature, but she was awkward,thin, timid and bold at once, a grown-up little girl, in short.
Her education was finished, that is to say, she has been taughtreligion, and even and above all, devotion; then “history,” that is tosay the thing that bears that name in convents, geography, grammar, theparticiples, the kings of France, a little music, a little drawing,etc.; but in all other respects she was utterly ignorant, which is agreat charm and a great peril. The soul of a young girl should not beleft in the dark; later on, mirages that are too abrupt and too livelyare formed there, as in a dark chamber. She should be gently anddiscreetly enlightened, rather with the reflection of realities thanwith their harsh and direct light. A useful and graciously austerehalf-light which dissipates puerile fears and obviates falls. There isnothing but the maternal instinct, that admirable intuition composed ofthe memories of the virgin and the experience of the woman, which knowshow this half-light is to be created and of what it should consist.
Nothing supplies the place of this instinct. All the nuns in the worldare not worth as much as one mother in the formation of a young girl’ssoul.
Cosette had had no mother. She had only had many mothers, in theplural.
As for Jean Valjean, he was, indeed, all tenderness, all solicitude;but he was only an old man and he knew nothing at all.
Now, in this work of education, in this grave matter of preparing awoman for life, what science is required to combat that vast ignorancewhich is called innocence!
Nothing prepares a young girl for passions like the convent. Theconvent turns the thoughts in the direction of the unknown. The heart,thus thrown back upon itself, works downward within itself, since itcannot overflow, and grows deep, since it cannot expand. Hence visions,suppositions, conjectures, outlines of romances, a desire foradventures, fantastic constructions, edifices built wholly in the innerobscurity of the mind, sombre and secret abodes where the passionsimmediately find a lodgement as soon as the open gate permits them toenter. The convent is a compression which, in order to triumph over thehuman heart, should last during the whole life.
On quitting the convent, Cosette could have found nothing more sweetand more dangerous than the house in the Rue Plumet. It was thecontinuation of solitude with the beginning of liberty; a garden thatwas closed, but a nature that was acrid, rich, voluptuous, andfragrant; the same dreams as in the convent, but with glimpses of youngmen; a grating, but one that opened on the street.
Still, when she arrived there, we repeat, she was only a child. JeanValjean gave this neglected garden over to her. “Do what you like withit,” he said to her. This amused Cosette; she turned over all theclumps and all the stones, she hunted for “beasts”; she played in it,while awaiting the time when she would dream in it; she loved thisgarden for the insects that she found beneath her feet amid the grass,while awaiting the day when she would love it for the stars that shewould see through the boughs above her head.
And then, she loved her father, that is to say, Jean Valjean, with allher soul, with an innocent filial passion which made the goodman abeloved and charming companion to her. It will be remembered that M.Madeleine had been in the habit of reading a great deal. Jean Valjeanhad continued this practice; he had come to converse well; he possessedthe secret riches and the eloquence of a true and humble mind which hasspontaneously cultivated itself. He retained just enough sharpness toseason his kindness; his mind was rough and his heart was soft. Duringtheir conversations in the Luxembourg, he gave her explanations ofeverything, drawing on what he had read, and also on what he hadsuffered. As she listened to him, Cosette’s eyes wandered vaguelyabout.
This simple man sufficed for Cosette’s thought, the same as the wildgarden sufficed for her eyes. When she had had a good chase after thebutterflies, she came panting up to him and said: “Ah! How I have run!”He kissed her brow.
Cosette adored the goodman. She was always at his heels. Where JeanValjean was, there happiness was. Jean Valjean lived neither in thepavilion nor the garden; she took greater pleasure in the paved backcourtyard, than in the enclosure filled with flowers, and in his littlelodge furnished with straw-seated chairs than in the great drawing-roomhung with tapestry, against which stood tufted easy-chairs. JeanValjean sometimes said to her, smiling at his happiness in beingimportuned: “Do go to your own quarters! Leave me alone a little!”

She gave him those charming and tender scoldings which are so gracefulwhen they come from a daughter to her father.
“Father, I am very cold in your rooms; why don’t you have a carpet hereand a stove?”

“Dear child, there are so many people who are better than I and whohave not even a roof over their heads.”

“Then why is there a fire in my rooms, and everything that is needed?”

“Because you are a woman and a child.”

“Bah! must men be cold and feel uncomfortable?”

“Certain men.”

“That is good, I shall come here so often that you will be obliged tohave a fire.”

And again she said to him:—
“Father, why do you eat horrible bread like that?”

“Because, my daughter.”

“Well, if you eat it, I will eat it too.”

Then, in order to prevent Cosette eating black bread, Jean Valjean atewhite bread.
Cosette had but a confused recollection of her childhood. She prayedmorning and evening for her mother whom she had never known. TheThénardiers had remained with her as two hideous figures in a dream.She remembered that she had gone “one day, at night,” to fetch water ina forest. She thought that it had been very far from Paris. It seemedto her that she had begun to live in an abyss, and that it was JeanValjean who had rescued her from it. Her childhood produced upon herthe effect of a time when there had been nothing around her butmillepeds, spiders, and serpents. When she meditated in the evening,before falling asleep, as she had not a very clear idea that she wasJean Valjean’s daughter, and that he was her father, she fancied thatthe soul of her mother had passed into that good man and had come todwell near her.
When he was seated, she leaned her cheek against his white hair, anddropped a silent tear, saying to herself: “Perhaps this man is mymother.”

Cosette, although this is a strange statement to make, in the profoundignorance of a girl brought up in a convent,—maternity being alsoabsolutely unintelligible to virginity,—had ended by fancying that shehad had as little mother as possible. She did not even know hermother’s name. Whenever she asked Jean Valjean, Jean Valjean remainedsilent. If she repeated her question, he responded with a smile. Onceshe insisted; the smile ended in a tear.
This silence on the part of Jean Valjean covered Fantine with darkness.
Was it prudence? Was it respect? Was it a fear that he should deliverthis name to the hazards of another memory than his own?
So long as Cosette had been small, Jean Valjean had been willing totalk to her of her mother; when she became a young girl, it wasimpossible for him to do so. It seemed to him that he no longer dared.Was it because of Cosette? Was it because of Fantine? He felt a certainreligious horror at letting that shadow enter Cosette’s thought; and ofplacing a third in their destiny. The more sacred this shade was tohim, the more did it seem that it was to be feared. He thought ofFantine, and felt himself overwhelmed with silence.
Through the darkness, he vaguely perceived something which appeared tohave its finger on its lips. Had all the modesty which had been inFantine, and which had violently quitted her during her lifetime,returned to rest upon her after her death, to watch in indignation overthe peace of that dead woman, and in its shyness, to keep her in hergrave? Was Jean Valjean unconsciously submitting to the pressure? Wewho believe in death, are not among the number who will reject thismysterious explanation.
Hence the impossibility of uttering, even for Cosette, that name ofFantine.
One day Cosette said to him:—
“Father, I saw my mother in a dream last night. She had two big wings.My mother must have been almost a saint during her life.”

“Through martyrdom,” replied Jean Valjean.
However, Jean Valjean was happy.
When Cosette went out with him, she leaned on his arm, proud and happy,in the plenitude of her heart. Jean Valjean felt his heart melt withinhim with delight, at all these sparks of a tenderness so exclusive, sowholly satisfied with himself alone. The poor man trembled, inundatedwith angelic joy; he declared to himself ecstatically that this wouldlast all their lives; he told himself that he really had not sufferedsufficiently to merit so radiant a bliss, and he thanked God, in thedepths of his soul, for having permitted him to be loved thus, he, awretch, by that innocent being.



CHAPTER V—THE ROSE PERCEIVES THAT IT IS AN ENGINE OF WAR

One day, Cosette chanced to look at herself in her mirror, and she saidto herself: “Really!” It seemed to her almost that she was pretty. Thisthrew her in a singularly troubled state of mind. Up to that moment shehad never thought of her face. She saw herself in her mirror, but shedid not look at herself. And then, she had so often been told that shewas homely; Jean Valjean alone said gently: “No indeed! no indeed!” Atall events, Cosette had always thought herself homely, and had grown upin that belief with the easy resignation of childhood. And here, all atonce, was her mirror saying to her, as Jean Valjean had said: “Noindeed!” That night, she did not sleep. “What if I were pretty!” shethought. “How odd it would be if I were pretty!” And she recalled thoseof her companions whose beauty had produced a sensation in the convent,and she said to herself: “What! Am I to be like MademoiselleSo-and-So?”

The next morning she looked at herself again, not by accident thistime, and she was assailed with doubts: “Where did I get such an idea?”said she; “no, I am ugly.” She had not slept well, that was all, hereyes were sunken and she was pale. She had not felt very joyous on thepreceding evening in the belief that she was beautiful, but it made hervery sad not to be able to believe in it any longer. She did not lookat herself again, and for more than a fortnight she tried to dress herhair with her back turned to the mirror.
In the evening, after dinner, she generally embroidered in wool or didsome convent needlework in the drawing-room, and Jean Valjean readbeside her. Once she raised her eyes from her work, and was renderedquite uneasy by the manner in which her father was gazing at her.
On another occasion, she was passing along the street, and it seemed toher that some one behind her, whom she did not see, said: “A prettywoman! but badly dressed.” “Bah!” she thought, “he does not mean me. Iam well dressed and ugly.” She was then wearing a plush hat and hermerino gown.
At last, one day when she was in the garden, she heard poor oldToussaint saying: “Do you notice how pretty Cosette is growing, sir?”Cosette did not hear her father’s reply, but Toussaint’s words caused asort of commotion within her. She fled from the garden, ran up to herroom, flew to the looking-glass,—it was three months since she hadlooked at herself,—and gave vent to a cry. She had just dazzledherself.
She was beautiful and lovely; she could not help agreeing withToussaint and her mirror. Her figure was formed, her skin had grownwhite, her hair was lustrous, an unaccustomed splendor had been lightedin her blue eyes. The consciousness of her beauty burst upon her in aninstant, like the sudden advent of daylight; other people noticed italso, Toussaint had said so, it was evidently she of whom the passer-byhad spoken, there could no longer be any doubt of that; she descendedto the garden again, thinking herself a queen, imagining that she heardthe birds singing, though it was winter, seeing the sky gilded, the sunamong the trees, flowers in the thickets, distracted, wild, ininexpressible delight.
Jean Valjean, on his side, experienced a deep and undefinableoppression at heart.
In fact, he had, for some time past, been contemplating with terrorthat beauty which seemed to grow more radiant every day on Cosette’ssweet face. The dawn that was smiling for all was gloomy for him.
Cosette had been beautiful for a tolerably long time before she becameaware of it herself. But, from the very first day, that unexpectedlight which was rising slowly and enveloping the whole of the younggirl’s person, wounded Jean Valjean’s sombre eye. He felt that it was achange in a happy life, a life so happy that he did not dare to movefor fear of disarranging something. This man, who had passed throughall manner of distresses, who was still all bleeding from the bruisesof fate, who had been almost wicked and who had become almost a saint,who, after having dragged the chain of the galleys, was now draggingthe invisible but heavy chain of indefinite misery, this man whom thelaw had not released from its grasp and who could be seized at anymoment and brought back from the obscurity of his virtue to the broaddaylight of public opprobrium, this man accepted all, excused all,pardoned all, and merely asked of Providence, of man, of the law, ofsociety, of nature, of the world, one thing, that Cosette might lovehim!
That Cosette might continue to love him! That God would not prevent theheart of the child from coming to him, and from remaining with him!Beloved by Cosette, he felt that he was healed, rested, appeased,loaded with benefits, recompensed, crowned. Beloved by Cosette, it waswell with him! He asked nothing more! Had any one said to him: “Do youwant anything better?” he would have answered: “No.” God might havesaid to him: “Do you desire heaven?” and he would have replied: “Ishould lose by it.”

Everything which could affect this situation, if only on the surface,made him shudder like the beginning of something new. He had neverknown very distinctly himself what the beauty of a woman means; but heunderstood instinctively, that it was something terrible.
He gazed with terror on this beauty, which was blossoming out ever moretriumphant and superb beside him, beneath his very eyes, on theinnocent and formidable brow of that child, from the depths of herhomeliness, of his old age, of his misery, of his reprobation.
He said to himself: “How beautiful she is! What is to become of me?”

There, moreover, lay the difference between his tenderness and thetenderness of a mother. What he beheld with anguish, a mother wouldhave gazed upon with joy.
The first symptoms were not long in making their appearance.
On the very morrow of the day on which she had said to herself:“Decidedly I am beautiful!” Cosette began to pay attention to hertoilet. She recalled the remark of that passer-by: “Pretty, but badlydressed,” the breath of an oracle which had passed beside her and hadvanished, after depositing in her heart one of the two germs which aredestined, later on, to fill the whole life of woman, coquetry. Love isthe other.
With faith in her beauty, the whole feminine soul expanded within her.She conceived a horror for her merinos, and shame for her plush hat.Her father had never refused her anything. She at once acquired thewhole science of the bonnet, the gown, the mantle, the boot, the cuff,the stuff which is in fashion, the color which is becoming, thatscience which makes of the Parisian woman something so charming, sodeep, and so dangerous. The words _heady woman_ were invented for theParisienne.
In less than a month, little Cosette, in that Thebaid of the Rue deBabylone, was not only one of the prettiest, but one of the “bestdressed” women in Paris, which means a great deal more.
She would have liked to encounter her “passer-by,” to see what he wouldsay, and to “teach him a lesson!” The truth is, that she was ravishingin every respect, and that she distinguished the difference between abonnet from Gérard and one from Herbaut in the most marvellous way.
Jean Valjean watched these ravages with anxiety. He who felt that hecould never do anything but crawl, walk at the most, beheld wingssprouting on Cosette.
Moreover, from the mere inspection of Cosette’s toilet, a woman wouldhave recognized the fact that she had no mother. Certain littleproprieties, certain special conventionalities, were not observed byCosette. A mother, for instance, would have told her that a young girldoes not dress in damask.
The first day that Cosette went out in her black damask gown andmantle, and her white crape bonnet, she took Jean Valjean’s arm, gay,radiant, rosy, proud, dazzling. “Father,” she said, “how do you like mein this guise?” Jean Valjean replied in a voice which resembled thebitter voice of an envious man: “Charming!” He was the same as usualduring their walk. On their return home, he asked Cosette:—
“Won’t you put on that other gown and bonnet again,—you know the ones Imean?”

This took place in Cosette’s chamber. Cosette turned towards thewardrobe where her cast-off schoolgirl’s clothes were hanging.
“That disguise!” said she. “Father, what do you want me to do with it?Oh no, the idea! I shall never put on those horrors again. With thatmachine on my head, I have the air of Madame Mad-dog.”

Jean Valjean heaved a deep sigh.
From that moment forth, he noticed that Cosette, who had alwaysheretofore asked to remain at home, saying: “Father, I enjoy myselfmore here with you,” now was always asking to go out. In fact, what isthe use of having a handsome face and a delicious costume if one doesnot display them?
He also noticed that Cosette had no longer the same taste for the backgarden. Now she preferred the garden, and did not dislike to promenadeback and forth in front of the railed fence. Jean Valjean, who was shy,never set foot in the garden. He kept to his back yard, like a dog.
Cosette, in gaining the knowledge that she was beautiful, lost thegrace of ignoring it. An exquisite grace, for beauty enhanced byingenuousness is ineffable, and nothing is so adorable as a dazzlingand innocent creature who walks along, holding in her hand the key toparadise without being conscious of it. But what she had lost iningenuous grace, she gained in pensive and serious charm. Her wholeperson, permeated with the joy of youth, of innocence, and of beauty,breathed forth a splendid melancholy.
It was at this epoch that Marius, after the lapse of six months, sawher once more at the Luxembourg.



CHAPTER VI—THE BATTLE BEGUN

Cosette in her shadow, like Marius in his, was all ready to take fire.Destiny, with its mysterious and fatal patience, slowly drew togetherthese two beings, all charged and all languishing with the stormyelectricity of passion, these two souls which were laden with love astwo clouds are laden with lightning, and which were bound to overflowand mingle in a look like the clouds in a flash of fire.
The glance has been so much abused in love romances that it has finallyfallen into disrepute. One hardly dares to say, nowadays, that twobeings fell in love because they looked at each other. That is the waypeople do fall in love, nevertheless, and the only way. The rest isnothing, but the rest comes afterwards. Nothing is more real than thesegreat shocks which two souls convey to each other by the exchange ofthat spark.
At that particular hour when Cosette unconsciously darted that glancewhich troubled Marius, Marius had no suspicion that he had alsolaunched a look which disturbed Cosette.
He caused her the same good and the same evil.
She had been in the habit of seeing him for a long time, and she hadscrutinized him as girls scrutinize and see, while looking elsewhere.Marius still considered Cosette ugly, when she had already begun tothink Marius handsome. But as he paid no attention to her, the youngman was nothing to her.
Still, she could not refrain from saying to herself that he hadbeautiful hair, beautiful eyes, handsome teeth, a charming tone ofvoice when she heard him conversing with his comrades, that he heldhimself badly when he walked, if you like, but with a grace that wasall his own, that he did not appear to be at all stupid, that his wholeperson was noble, gentle, simple, proud, and that, in short, though heseemed to be poor, yet his air was fine.
On the day when their eyes met at last, and said to each other thosefirst, obscure, and ineffable things which the glance lisps, Cosettedid not immediately understand. She returned thoughtfully to the housein the Rue de l’Ouest, where Jean Valjean, according to his custom, hadcome to spend six weeks. The next morning, on waking, she thought ofthat strange young man, so long indifferent and icy, who now seemed topay attention to her, and it did not appear to her that this attentionwas the least in the world agreeable to her. She was, on the contrary,somewhat incensed at this handsome and disdainful individual. Asubstratum of war stirred within her. It struck her, and the ideacaused her a wholly childish joy, that she was going to take herrevenge at last.
Knowing that she was beautiful, she was thoroughly conscious, though inan indistinct fashion, that she possessed a weapon. Women play withtheir beauty as children do with a knife. They wound themselves.
The reader will recall Marius’ hesitations, his palpitations, histerrors. He remained on his bench and did not approach. This vexedCosette. One day, she said to Jean Valjean: “Father, let us strollabout a little in that direction.” Seeing that Marius did not come toher, she went to him. In such cases, all women resemble Mahomet. Andthen, strange to say, the first symptom of true love in a young man istimidity; in a young girl it is boldness. This is surprising, and yetnothing is more simple. It is the two sexes tending to approach eachother and assuming, each the other’s qualities.
That day, Cosette’s glance drove Marius beside himself, and Marius’glance set Cosette to trembling. Marius went away confident, andCosette uneasy. From that day forth, they adored each other.
The first thing that Cosette felt was a confused and profoundmelancholy. It seemed to her that her soul had become black since theday before. She no longer recognized it. The whiteness of soul in younggirls, which is composed of coldness and gayety, resembles snow. Itmelts in love, which is its sun.
Cosette did not know what love was. She had never heard the worduttered in its terrestrial sense. On the books of profane music whichentered the convent, _amour_ (love) was replaced by _tambour_ (drum) or_pandour_. This created enigmas which exercised the imaginations of the_big girls_, such as: _Ah, how delightful is the drum! _ or, _Pity isnot a pandour_. But Cosette had left the convent too early to haveoccupied herself much with the “drum.” Therefore, she did not know whatname to give to what she now felt. Is any one the less ill because onedoes not know the name of one’s malady?
She loved with all the more passion because she loved ignorantly. Shedid not know whether it was a good thing or a bad thing, useful ordangerous, eternal or temporary, allowable or prohibited; she loved.She would have been greatly astonished, had any one said to her: “Youdo not sleep? But that is forbidden! You do not eat? Why, that is verybad! You have oppressions and palpitations of the heart? That must notbe! You blush and turn pale, when a certain being clad in black appearsat the end of a certain green walk? But that is abominable!” She wouldnot have understood, and she would have replied: “What fault is thereof mine in a matter in which I have no power and of which I knownothing?”

It turned out that the love which presented itself was exactly suitedto the state of her soul. It was a sort of admiration at a distance, amute contemplation, the deification of a stranger. It was theapparition of youth to youth, the dream of nights become a reality yetremaining a dream, the longed-for phantom realized and made flesh atlast, but having as yet, neither name, nor fault, nor spot, norexigence, nor defect; in a word, the distant lover who lingered in theideal, a chimæra with a form. Any nearer and more palpable meetingwould have alarmed Cosette at this first stage, when she was still halfimmersed in the exaggerated mists of the cloister. She had all thefears of children and all the fears of nuns combined. The spirit of theconvent, with which she had been permeated for the space of five years,was still in the process of slow evaporation from her person, and madeeverything tremble around her. In this situation he was not a lover, hewas not even an admirer, he was a vision. She set herself to adoringMarius as something charming, luminous, and impossible.
As extreme innocence borders on extreme coquetry, she smiled at himwith all frankness.
Every day, she looked forward to the hour for their walk withimpatience, she found Marius there, she felt herself unspeakably happy,and thought in all sincerity that she was expressing her whole thoughtwhen she said to Jean Valjean:—
“What a delicious garden that Luxembourg is!”

Marius and Cosette were in the dark as to one another. They did notaddress each other, they did not salute each other, they did not knoweach other; they saw each other; and like stars of heaven which areseparated by millions of leagues, they lived by gazing at each other.
It was thus that Cosette gradually became a woman and developed,beautiful and loving, with a consciousness of her beauty, and inignorance of her love. She was a coquette to boot through herignorance.



CHAPTER VII—TO ONE SADNESS OPPOSE A SADNESS AND A HALF

All situations have their instincts. Old and eternal Mother Naturewarned Jean Valjean in a dim way of the presence of Marius. JeanValjean shuddered to the very bottom of his soul. Jean Valjean sawnothing, knew nothing, and yet he scanned with obstinate attention, thedarkness in which he walked, as though he felt on one side of himsomething in process of construction, and on the other, something whichwas crumbling away. Marius, also warned, and, in accordance with thedeep law of God, by that same Mother Nature, did all he could to keepout of sight of “the father.” Nevertheless, it came to pass that JeanValjean sometimes espied him. Marius’ manners were no longer in theleast natural. He exhibited ambiguous prudence and awkward daring. Heno longer came quite close to them as formerly. He seated himself at adistance and pretended to be reading; why did he pretend that? Formerlyhe had come in his old coat, now he wore his new one every day; JeanValjean was not sure that he did not have his hair curled, his eyeswere very queer, he wore gloves; in short, Jean Valjean cordiallydetested this young man.
Cosette allowed nothing to be divined. Without knowing just what wasthe matter with her she was convinced that there was something in it,and that it must be concealed.
There was a coincidence between the taste for the toilet which hadrecently come to Cosette, and the habit of new clothes developed bythat stranger which was very repugnant to Jean Valjean. It might beaccidental, no doubt, certainly, but it was a menacing accident.
He never opened his mouth to Cosette about this stranger. One day,however, he could not refrain from so doing, and, with that vaguedespair which suddenly casts the lead into the depths of its despair,he said to her: “What a very pedantic air that young man has!”

Cosette, but a year before only an indifferent little girl, would havereplied: “Why, no, he is charming.” Ten years later, with the love ofMarius in her heart, she would have answered: “A pedant, andinsufferable to the sight! You are right!”—At the moment in life andthe heart which she had then attained, she contented herself withreplying, with supreme calmness: “That young man!”

As though she now beheld him for the first time in her life.
“How stupid I am!” thought Jean Valjean. “She had not noticed him. Itis I who have pointed him out to her.”

Oh, simplicity of the old! oh, the depth of children!
It is one of the laws of those fresh years of suffering and trouble, ofthose vivacious conflicts between a first love and the first obstacles,that the young girl does not allow herself to be caught in any trapwhatever, and that the young man falls into every one. Jean Valjean hadinstituted an undeclared war against Marius, which Marius, with thesublime stupidity of his passion and his age, did not divine. JeanValjean laid a host of ambushes for him; he changed his hour, hechanged his bench, he forgot his handkerchief, he came alone to theLuxembourg; Marius dashed headlong into all these snares; and to allthe interrogation marks planted by Jean Valjean in his pathway, heingenuously answered “yes.” But Cosette remained immured in herapparent unconcern and in her imperturbable tranquillity, so that JeanValjean arrived at the following conclusion: “That ninny is madly inlove with Cosette, but Cosette does not even know that he exists.”

Nonetheless did he bear in his heart a mournful tremor. The minute whenCosette would love might strike at any moment. Does not everythingbegin with indifference?
Only once did Cosette make a mistake and alarm him. He rose from hisseat to depart, after a stay of three hours, and she said: “What,already?”

Jean Valjean had not discontinued his trips to the Luxembourg, as hedid not wish to do anything out of the way, and as, above all things,he feared to arouse Cosette; but during the hours which were so sweetto the lovers, while Cosette was sending her smile to the intoxicatedMarius, who perceived nothing else now, and who now saw nothing in allthe world but an adored and radiant face, Jean Valjean was fixing onMarius flashing and terrible eyes. He, who had finally come to believehimself incapable of a malevolent feeling, experienced moments whenMarius was present, in which he thought he was becoming savage andferocious once more, and he felt the old depths of his soul, which hadformerly contained so much wrath, opening once more and rising upagainst that young man. It almost seemed to him that unknown craterswere forming in his bosom.
What! he was there, that creature! What was he there for? He camecreeping about, smelling out, examining, trying! He came, saying: “Hey!Why not?” He came to prowl about his, Jean Valjean’s, life! to prowlabout his happiness, with the purpose of seizing it and bearing itaway!
Jean Valjean added: “Yes, that’s it! What is he in search of? Anadventure! What does he want? A love affair! A love affair! And I?What! I have been first, the most wretched of men, and then the mostunhappy, and I have traversed sixty years of life on my knees, I havesuffered everything that man can suffer, I have grown old withouthaving been young, I have lived without a family, without relatives,without friends, without life, without children, I have left my bloodon every stone, on every bramble, on every mile-post, along every wall,I have been gentle, though others have been hard to me, and kind,although others have been malicious, I have become an honest man oncemore, in spite of everything, I have repented of the evil that I havedone and have forgiven the evil that has been done to me, and at themoment when I receive my recompense, at the moment when it is all over,at the moment when I am just touching the goal, at the moment when Ihave what I desire, it is well, it is good, I have paid, I have earnedit, all this is to take flight, all this will vanish, and I shall loseCosette, and I shall lose my life, my joy, my soul, because it haspleased a great booby to come and lounge at the Luxembourg.”

Then his eyes were filled with a sad and extraordinary gleam.
It was no longer a man gazing at a man; it was no longer an enemysurveying an enemy. It was a dog scanning a thief.
The reader knows the rest. Marius pursued his senseless course. One dayhe followed Cosette to the Rue de l’Ouest. Another day he spoke to theporter. The porter, on his side, spoke, and said to Jean Valjean:“Monsieur, who is that curious young man who is asking for you?” On themorrow Jean Valjean bestowed on Marius that glance which Marius at lastperceived. A week later, Jean Valjean had taken his departure. He sworeto himself that he would never again set foot either in the Luxembourgor in the Rue de l’Ouest. He returned to the Rue Plumet.
Cosette did not complain, she said nothing, she asked no questions, shedid not seek to learn his reasons; she had already reached the pointwhere she was afraid of being divined, and of betraying herself. JeanValjean had no experience of these miseries, the only miseries whichare charming and the only ones with which he was not acquainted; theconsequence was that he did not understand the grave significance ofCosette’s silence.
He merely noticed that she had grown sad, and he grew gloomy. On hisside and on hers, inexperience had joined issue.
Once he made a trial. He asked Cosette:—
“Would you like to come to the Luxembourg?”

A ray illuminated Cosette’s pale face.
“Yes,” said she.
They went thither. Three months had elapsed. Marius no longer wentthere. Marius was not there.
On the following day, Jean Valjean asked Cosette again:—
“Would you like to come to the Luxembourg?”

She replied, sadly and gently:—
“No.”

Jean Valjean was hurt by this sadness, and heart-broken at thisgentleness.
What was going on in that mind which was so young and yet already soimpenetrable? What was on its way there within? What was taking placein Cosette’s soul? Sometimes, instead of going to bed, Jean Valjeanremained seated on his pallet, with his head in his hands, and hepassed whole nights asking himself: “What has Cosette in her mind?” andin thinking of the things that she might be thinking about.
Oh! at such moments, what mournful glances did he cast towards thatcloister, that chaste peak, that abode of angels, that inaccessibleglacier of virtue! How he contemplated, with despairing ecstasy, thatconvent garden, full of ignored flowers and cloistered virgins, whereall perfumes and all souls mount straight to heaven! How he adored thatEden forever closed against him, whence he had voluntarily and madlyemerged! How he regretted his abnegation and his folly in havingbrought Cosette back into the world, poor hero of sacrifice, seized andhurled to the earth by his very self-devotion! How he said to himself,“What have I done?”

However, nothing of all this was perceptible to Cosette. No ill-temper,no harshness. His face was always serene and kind. Jean Valjean’smanners were more tender and more paternal than ever. If anything couldhave betrayed his lack of joy, it was his increased suavity.
On her side, Cosette languished. She suffered from the absence ofMarius as she had rejoiced in his presence, peculiarly, without exactlybeing conscious of it. When Jean Valjean ceased to take her on theircustomary strolls, a feminine instinct murmured confusedly, at thebottom of her heart, that she must not seem to set store on theLuxembourg garden, and that if this proved to be a matter ofindifference to her, her father would take her thither once more. Butdays, weeks, months, elapsed. Jean Valjean had tacitly acceptedCosette’s tacit consent. She regretted it. It was too late. So Mariushad disappeared; all was over. The day on which she returned to theLuxembourg, Marius was no longer there. What was to be done? Should sheever find him again? She felt an anguish at her heart, which nothingrelieved, and which augmented every day; she no longer knew whether itwas winter or summer, whether it was raining or shining, whether thebirds were singing, whether it was the season for dahlias or daisies,whether the Luxembourg was more charming than the Tuileries, whetherthe linen which the laundress brought home was starched too much or notenough, whether Toussaint had done “her marketing” well or ill; and sheremained dejected, absorbed, attentive to but a single thought, hereyes vague and staring as when one gazes by night at a black andfathomless spot where an apparition has vanished.
However, she did not allow Jean Valjean to perceive anything of this,except her pallor.
She still wore her sweet face for him.
This pallor sufficed but too thoroughly to trouble Jean Valjean.Sometimes he asked her:—
“What is the matter with you?”

She replied: “There is nothing the matter with me.”

And after a silence, when she divined that he was sad also, she wouldadd:—
“And you, father—is there anything wrong with you?”

“With me? Nothing,” said he.
These two beings who had loved each other so exclusively, and with sotouching an affection, and who had lived so long for each other nowsuffered side by side, each on the other’s account; withoutacknowledging it to each other, without anger towards each other, andwith a smile.



CHAPTER VIII—THE CHAIN-GANG

Jean Valjean was the more unhappy of the two. Youth, even in itssorrows, always possesses its own peculiar radiance.
At times, Jean Valjean suffered so greatly that he became puerile. Itis the property of grief to cause the childish side of man to reappear.He had an unconquerable conviction that Cosette was escaping from him.He would have liked to resist, to retain her, to arouse her enthusiasmby some external and brilliant matter. These ideas, puerile, as we havejust said, and at the same time senile, conveyed to him, by their verychildishness, a tolerably just notion of the influence of gold lace onthe imaginations of young girls. He once chanced to see a general onhorseback, in full uniform, pass along the street, Comte Coutard, thecommandant of Paris. He envied that gilded man; what happiness it wouldbe, he said to himself, if he could put on that suit which was anincontestable thing; and if Cosette could behold him thus, she would bedazzled, and when he had Cosette on his arm and passed the gates of theTuileries, the guard would present arms to him, and that would sufficefor Cosette, and would dispel her idea of looking at young men.
An unforeseen shock was added to these sad reflections.
In the isolated life which they led, and since they had come to dwellin the Rue Plumet, they had contracted one habit. They sometimes took apleasure trip to see the sun rise, a mild species of enjoyment whichbefits those who are entering life and those who are quitting it.
For those who love solitude, a walk in the early morning is equivalentto a stroll by night, with the cheerfulness of nature added. Thestreets are deserted and the birds are singing. Cosette, a birdherself, liked to rise early. These matutinal excursions were plannedon the preceding evening. He proposed, and she agreed. It was arrangedlike a plot, they set out before daybreak, and these trips were so manysmall delights for Cosette. These innocent eccentricities please youngpeople.
Jean Valjean’s inclination led him, as we have seen, to the leastfrequented spots, to solitary nooks, to forgotten places. There thenexisted, in the vicinity of the barriers of Paris, a sort of poormeadows, which were almost confounded with the city, where grew insummer sickly grain, and which, in autumn, after the harvest had beengathered, presented the appearance, not of having been reaped, butpeeled. Jean Valjean loved to haunt these fields. Cosette was not boredthere. It meant solitude to him and liberty to her. There, she became alittle girl once more, she could run and almost play; she took off herhat, laid it on Jean Valjean’s knees, and gathered bunches of flowers.She gazed at the butterflies on the flowers, but did not catch them;gentleness and tenderness are born with love, and the young girl whocherishes within her breast a trembling and fragile ideal has mercy onthe wing of a butterfly. She wove garlands of poppies, which she placedon her head, and which, crossed and penetrated with sunlight, glowinguntil they flamed, formed for her rosy face a crown of burning embers.
Even after their life had grown sad, they kept up their custom of earlystrolls.
One morning in October, therefore, tempted by the serene perfection ofthe autumn of 1831, they set out, and found themselves at break of daynear the Barrière du Maine. It was not dawn, it was daybreak; adelightful and stern moment. A few constellations here and there in thedeep, pale azure, the earth all black, the heavens all white, a quiveramid the blades of grass, everywhere the mysterious chill of twilight.A lark, which seemed mingled with the stars, was carolling at aprodigious height, and one would have declared that that hymn ofpettiness calmed immensity. In the East, the Val-de-Grâce projected itsdark mass on the clear horizon with the sharpness of steel; Venusdazzlingly brilliant was rising behind that dome and had the air of asoul making its escape from a gloomy edifice.
All was peace and silence; there was no one on the road; a few straylaborers, of whom they caught barely a glimpse, were on their way totheir work along the side-paths.
Jean Valjean was sitting in a cross-walk on some planks deposited atthe gate of a timber-yard. His face was turned towards the highway, hisback towards the light; he had forgotten the sun which was on the pointof rising; he had sunk into one of those profound absorptions in whichthe mind becomes concentrated, which imprison even the eye, and whichare equivalent to four walls. There are meditations which may be calledvertical; when one is at the bottom of them, time is required to returnto earth. Jean Valjean had plunged into one of these reveries. He wasthinking of Cosette, of the happiness that was possible if nothing camebetween him and her, of the light with which she filled his life, alight which was but the emanation of her soul. He was almost happy inhis reverie. Cosette, who was standing beside him, was gazing at theclouds as they turned rosy.
All at once Cosette exclaimed: “Father, I should think some one wascoming yonder.” Jean Valjean raised his eyes.
Cosette was right. The causeway which leads to the ancient Barrière duMaine is a prolongation, as the reader knows, of the Rue de Sèvres, andis cut at right angles by the inner boulevard. At the elbow of thecauseway and the boulevard, at the spot where it branches, they heard anoise which it was difficult to account for at that hour, and a sort ofconfused pile made its appearance. Some shapeless thing which wascoming from the boulevard was turning into the road.
It grew larger, it seemed to move in an orderly manner, though it wasbristling and quivering; it seemed to be a vehicle, but its load couldnot be distinctly made out. There were horses, wheels, shouts; whipswere cracking. By degrees the outlines became fixed, although bathed inshadows. It was a vehicle, in fact, which had just turned from theboulevard into the highway, and which was directing its course towardsthe barrier near which sat Jean Valjean; a second, of the same aspect,followed, then a third, then a fourth; seven chariots made theirappearance in succession, the heads of the horses touching the rear ofthe wagon in front. Figures were moving on these vehicles, flashes werevisible through the dusk as though there were naked swords there, aclanking became audible which resembled the rattling of chains, and asthis something advanced, the sound of voices waxed louder, and itturned into a terrible thing such as emerges from the cave of dreams.
As it drew nearer, it assumed a form, and was outlined behind the treeswith the pallid hue of an apparition; the mass grew white; the day,which was slowly dawning, cast a wan light on this swarming heap whichwas at once both sepulchral and living, the heads of the figures turnedinto the faces of corpses, and this is what it proved to be:—
Seven wagons were driving in a file along the road. The first six weresingularly constructed. They resembled coopers’ drays; they consistedof long ladders placed on two wheels and forming barrows at their rearextremities. Each dray, or rather let us say, each ladder, was attachedto four horses harnessed tandem. On these ladders strange clusters ofmen were being drawn. In the faint light, these men were to be divinedrather than seen. Twenty-four on each vehicle, twelve on a side, backto back, facing the passers-by, their legs dangling in the air,—thiswas the manner in which these men were travelling, and behind theirbacks they had something which clanked, and which was a chain, and ontheir necks something which shone, and which was an iron collar. Eachman had his collar, but the chain was for all; so that if these fourand twenty men had occasion to alight from the dray and walk, they wereseized with a sort of inexorable unity, and were obliged to wind overthe ground with the chain for a backbone, somewhat after the fashion ofmillepeds. In the back and front of each vehicle, two men armed withmuskets stood erect, each holding one end of the chain under his foot.The iron necklets were square. The seventh vehicle, a huge rack-sidedbaggage wagon, without a hood, had four wheels and six horses, andcarried a sonorous pile of iron boilers, cast-iron pots, braziers, andchains, among which were mingled several men who were pinioned andstretched at full length, and who seemed to be ill. This wagon, alllattice-work, was garnished with dilapidated hurdles which appeared tohave served for former punishments. These vehicles kept to the middleof the road. On each side marched a double hedge of guards of infamousaspect, wearing three-cornered hats, like the soldiers under theDirectory, shabby, covered with spots and holes, muffled in uniforms ofveterans and the trousers of undertakers’ men, half gray, half blue,which were almost hanging in rags, with red epaulets, yellow shoulderbelts, short sabres, muskets, and cudgels; they were a species ofsoldier-blackguards. These myrmidons seemed composed of the abjectnessof the beggar and the authority of the executioner. The one whoappeared to be their chief held a postilion’s whip in his hand. Allthese details, blurred by the dimness of dawn, became more and moreclearly outlined as the light increased. At the head and in the rear ofthe convoy rode mounted gendarmes, serious and with sword in fist.
This procession was so long that when the first vehicle reached thebarrier, the last was barely debauching from the boulevard. A throng,sprung, it is impossible to say whence, and formed in a twinkling, asis frequently the case in Paris, pressed forward from both sides of theroad and looked on. In the neighboring lanes the shouts of peoplecalling to each other and the wooden shoes of market-gardenershastening up to gaze were audible.
The men massed upon the drays allowed themselves to be jolted along insilence. They were livid with the chill of morning. They all wore linentrousers, and their bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes. The restof their costume was a fantasy of wretchedness. Their accoutrementswere horribly incongruous; nothing is more funereal than the harlequinin rags. Battered felt hats, tarpaulin caps, hideous woollen nightcaps,and, side by side with a short blouse, a black coat broken at theelbow; many wore women’s headgear, others had baskets on their heads;hairy breasts were visible, and through the rent in their garmentstattooed designs could be descried; temples of Love, flaming hearts,Cupids; eruptions and unhealthy red blotches could also be seen. Two orthree had a straw rope attached to the cross-bar of the dray, andsuspended under them like a stirrup, which supported their feet. One ofthem held in his hand and raised to his mouth something which had theappearance of a black stone and which he seemed to be gnawing; it wasbread which he was eating. There were no eyes there which were noteither dry, dulled, or flaming with an evil light. The escort troopcursed, the men in chains did not utter a syllable; from time to timethe sound of a blow became audible as the cudgels descended onshoulder-blades or skulls; some of these men were yawning; their ragswere terrible; their feet hung down, their shoulders oscillated, theirheads clashed together, their fetters clanked, their eyes glaredferociously, their fists clenched or fell open inertly like the handsof corpses; in the rear of the convoy ran a band of children screamingwith laughter.
This file of vehicles, whatever its nature was, was mournful. It wasevident that to-morrow, that an hour hence, a pouring rain mightdescend, that it might be followed by another and another, and thattheir dilapidated garments would be drenched, that once soaked, thesemen would not get dry again, that once chilled, they would not againget warm, that their linen trousers would be glued to their bones bythe downpour, that the water would fill their shoes, that no lashesfrom the whips would be able to prevent their jaws from chattering,that the chain would continue to bind them by the neck, that their legswould continue to dangle, and it was impossible not to shudder at thesight of these human beings thus bound and passive beneath the coldclouds of autumn, and delivered over to the rain, to the blast, to allthe furies of the air, like trees and stones.
Blows from the cudgel were not omitted even in the case of the sickmen, who lay there knotted with ropes and motionless on the seventhwagon, and who appeared to have been tossed there like sacks filledwith misery.
Suddenly, the sun made its appearance; the immense light of the Orientburst forth, and one would have said that it had set fire to all thoseferocious heads. Their tongues were unloosed; a conflagration of grins,oaths, and songs exploded. The broad horizontal sheet of light severedthe file in two parts, illuminating heads and bodies, leaving feet andwheels in the obscurity. Thoughts made their appearance on these faces;it was a terrible moment; visible demons with their masks removed,fierce souls laid bare. Though lighted up, this wild throng remained ingloom. Some, who were gay, had in their mouths quills through whichthey blew vermin over the crowd, picking out the women; the dawnaccentuated these lamentable profiles with the blackness of itsshadows; there was not one of these creatures who was not deformed byreason of wretchedness; and the whole was so monstrous that one wouldhave said that the sun’s brilliancy had been changed into the glare ofthe lightning. The wagon-load which headed the line had struck up asong, and were shouting at the top of their voices with a haggardjoviality, a pot-pourri by Desaugiers, then famous, called _TheVestal_; the trees shivered mournfully; in the cross-lanes,countenances of bourgeois listened in an idiotic delight to thesecoarse strains droned by spectres.
All sorts of distress met in this procession as in chaos; here were tobe found the facial angles of every sort of beast, old men, youths,bald heads, gray beards, cynical monstrosities, sour resignation,savage grins, senseless attitudes, snouts surmounted by caps, headslike those of young girls with corkscrew curls on the temples,infantile visages, and by reason of that, horrible thin skeleton faces,to which death alone was lacking. On the first cart was a negro, whohad been a slave, in all probability, and who could make a comparisonof his chains. The frightful leveller from below, shame, had passedover these brows; at that degree of abasement, the last transformationswere suffered by all in their extremest depths, and ignorance,converted into dulness, was the equal of intelligence converted intodespair. There was no choice possible between these men who appeared tothe eye as the flower of the mud. It was evident that the person whohad had the ordering of that unclean procession had not classifiedthem. These beings had been fettered and coupled pell-mell, inalphabetical disorder, probably, and loaded hap-hazard on those carts.Nevertheless, horrors, when grouped together, always end by evolving aresult; all additions of wretched men give a sum total, each chainexhaled a common soul, and each dray-load had its own physiognomy. Bythe side of the one where they were singing, there was one where theywere howling; a third where they were begging; one could be seen inwhich they were gnashing their teeth; another load menaced thespectators, another blasphemed God; the last was as silent as the tomb.Dante would have thought that he beheld his seven circles of hell onthe march. The march of the damned to their tortures, performed insinister wise, not on the formidable and flaming chariot of theApocalypse, but, what was more mournful than that, on the gibbet cart.
One of the guards, who had a hook on the end of his cudgel, made apretence from time to time, of stirring up this mass of human filth. Anold woman in the crowd pointed them out to her little boy five yearsold, and said to him: “Rascal, let that be a warning to you!”

As the songs and blasphemies increased, the man who appeared to be thecaptain of the escort cracked his whip, and at that signal a fearfuldull and blind flogging, which produced the sound of hail, fell uponthe seven dray-loads; many roared and foamed at the mouth; whichredoubled the delight of the street urchins who had hastened up, aswarm of flies on these wounds.
Jean Valjean’s eyes had assumed a frightful expression. They were nolonger eyes; they were those deep and glassy objects which replace theglance in the case of certain wretched men, which seem unconscious ofreality, and in which flames the reflection of terrors and ofcatastrophes. He was not looking at a spectacle, he was seeing avision. He tried to rise, to flee, to make his escape; he could notmove his feet. Sometimes, the things that you see seize upon you andhold you fast. He remained nailed to the spot, petrified, stupid,asking himself, athwart confused and inexpressible anguish, what thissepulchral persecution signified, and whence had come that pandemoniumwhich was pursuing him. All at once, he raised his hand to his brow, agesture habitual to those whose memory suddenly returns; he rememberedthat this was, in fact, the usual itinerary, that it was customary tomake this detour in order to avoid all possibility of encounteringroyalty on the road to Fontainebleau, and that, five and thirty yearsbefore, he had himself passed through that barrier.
Cosette was no less terrified, but in a different way. She did notunderstand; what she beheld did not seem to her to be possible; atlength she cried:—
“Father! What are those men in those carts?”

Jean Valjean replied: “Convicts.”

“Whither are they going?”

“To the galleys.”

At that moment, the cudgelling, multiplied by a hundred hands, becamezealous, blows with the flat of the sword were mingled with it, it wasa perfect storm of whips and clubs; the convicts bent before it, ahideous obedience was evoked by the torture, and all held their peace,darting glances like chained wolves.
Cosette trembled in every limb; she resumed:—
“Father, are they still men?”

“Sometimes,” answered the unhappy man.
It was the chain-gang, in fact, which had set out before daybreak fromBicêtre, and had taken the road to Mans in order to avoidFontainebleau, where the King then was. This caused the horriblejourney to last three or four days longer; but torture may surely beprolonged with the object of sparing the royal personage a sight of it.
Jean Valjean returned home utterly overwhelmed. Such encounters areshocks, and the memory that they leave behind them resembles a thoroughshaking up.
Nevertheless, Jean Valjean did not observe that, on his way back to theRue de Babylone with Cosette, the latter was plying him with otherquestions on the subject of what they had just seen; perhaps he was toomuch absorbed in his own dejection to notice her words and reply tothem. But when Cosette was leaving him in the evening, to betakeherself to bed, he heard her say in a low voice, and as though talkingto herself: “It seems to me, that if I were to find one of those men inmy pathway, oh, my God, I should die merely from the sight of him closeat hand.”

Fortunately, chance ordained that on the morrow of that tragic day,there was some official solemnity apropos of I know not what,—fêtes inParis, a review in the Champ de Mars, jousts on the Seine, theatricalperformances in the Champs-Élysées, fireworks at the Arc de l‘Étoile,illuminations everywhere. Jean Valjean did violence to his habits, andtook Cosette to see these rejoicings, for the purpose of diverting herfrom the memory of the day before, and of effacing, beneath the smilingtumult of all Paris, the abominable thing which had passed before her.The review with which the festival was spiced made the presence ofuniforms perfectly natural; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of anational guard with the vague inward feeling of a man who is betakinghimself to shelter. However, this trip seemed to attain its object.Cosette, who made it her law to please her father, and to whom,moreover, all spectacles were a novelty, accepted this diversion withthe light and easy good grace of youth, and did not pout toodisdainfully at that flutter of enjoyment called a public fête; so thatJean Valjean was able to believe that he had succeeded, and that notrace of that hideous vision remained.
Some days later, one morning, when the sun was shining brightly, andthey were both on the steps leading to the garden, another infractionof the rules which Jean Valjean seemed to have imposed upon himself,and to the custom of remaining in her chamber which melancholy hadcaused Cosette to adopt, Cosette, in a wrapper, was standing erect inthat negligent attire of early morning which envelops young girls in anadorable way and which produces the effect of a cloud drawn over astar; and, with her head bathed in light, rosy after a good sleep,submitting to the gentle glances of the tender old man, she was pickinga daisy to pieces. Cosette did not know the delightful legend, _I lovea little, passionately, etc_.—who was there who could have taught her?She was handling the flower instinctively, innocently, without asuspicion that to pluck a daisy apart is to do the same by a heart. Ifthere were a fourth, and smiling Grace called Melancholy, she wouldhave worn the air of that Grace. Jean Valjean was fascinated by thecontemplation of those tiny fingers on that flower, and forgetful ofeverything in the radiance emitted by that child. A red-breast waswarbling in the thicket, on one side. White cloudlets floated acrossthe sky, so gayly, that one would have said that they had just been setat liberty. Cosette went on attentively tearing the leaves from herflower; she seemed to be thinking about something; but whatever it was,it must be something charming; all at once she turned her head over hershoulder with the delicate languor of a swan, and said to Jean Valjean:“Father, what are the galleys like?”




BOOK FOURTH—SUCCOR FROM BELOW MAY TURN OUT TO BE SUCCOR FROM ON HIGH



CHAPTER I—A WOUND WITHOUT, HEALING WITHIN

Thus their life clouded over by degrees.
But one diversion, which had formerly been a happiness, remained tothem, which was to carry bread to those who were hungry, and clothingto those who were cold. Cosette often accompanied Jean Valjean on thesevisits to the poor, on which they recovered some remnants of theirformer free intercourse; and sometimes, when the day had been a goodone, and they had assisted many in distress, and cheered and warmedmany little children, Cosette was rather merry in the evening. It wasat this epoch that they paid their visit to the Jondrette den.
On the day following that visit, Jean Valjean made his appearance inthe pavilion in the morning, calm as was his wont, but with a largewound on his left arm which was much inflamed, and very angry, whichresembled a burn, and which he explained in some way or other. Thiswound resulted in his being detained in the house for a month withfever. He would not call in a doctor. When Cosette urged him, “Call thedog-doctor,” said he.
Cosette dressed the wound morning and evening with so divine an air andsuch angelic happiness at being of use to him, that Jean Valjean feltall his former joy returning, his fears and anxieties dissipating, andhe gazed at Cosette, saying: “Oh! what a kindly wound! Oh! what a goodmisfortune!”

Cosette on perceiving that her father was ill, had deserted thepavilion and again taken a fancy to the little lodging and the backcourtyard. She passed nearly all her days beside Jean Valjean and readto him the books which he desired. Generally they were books of travel.Jean Valjean was undergoing a new birth; his happiness was reviving inthese ineffable rays; the Luxembourg, the prowling young stranger,Cosette’s coldness,—all these clouds upon his soul were growing dim. Hehad reached the point where he said to himself: “I imagined all that. Iam an old fool.”

His happiness was so great that the horrible discovery of theThénardiers made in the Jondrette hovel, unexpected as it was, had,after a fashion, glided over him unnoticed. He had succeeded in makinghis escape; all trace of him was lost—what more did he care for! heonly thought of those wretched beings to pity them. “Here they are inprison, and henceforth they will be incapacitated for doing any harm,”he thought, “but what a lamentable family in distress!”

As for the hideous vision of the Barrière du Maine, Cosette had notreferred to it again.
Sister Sainte-Mechtilde had taught Cosette music in the convent;Cosette had the voice of a linnet with a soul, and sometimes, in theevening, in the wounded man’s humble abode, she warbled melancholysongs which delighted Jean Valjean.
Spring came; the garden was so delightful at that season of the year,that Jean Valjean said to Cosette:—
“You never go there; I want you to stroll in it.”

“As you like, father,” said Cosette.
And for the sake of obeying her father, she resumed her walks in thegarden, generally alone, for, as we have mentioned, Jean Valjean, whowas probably afraid of being seen through the fence, hardly ever wentthere.
Jean Valjean’s wound had created a diversion.
When Cosette saw that her father was suffering less, that he wasconvalescing, and that he appeared to be happy, she experienced acontentment which she did not even perceive, so gently and naturallyhad it come. Then, it was in the month of March, the days were growinglonger, the winter was departing, the winter always bears away with ita portion of our sadness; then came April, that daybreak of summer,fresh as dawn always is, gay like every childhood; a little inclined toweep at times like the new-born being that it is. In that month, naturehas charming gleams which pass from the sky, from the trees, from themeadows and the flowers into the heart of man.
Cosette was still too young to escape the penetrating influence of thatApril joy which bore so strong a resemblance to herself. Insensibly,and without her suspecting the fact, the blackness departed from herspirit. In spring, sad souls grow light, as light falls into cellars atmidday. Cosette was no longer sad. However, though this was so, she didnot account for it to herself. In the morning, about ten o’clock, afterbreakfast, when she had succeeded in enticing her father into thegarden for a quarter of an hour, and when she was pacing up and down inthe sunlight in front of the steps, supporting his left arm for him,she did not perceive that she laughed every moment and that she washappy.
Jean Valjean, intoxicated, beheld her growing fresh and rosy once more.
“Oh! What a good wound!” he repeated in a whisper.
And he felt grateful to the Thénardiers.
His wound once healed, he resumed his solitary twilight strolls.
It is a mistake to suppose that a person can stroll alone in thatfashion in the uninhabited regions of Paris without meeting with someadventure.



CHAPTER II—MOTHER PLUTARQUE FINDS NO DIFFICULTY IN EXPLAINING APHENOMENON

One evening, little Gavroche had had nothing to eat; he remembered thathe had not dined on the preceding day either; this was becomingtiresome. He resolved to make an effort to secure some supper. Hestrolled out beyond the Salpêtrière into deserted regions; that iswhere windfalls are to be found; where there is no one, one alwaysfinds something. He reached a settlement which appeared to him to bethe village of Austerlitz.
In one of his preceding lounges he had noticed there an old gardenhaunted by an old man and an old woman, and in that garden, a passableapple-tree. Beside the apple-tree stood a sort of fruit-house, whichwas not securely fastened, and where one might contrive to get anapple. One apple is a supper; one apple is life. That which was Adam’sruin might prove Gavroche’s salvation. The garden abutted on asolitary, unpaved lane, bordered with brushwood while awaiting thearrival of houses; the garden was separated from it by a hedge.
Gavroche directed his steps towards this garden; he found the lane, herecognized the apple-tree, he verified the fruit-house, he examined thehedge; a hedge means merely one stride. The day was declining, therewas not even a cat in the lane, the hour was propitious. Gavroche beganthe operation of scaling the hedge, then suddenly paused. Some one wastalking in the garden. Gavroche peeped through one of the breaks in thehedge.

  Enlarge
Succor from Below 4b4-1-succor-from-below

A couple of paces distant, at the foot of the hedge on the other side,exactly at the point where the gap which he was meditating would havebeen made, there was a sort of recumbent stone which formed a bench,and on this bench was seated the old man of the garden, while the oldwoman was standing in front of him. The old woman was grumbling.Gavroche, who was not very discreet, listened.
“Monsieur Mabeuf!” said the old woman.
“Mabeuf!” thought Gavroche, “that name is a perfect farce.”

The old man who was thus addressed, did not stir. The old womanrepeated:—
“Monsieur Mabeuf!”

The old man, without raising his eyes from the ground, made up his mindto answer:—
“What is it, Mother Plutarque?”

“Mother Plutarque!” thought Gavroche, “another farcical name.”

Mother Plutarque began again, and the old man was forced to accept theconversation:—
“The landlord is not pleased.”

“Why?”

“We owe three quarters rent.”

“In three months, we shall owe him for four quarters.”

“He says that he will turn you out to sleep.”

“I will go.”

“The green-grocer insists on being paid. She will no longer leave herfagots. What will you warm yourself with this winter? We shall have nowood.”

“There is the sun.”

“The butcher refuses to give credit; he will not let us have any moremeat.”

“That is quite right. I do not digest meat well. It is too heavy.”

“What shall we have for dinner?”

“Bread.”

“The baker demands a settlement, and says, ‘no money, no bread.’”

“That is well.”

“What will you eat?”

“We have apples in the apple-room.”

“But, Monsieur, we can’t live like that without money.”

“I have none.”

The old woman went away, the old man remained alone. He fell intothought. Gavroche became thoughtful also. It was almost dark.
The first result of Gavroche’s meditation was, that instead of scalingthe hedge, he crouched down under it. The branches stood apart a littleat the foot of the thicket.
“Come,” exclaimed Gavroche mentally, “here’s a nook!” and he curled upin it. His back was almost in contact with Father Mabeuf’s bench. Hecould hear the octogenarian breathe.
Then, by way of dinner, he tried to sleep.
It was a cat-nap, with one eye open. While he dozed, Gavroche kept onthe watch.
The twilight pallor of the sky blanched the earth, and the lane formeda livid line between two rows of dark bushes.
All at once, in this whitish band, two figures made their appearance.One was in front, the other some distance in the rear.
“There come two creatures,” muttered Gavroche.
The first form seemed to be some elderly bourgeois, who was bent andthoughtful, dressed more than plainly, and who was walking slowlybecause of his age, and strolling about in the open evening air.
The second was straight, firm, slender. It regulated its pace by thatof the first; but in the voluntary slowness of its gait, suppleness andagility were discernible. This figure had also something fierce anddisquieting about it, the whole shape was that of what was then called_an elegant_; the hat was of good shape, the coat black, well cut,probably of fine cloth, and well fitted in at the waist. The head washeld erect with a sort of robust grace, and beneath the hat the paleprofile of a young man could be made out in the dim light. The profilehad a rose in its mouth. This second form was well known to Gavroche;it was Montparnasse.
He could have told nothing about the other, except that he was arespectable old man.
Gavroche immediately began to take observations.
One of these two pedestrians evidently had a project connected with theother. Gavroche was well placed to watch the course of events. Thebedroom had turned into a hiding-place at a very opportune moment.
Montparnasse on the hunt at such an hour, in such a place, betokenedsomething threatening. Gavroche felt his gamin’s heart moved withcompassion for the old man.
What was he to do? Interfere? One weakness coming to the aid ofanother! It would be merely a laughing matter for Montparnasse.Gavroche did not shut his eyes to the fact that the old man, in thefirst place, and the child in the second, would make but two mouthfulsfor that redoubtable ruffian eighteen years of age.
While Gavroche was deliberating, the attack took place, abruptly andhideously. The attack of the tiger on the wild ass, the attack of thespider on the fly. Montparnasse suddenly tossed away his rose, boundedupon the old man, seized him by the collar, grasped and clung to him,and Gavroche with difficulty restrained a scream. A moment later one ofthese men was underneath the other, groaning, struggling, with a kneeof marble upon his breast. Only, it was not just what Gavroche hadexpected. The one who lay on the earth was Montparnasse; the one whowas on top was the old man. All this took place a few paces distantfrom Gavroche.
The old man had received the shock, had returned it, and that in such aterrible fashion, that in a twinkling, the assailant and the assailedhad exchanged rôles.
“Here’s a hearty veteran!” thought Gavroche.
He could not refrain from clapping his hands. But it was applausewasted. It did not reach the combatants, absorbed and deafened as theywere, each by the other, as their breath mingled in the struggle.
Silence ensued. Montparnasse ceased his struggles. Gavroche indulged inthis aside: “Can he be dead!”

The goodman had not uttered a word, nor given vent to a cry. He rose tohis feet, and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse:—
“Get up.”

Montparnasse rose, but the goodman held him fast. Montparnasse’sattitude was the humiliated and furious attitude of the wolf who hasbeen caught by a sheep.
Gavroche looked on and listened, making an effort to reinforce his eyeswith his ears. He was enjoying himself immensely.
He was repaid for his conscientious anxiety in the character of aspectator. He was able to catch on the wing a dialogue which borrowedfrom the darkness an indescribably tragic accent. The goodmanquestioned, Montparnasse replied.
“How old are you?”

“Nineteen.”

“You are strong and healthy. Why do you not work?”

“It bores me.”

“What is your trade?”

“An idler.”

“Speak seriously. Can anything be done for you? What would you like tobe?”

“A thief.”

A pause ensued. The old man seemed absorbed in profound thought. Hestood motionless, and did not relax his hold on Montparnasse.
Every moment the vigorous and agile young ruffian indulged in thetwitchings of a wild beast caught in a snare. He gave a jerk, tried acrook of the knee, twisted his limbs desperately, and made efforts toescape.
The old man did not appear to notice it, and held both his arms withone hand, with the sovereign indifference of absolute force.
The old man’s reverie lasted for some time, then, looking steadily atMontparnasse, he addressed to him in a gentle voice, in the midst ofthe darkness where they stood, a solemn harangue, of which Gavroche didnot lose a single syllable:—
“My child, you are entering, through indolence, on one of the mostlaborious of lives. Ah! You declare yourself to be an idler! prepare totoil. There is a certain formidable machine, have you seen it? It isthe rolling-mill. You must be on your guard against it, it is craftyand ferocious; if it catches hold of the skirt of your coat, you willbe drawn in bodily. That machine is laziness. Stop while there is yettime, and save yourself! Otherwise, it is all over with you; in a shorttime you will be among the gearing. Once entangled, hope for nothingmore. Toil, lazybones! there is no more repose for you! The iron handof implacable toil has seized you. You do not wish to earn your living,to have a task, to fulfil a duty! It bores you to be like other men?Well! You will be different. Labor is the law; he who rejects it willfind ennui his torment. You do not wish to be a workingman, you will bea slave. Toil lets go of you on one side only to grasp you again on theother. You do not desire to be its friend, you shall be its negroslave. Ah! You would have none of the honest weariness of men, youshall have the sweat of the damned. Where others sing, you will rattlein your throat. You will see afar off, from below, other men at work;it will seem to you that they are resting. The laborer, the harvester,the sailor, the blacksmith, will appear to you in glory like theblessed spirits in paradise. What radiance surrounds the forge! Toguide the plough, to bind the sheaves, is joy. The bark at liberty inthe wind, what delight! Do you, lazy idler, delve, drag on, roll,march! Drag your halter. You are a beast of burden in the team of hell!Ah! To do nothing is your object. Well, not a week, not a day, not anhour shall you have free from oppression. You will be able to liftnothing without anguish. Every minute that passes will make yourmuscles crack. What is a feather to others will be a rock to you. Thesimplest things will become steep acclivities. Life will becomemonstrous all about you. To go, to come, to breathe, will be just somany terrible labors. Your lungs will produce on you the effect ofweighing a hundred pounds. Whether you shall walk here rather thanthere, will become a problem that must be solved. Any one who wants togo out simply gives his door a push, and there he is in the open air.If you wish to go out, you will be obliged to pierce your wall. Whatdoes every one who wants to step into the street do? He goesdownstairs; you will tear up your sheets, little by little you willmake of them a rope, then you will climb out of your window, and youwill suspend yourself by that thread over an abyss, and it will benight, amid storm, rain, and the hurricane, and if the rope is tooshort, but one way of descending will remain to you, to fall. To drophap-hazard into the gulf, from an unknown height, on what? On what isbeneath, on the unknown. Or you will crawl up a chimney-flue, at therisk of burning; or you will creep through a sewer-pipe, at the risk ofdrowning; I do not speak of the holes that you will be obliged to mask,of the stones which you will have to take up and replace twenty times aday, of the plaster that you will have to hide in your straw pallet. Alock presents itself; the bourgeois has in his pocket a key made by alocksmith. If you wish to pass out, you will be condemned to execute aterrible work of art; you will take a large sou, you will cut it in twoplates; with what tools? You will have to invent them. That is yourbusiness. Then you will hollow out the interior of these plates, takinggreat care of the outside, and you will make on the edges a thread, sothat they can be adjusted one upon the other like a box and its cover.The top and bottom thus screwed together, nothing will be suspected. Tothe overseers it will be only a sou; to you it will be a box. What willyou put in this box? A small bit of steel. A watch-spring, in which youwill have cut teeth, and which will form a saw. With this saw, as longas a pin, and concealed in a sou, you will cut the bolt of the lock,you will sever bolts, the padlock of your chain, and the bar at yourwindow, and the fetter on your leg. This masterpiece finished, thisprodigy accomplished, all these miracles of art, address, skill, andpatience executed, what will be your recompense if it becomes knownthat you are the author? The dungeon. There is your future. Whatprecipices are idleness and pleasure! Do you know that to do nothing isa melancholy resolution? To live in idleness on the property ofsociety! to be useless, that is to say, pernicious! This leads straightto the depth of wretchedness. Woe to the man who desires to be aparasite! He will become vermin! Ah! So it does not please you to work?Ah! You have but one thought, to drink well, to eat well, to sleepwell. You will drink water, you will eat black bread, you will sleep ona plank with a fetter whose cold touch you will feel on your flesh allnight long, riveted to your limbs. You will break those fetters, youwill flee. That is well. You will crawl on your belly through thebrushwood, and you will eat grass like the beasts of the forest. Andyou will be recaptured. And then you will pass years in a dungeon,riveted to a wall, groping for your jug that you may drink, gnawing ata horrible loaf of darkness which dogs would not touch, eating beansthat the worms have eaten before you. You will be a wood-louse in acellar. Ah! Have pity on yourself, you miserable young child, who weresucking at nurse less than twenty years ago, and who have, no doubt, amother still alive! I conjure you, listen to me, I entreat you. Youdesire fine black cloth, varnished shoes, to have your hair curled andsweet-smelling oils on your locks, to please low women, to be handsome.You will be shaven clean, and you will wear a red blouse and woodenshoes. You want rings on your fingers, you will have an iron necklet onyour neck. If you glance at a woman, you will receive a blow. And youwill enter there at the age of twenty. And you will come out at fifty!You will enter young, rosy, fresh, with brilliant eyes, and all yourwhite teeth, and your handsome, youthful hair; you will come outbroken, bent, wrinkled, toothless, horrible, with white locks! Ah! mypoor child, you are on the wrong road; idleness is counselling youbadly; the hardest of all work is thieving. Believe me, do notundertake that painful profession of an idle man. It is not comfortableto become a rascal. It is less disagreeable to be an honest man. Nowgo, and ponder on what I have said to you. By the way, what did youwant of me? My purse? Here it is.”

And the old man, releasing Montparnasse, put his purse in the latter’shand; Montparnasse weighed it for a moment, after which he allowed itto slide gently into the back pocket of his coat, with the samemechanical precaution as though he had stolen it.
All this having been said and done, the goodman turned his back andtranquilly resumed his stroll.
“The blockhead!” muttered Montparnasse.
Who was this goodman? The reader has, no doubt, already divined.
Montparnasse watched him with amazement, as he disappeared in the dusk.This contemplation was fatal to him.
While the old man was walking away, Gavroche drew near.
Gavroche had assured himself, with a sidelong glance, that FatherMabeuf was still sitting on his bench, probably sound asleep. Then thegamin emerged from his thicket, and began to crawl after Montparnassein the dark, as the latter stood there motionless. In this manner hecame up to Montparnasse without being seen or heard, gently insinuatedhis hand into the back pocket of that frock-coat of fine black cloth,seized the purse, withdrew his hand, and having recourse once more tohis crawling, he slipped away like an adder through the shadows.Montparnasse, who had no reason to be on his guard, and who was engagedin thought for the first time in his life, perceived nothing. WhenGavroche had once more attained the point where Father Mabeuf was, heflung the purse over the hedge, and fled as fast as his legs wouldcarry him.
The purse fell on Father Mabeuf’s foot. This commotion roused him.
He bent over and picked up the purse.
He did not understand in the least, and opened it.
The purse had two compartments; in one of them there was some smallchange; in the other lay six napoleons.
M. Mabeuf, in great alarm, referred the matter to his housekeeper.
“That has fallen from heaven,” said Mother Plutarque.



BOOK FIFTH—THE END OF WHICH DOES NOT RESEMBLE THE BEGINNING



CHAPTER I—SOLITUDE AND THE BARRACKS COMBINED

Cosette’s grief, which had been so poignant and lively four or fivemonths previously, had, without her being conscious of the fact,entered upon its convalescence. Nature, spring, youth, love for herfather, the gayety of the birds and flowers, caused something almostresembling forgetfulness to filter gradually, drop by drop, into thatsoul, which was so virgin and so young. Was the fire wholly extinctthere? Or was it merely that layers of ashes had formed? The truth is,that she hardly felt the painful and burning spot any longer.
One day she suddenly thought of Marius: “Why!” said she, “I no longerthink of him.”

That same week, she noticed a very handsome officer of lancers, with awasp-like waist, a delicious uniform, the cheeks of a young girl, asword under his arm, waxed moustaches, and a glazed schapka, passingthe gate. Moreover, he had light hair, prominent blue eyes, a roundface, was vain, insolent and good-looking; quite the reverse of Marius.He had a cigar in his mouth. Cosette thought that this officerdoubtless belonged to the regiment in barracks in the Rue de Babylone.
On the following day, she saw him pass again. She took note of thehour.
From that time forth, was it chance? she saw him pass nearly every day.
The officer’s comrades perceived that there was, in that “badly kept”garden, behind that malicious rococo fence, a very pretty creature, whowas almost always there when the handsome lieutenant,—who is notunknown to the reader, and whose name was Théodule Gillenormand,—passedby.
“See here!” they said to him, “there’s a little creature there who ismaking eyes at you, look.”

“Have I the time,” replied the lancer, “to look at all the girls wholook at me?”

This was at the precise moment when Marius was descending heavilytowards agony, and was saying: “If I could but see her before Idie!”—Had his wish been realized, had he beheld Cosette at that momentgazing at the lancer, he would not have been able to utter a word, andhe would have expired with grief.
Whose fault was it? No one’s.
Marius possessed one of those temperaments which bury themselves insorrow and there abide; Cosette was one of those persons who plungeinto sorrow and emerge from it again.
Cosette was, moreover, passing through that dangerous period, the fatalphase of feminine reverie abandoned to itself, in which the isolatedheart of a young girl resembles the tendrils of the vine which cling,as chance directs, to the capital of a marble column or to the post ofa wine-shop: A rapid and decisive moment, critical for every orphan, beshe rich or poor, for wealth does not prevent a bad choice;misalliances are made in very high circles, real misalliance is that ofsouls; and as many an unknown young man, without name, without birth,without fortune, is a marble column which bears up a temple of grandsentiments and grand ideas, so such and such a man of the worldsatisfied and opulent, who has polished boots and varnished words, iflooked at not outside, but inside, a thing which is reserved for hiswife, is nothing more than a block obscurely haunted by violent,unclean, and vinous passions; the post of a drinking-shop.
What did Cosette’s soul contain? Passion calmed or lulled to sleep;something limpid, brilliant, troubled to a certain depth, and gloomylower down. The image of the handsome officer was reflected in thesurface. Did a souvenir linger in the depths?—Quite at thebottom?—Possibly. Cosette did not know.
A singular incident supervened.



CHAPTER II—COSETTE’S APPREHENSIONS

During the first fortnight in April, Jean Valjean took a journey. This,as the reader knows, happened from time to time, at very longintervals. He remained absent a day or two days at the utmost. Wheredid he go? No one knew, not even Cosette. Once only, on the occasion ofone of these departures, she had accompanied him in a hackney-coach asfar as a little blind-alley at the corner of which she read: _Impassede la Planchette_. There he alighted, and the coach took Cosette backto the Rue de Babylone. It was usually when money was lacking in thehouse that Jean Valjean took these little trips.
So Jean Valjean was absent. He had said: “I shall return in threedays.”

That evening, Cosette was alone in the drawing-room. In order to getrid of her ennui, she had opened her piano-organ, and had begun tosing, accompanying herself the while, the chorus from _Euryanthe_:“Hunters astray in the wood!” which is probably the most beautifulthing in all the sphere of music. When she had finished, she remainedwrapped in thought.
All at once, it seemed to her that she heard the sound of footsteps inthe garden.
It could not be her father, he was absent; it could not be Toussaint,she was in bed, and it was ten o’clock at night.
She stepped to the shutter of the drawing-room, which was closed, andlaid her ear against it.
It seemed to her that it was the tread of a man, and that he waswalking very softly.
She mounted rapidly to the first floor, to her own chamber, opened asmall wicket in her shutter, and peeped into the garden. The moon wasat the full. Everything could be seen as plainly as by day.
There was no one there.
She opened the window. The garden was absolutely calm, and all that wasvisible was that the street was deserted as usual.
Cosette thought that she had been mistaken. She thought that she hadheard a noise. It was a hallucination produced by the melancholy andmagnificent chorus of Weber, which lays open before the mind terrifieddepths, which trembles before the gaze like a dizzy forest, and inwhich one hears the crackling of dead branches beneath the uneasy treadof the huntsmen of whom one catches a glimpse through the twilight.
She thought no more about it.
Moreover, Cosette was not very timid by nature. There flowed in herveins some of the blood of the bohemian and the adventuress who runsbarefoot. It will be remembered that she was more of a lark than adove. There was a foundation of wildness and bravery in her.
On the following day, at an earlier hour, towards nightfall, she wasstrolling in the garden. In the midst of the confused thoughts whichoccupied her, she fancied that she caught for an instant a soundsimilar to that of the preceding evening, as though some one werewalking beneath the trees in the dusk, and not very far from her; butshe told herself that nothing so closely resembles a step on the grassas the friction of two branches which have moved from side to side, andshe paid no heed to it. Besides, she could see nothing.
She emerged from “the thicket”; she had still to cross a small lawn toregain the steps.
The moon, which had just risen behind her, cast Cosette’s shadow infront of her upon this lawn, as she came out from the shrubbery.
Cosette halted in alarm.
Beside her shadow, the moon outlined distinctly upon the turf anothershadow, which was particularly startling and terrible, a shadow whichhad a round hat.
It was the shadow of a man, who must have been standing on the borderof the clump of shrubbery, a few paces in the rear of Cosette.
She stood for a moment without the power to speak, or cry, or call, orstir, or turn her head.
Then she summoned up all her courage, and turned round resolutely.
There was no one there.
She glanced on the ground. The figure had disappeared.
She re-entered the thicket, searched the corners boldly, went as far asthe gate, and found nothing.
She felt herself absolutely chilled with terror. Was this anotherhallucination? What! Two days in succession! One hallucination mightpass, but two hallucinations? The disquieting point about it was, thatthe shadow had assuredly not been a phantom. Phantoms do not wear roundhats.
On the following day Jean Valjean returned. Cosette told him what shethought she had heard and seen. She wanted to be reassured and to seeher father shrug his shoulders and say to her: “You are a littlegoose.”

Jean Valjean grew anxious.
“It cannot be anything,” said he.
He left her under some pretext, and went into the garden, and she sawhim examining the gate with great attention.
During the night she woke up; this time she was sure, and shedistinctly heard some one walking close to the flight of steps beneathher window. She ran to her little wicket and opened it. In point offact, there was a man in the garden, with a large club in his hand.Just as she was about to scream, the moon lighted up the man’s profile.It was her father. She returned to her bed, saying to herself: “He isvery uneasy!”

Jean Valjean passed that night and the two succeeding nights in thegarden. Cosette saw him through the hole in her shutter.
On the third night, the moon was on the wane, and had begun to riselater; at one o’clock in the morning, possibly, she heard a loud burstof laughter and her father’s voice calling her:—
“Cosette!”

She jumped out of bed, threw on her dressing-gown, and opened herwindow.
Her father was standing on the grass-plot below.
“I have waked you for the purpose of reassuring you,” said he; “look,there is your shadow with the round hat.”

And he pointed out to her on the turf a shadow cast by the moon, andwhich did indeed, bear considerable resemblance to the spectre of a manwearing a round hat. It was the shadow produced by a chimney-pipe ofsheet iron, with a hood, which rose above a neighboring roof.
Cosette joined in his laughter, all her lugubrious suppositions wereallayed, and the next morning, as she was at breakfast with her father,she made merry over the sinister garden haunted by the shadows of ironchimney-pots.
Jean Valjean became quite tranquil once more; as for Cosette, she didnot pay much attention to the question whether the chimney-pot wasreally in the direction of the shadow which she had seen, or thoughtshe had seen, and whether the moon had been in the same spot in thesky.
She did not question herself as to the peculiarity of a chimney-potwhich is afraid of being caught in the act, and which retires when someone looks at its shadow, for the shadow had taken the alarm whenCosette had turned round, and Cosette had thought herself very sure ofthis. Cosette’s serenity was fully restored. The proof appeared to herto be complete, and it quite vanished from her mind, whether therecould possibly be any one walking in the garden during the evening orat night.
A few days later, however, a fresh incident occurred.



CHAPTER III—ENRICHED WITH COMMENTARIES BY TOUSSAINT

In the garden, near the railing on the street, there was a stone bench,screened from the eyes of the curious by a plantation of yoke-elms, butwhich could, in case of necessity, be reached by an arm from theoutside, past the trees and the gate.
One evening during that same month of April, Jean Valjean had gone out;Cosette had seated herself on this bench after sundown. The breeze wasblowing briskly in the trees, Cosette was meditating; an objectlesssadness was taking possession of her little by little, that invinciblesadness evoked by the evening, and which arises, perhaps, who knows,from the mystery of the tomb which is ajar at that hour.
Perhaps Fantine was within that shadow.
Cosette rose, slowly made the tour of the garden, walking on the grassdrenched in dew, and saying to herself, through the species ofmelancholy somnambulism in which she was plunged: “Really, one needswooden shoes for the garden at this hour. One takes cold.”

She returned to the bench.
As she was about to resume her seat there, she observed on the spotwhich she had quitted, a tolerably large stone which had, evidently,not been there a moment before.
Cosette gazed at the stone, asking herself what it meant. All at oncethe idea occurred to her that the stone had not reached the bench allby itself, that some one had placed it there, that an arm had beenthrust through the railing, and this idea appeared to alarm her. Thistime, the fear was genuine; the stone was there. No doubt was possible;she did not touch it, fled without glancing behind her, took refuge inthe house, and immediately closed with shutter, bolt, and bar thedoor-like window opening on the flight of steps. She inquired ofToussaint:—
“Has my father returned yet?”

“Not yet, Mademoiselle.”

[We have already noted once for all the fact that Toussaint stuttered.May we be permitted to dispense with it for the future. The musicalnotation of an infirmity is repugnant to us.]
Jean Valjean, a thoughtful man, and given to nocturnal strolls, oftenreturned quite late at night.
“Toussaint,” went on Cosette, “are you careful to thoroughly barricadethe shutters opening on the garden, at least with bars, in the evening,and to put the little iron things in the little rings that close them?”

“Oh! be easy on that score, Miss.”

Toussaint did not fail in her duty, and Cosette was well aware of thefact, but she could not refrain from adding:—
“It is so solitary here.”

“So far as that is concerned,” said Toussaint, “it is true. We might beassassinated before we had time to say _ouf!_ And Monsieur does notsleep in the house, to boot. But fear nothing, Miss, I fasten theshutters up like prisons. Lone women! That is enough to make oneshudder, I believe you! Just imagine, what if you were to see men enteryour chamber at night and say: ‘Hold your tongue!’ and begin to cutyour throat. It’s not the dying so much; you die, for one must die, andthat’s all right; it’s the abomination of feeling those people touchyou. And then, their knives; they can’t be able to cut well with them!Ah, good gracious!”

“Be quiet,” said Cosette. “Fasten everything thoroughly.”

Cosette, terrified by the melodrama improvised by Toussaint, andpossibly, also, by the recollection of the apparitions of the pastweek, which recurred to her memory, dared not even say to her: “Go andlook at the stone which has been placed on the bench!” for fear ofopening the garden gate and allowing “the men” to enter. She saw thatall the doors and windows were carefully fastened, made Toussaint goall over the house from garret to cellar, locked herself up in her ownchamber, bolted her door, looked under her couch, went to bed and sleptbadly. All night long she saw that big stone, as large as a mountainand full of caverns.
At sunrise,—the property of the rising sun is to make us laugh at allour terrors of the past night, and our laughter is in direct proportionto our terror which they have caused,—at sunrise Cosette, when shewoke, viewed her fright as a nightmare, and said to herself: “What haveI been thinking of? It is like the footsteps that I thought I heard aweek or two ago in the garden at night! It is like the shadow of thechimney-pot! Am I becoming a coward?” The sun, which was glowingthrough the crevices in her shutters, and turning the damask curtainscrimson, reassured her to such an extent that everything vanished fromher thoughts, even the stone.
“There was no more a stone on the bench than there was a man in a roundhat in the garden; I dreamed about the stone, as I did all the rest.”

She dressed herself, descended to the garden, ran to the bench, andbroke out in a cold perspiration. The stone was there.
But this lasted only for a moment. That which is terror by night iscuriosity by day.
“Bah!” said she, “come, let us see what it is.”

She lifted the stone, which was tolerably large. Beneath it wassomething which resembled a letter. It was a white envelope. Cosetteseized it. There was no address on one side, no seal on the other. Yetthe envelope, though unsealed, was not empty. Papers could be seeninside.
Cosette examined it. It was no longer alarm, it was no longercuriosity; it was a beginning of anxiety.
Cosette drew from the envelope its contents, a little notebook ofpaper, each page of which was numbered and bore a few lines in a veryfine and rather pretty handwriting, as Cosette thought.
Cosette looked for a name; there was none. To whom was this addressed?To her, probably, since a hand had deposited the packet on her bench.From whom did it come? An irresistible fascination took possession ofher; she tried to turn away her eyes from the leaflets which weretrembling in her hand, she gazed at the sky, the street, the acaciasall bathed in light, the pigeons fluttering over a neighboring roof,and then her glance suddenly fell upon the manuscript, and she said toherself that she must know what it contained.
This is what she read.



CHAPTER IV—A HEART BENEATH A STONE


  Enlarge
Cosette With Letter  4b4-5-cosette-after-letter

The reduction of the universe to a single being, the expansion of asingle being even to God, that is love.
Love is the salutation of the angels to the stars.
How sad is the soul, when it is sad through love!
What a void in the absence of the being who, by herself alone fills theworld! Oh! how true it is that the beloved being becomes God. One couldcomprehend that God might be jealous of this had not God the Father ofall evidently made creation for the soul, and the soul for love.
The glimpse of a smile beneath a white crape bonnet with a lilaccurtain is sufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace ofdreams.
God is behind everything, but everything hides God. Things are black,creatures are opaque. To love a being is to render that beingtransparent.
Certain thoughts are prayers. There are moments when, whatever theattitude of the body may be, the soul is on its knees.
Parted lovers beguile absence by a thousand chimerical devices, whichpossess, however, a reality of their own. They are prevented fromseeing each other, they cannot write to each other; they discover amultitude of mysterious means to correspond. They send each other thesong of the birds, the perfume of the flowers, the smiles of children,the light of the sun, the sighings of the breeze, the rays of stars,all creation. And why not? All the works of God are made to serve love.Love is sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its messages.
Oh Spring! Thou art a letter that I write to her.
The future belongs to hearts even more than it does to minds. Love,that is the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity. In theinfinite, the inexhaustible is requisite.
Love participates of the soul itself. It is of the same nature. Likeit, it is the divine spark; like it, it is incorruptible, indivisible,imperishable. It is a point of fire that exists within us, which isimmortal and infinite, which nothing can confine, and which nothing canextinguish. We feel it burning even to the very marrow of our bones,and we see it beaming in the very depths of heaven.
Oh Love! Adorations! voluptuousness of two minds which understand eachother, of two hearts which exchange with each other, of two glanceswhich penetrate each other! You will come to me, will you not, bliss!strolls by twos in the solitudes! Blessed and radiant days! I havesometimes dreamed that from time to time hours detached themselves fromthe lives of the angels and came here below to traverse the destiniesof men.
God can add nothing to the happiness of those who love, except to givethem endless duration. After a life of love, an eternity of love is, infact, an augmentation; but to increase in intensity even the ineffablefelicity which love bestows on the soul even in this world, isimpossible, even to God. God is the plenitude of heaven; love is theplenitude of man.
You look at a star for two reasons, because it is luminous, and becauseit is impenetrable. You have beside you a sweeter radiance and agreater mystery, woman.
All of us, whoever we may be, have our respirable beings. We lack airand we stifle. Then we die. To die for lack of love is horrible.Suffocation of the soul.
When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelicunity, the secret of life has been discovered so far as they areconcerned; they are no longer anything more than the two boundaries ofthe same destiny; they are no longer anything but the two wings of thesame spirit. Love, soar.
On the day when a woman as she passes before you emits light as shewalks, you are lost, you love. But one thing remains for you to do: tothink of her so intently that she is constrained to think of you.
What love commences can be finished by God alone.
True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or ahandkerchief found, and eternity is required for its devotion and itshopes. It is composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitelylittle.
If you are a stone, be adamant; if you are a plant, be the sensitiveplant; if you are a man, be love.
Nothing suffices for love. We have happiness, we desire paradise; wepossess paradise, we desire heaven.
Oh ye who love each other, all this is contained in love. Understandhow to find it there. Love has contemplation as well as heaven, andmore than heaven, it has voluptuousness.
“Does she still come to the Luxembourg?” “No, sir.” “This is the churchwhere she attends mass, is it not?” “She no longer comes here.” “Doesshe still live in this house?” “She has moved away.” “Where has shegone to dwell?”

“She did not say.”

What a melancholy thing not to know the address of one’s soul!
Love has its childishness, other passions have their pettinesses. Shameon the passions which belittle man! Honor to the one which makes achild of him!
There is one strange thing, do you know it? I dwell in the night. Thereis a being who carried off my sky when she went away.
Oh! would that we were lying side by side in the same grave, hand inhand, and from time to time, in the darkness, gently caressing afinger,—that would suffice for my eternity!
Ye who suffer because ye love, love yet more. To die of love, is tolive in it.
Love. A sombre and starry transfiguration is mingled with this torture.There is ecstasy in agony.
Oh joy of the birds! It is because they have nests that they sing.
Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise.
Deep hearts, sage minds, take life as God has made it; it is a longtrial, an incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny. Thisdestiny, the true one, begins for a man with the first step inside thetomb. Then something appears to him, and he begins to distinguish thedefinitive. The definitive, meditate upon that word. The livingperceive the infinite; the definitive permits itself to be seen only bythe dead. In the meanwhile, love and suffer, hope and contemplate. Woe,alas! to him who shall have loved only bodies, forms, appearances!Death will deprive him of all. Try to love souls, you will find themagain.
I encountered in the street, a very poor young man who was in love. Hishat was old, his coat was worn, his elbows were in holes; watertrickled through his shoes, and the stars through his soul.
What a grand thing it is to be loved! What a far grander thing it is tolove! The heart becomes heroic, by dint of passion. It is no longercomposed of anything but what is pure; it no longer rests on anythingthat is not elevated and great. An unworthy thought can no moregerminate in it, than a nettle on a glacier. The serene and lofty soul,inaccessible to vulgar passions and emotions, dominating the clouds andthe shades of this world, its follies, its lies, its hatreds, itsvanities, its miseries, inhabits the blue of heaven, and no longerfeels anything but profound and subterranean shocks of destiny, as thecrests of mountains feel the shocks of earthquake.
If there did not exist some one who loved, the sun would becomeextinct.



CHAPTER V—COSETTE AFTER THE LETTER

As Cosette read, she gradually fell into thought. At the very momentwhen she raised her eyes from the last line of the note-book, thehandsome officer passed triumphantly in front of the gate,—it was hishour; Cosette thought him hideous.
She resumed her contemplation of the book. It was written in the mostcharming of chirography, thought Cosette; in the same hand, but withdivers inks, sometimes very black, again whitish, as when ink has beenadded to the inkstand, and consequently on different days. It was,then, a mind which had unfolded itself there, sigh by sigh,irregularly, without order, without choice, without object, hap-hazard.Cosette had never read anything like it. This manuscript, in which shealready perceived more light than obscurity, produced upon her theeffect of a half-open sanctuary. Each one of these mysterious linesshone before her eyes and inundated her heart with a strange radiance.The education which she had received had always talked to her of thesoul, and never of love, very much as one might talk of the firebrandand not of the flame. This manuscript of fifteen pages suddenly andsweetly revealed to her all of love, sorrow, destiny, life, eternity,the beginning, the end. It was as if a hand had opened and suddenlyflung upon her a handful of rays of light. In these few lines she felta passionate, ardent, generous, honest nature, a sacred will, animmense sorrow, and an immense despair, a suffering heart, an ecstasyfully expanded. What was this manuscript? A letter. A letter withoutname, without address, without date, without signature, pressing anddisinterested, an enigma composed of truths, a message of love made tobe brought by an angel and read by a virgin, an appointment made beyondthe bounds of earth, the love-letter of a phantom to a shade. It was anabsent one, tranquil and dejected, who seemed ready to take refuge indeath and who sent to the absent love, his lady, the secret of fate,the key of life, love. This had been written with one foot in the graveand one finger in heaven. These lines, which had fallen one by one onthe paper, were what might be called drops of soul.
Now, from whom could these pages come? Who could have penned them?
Cosette did not hesitate a moment. One man only.
He!
Day had dawned once more in her spirit; all had reappeared. She felt anunheard-of joy, and a profound anguish. It was he! he who had written!he was there! it was he whose arm had been thrust through that railing!While she was forgetful of him, he had found her again! But had sheforgotten him? No, never! She was foolish to have thought so for asingle moment. She had always loved him, always adored him. The firehad been smothered, and had smouldered for a time, but she saw allplainly now; it had but made headway, and now it had burst forthafresh, and had inflamed her whole being. This note-book was like aspark which had fallen from that other soul into hers. She felt theconflagration starting up once more.
She imbued herself thoroughly with every word of the manuscript: “Ohyes!” said she, “how perfectly I recognize all that! That is what I hadalready read in his eyes.” As she was finishing it for the third time,Lieutenant Théodule passed the gate once more, and rattled his spursupon the pavement. Cosette was forced to raise her eyes. She thoughthim insipid, silly, stupid, useless, foppish, displeasing, impertinent,and extremely ugly. The officer thought it his duty to smile at her.
She turned away as in shame and indignation. She would gladly havethrown something at his head.
She fled, re-entered the house, and shut herself up in her chamber toperuse the manuscript once more, to learn it by heart, and to dream.When she had thoroughly mastered it she kissed it and put it in herbosom.
All was over, Cosette had fallen back into deep, seraphic love. Theabyss of Eden had yawned once more.
All day long, Cosette remained in a sort of bewilderment. She scarcelythought, her ideas were in the state of a tangled skein in her brain,she could not manage to conjecture anything, she hoped through atremor, what? vague things. She dared make herself no promises, and shedid not wish to refuse herself anything. Flashes of pallor passed overher countenance, and shivers ran through her frame. It seemed to her,at intervals, that she was entering the land of chimæras; she said toherself: “Is this reality?” Then she felt of the dear paper within herbosom under her gown, she pressed it to her heart, she felt its anglesagainst her flesh; and if Jean Valjean had seen her at the moment, hewould have shuddered in the presence of that luminous and unknown joy,which overflowed from beneath her eyelids.—“Oh yes!” she thought, “itis certainly he! This comes from him, and is for me!”

And she told herself that an intervention of the angels, a celestialchance, had given him back to her.
Oh transfiguration of love! Oh dreams! That celestial chance, thatintervention of the angels, was a pellet of bread tossed by one thiefto another thief, from the Charlemagne Courtyard to the Lion’s Ditch,over the roofs of La Force.



CHAPTER VI—OLD PEOPLE ARE MADE TO GO OUT OPPORTUNELY

When evening came, Jean Valjean went out; Cosette dressed herself. Shearranged her hair in the most becoming manner, and she put on a dresswhose bodice had received one snip of the scissors too much, and which,through this slope, permitted a view of the beginning of her throat,and was, as young girls say, “a trifle indecent.” It was not in theleast indecent, but it was prettier than usual. She made her toiletthus without knowing why she did so.
Did she mean to go out? No.
Was she expecting a visitor? No.
At dusk, she went down to the garden. Toussaint was busy in herkitchen, which opened on the back yard.
She began to stroll about under the trees, thrusting aside the branchesfrom time to time with her hand, because there were some which hungvery low.
In this manner she reached the bench.
The stone was still there.
She sat down, and gently laid her white hand on this stone as thoughshe wished to caress and thank it.
All at once, she experienced that indefinable impression which oneundergoes when there is some one standing behind one, even when shedoes not see the person.
She turned her head and rose to her feet.
It was he.
His head was bare. He appeared to have grown thin and pale. His blackclothes were hardly discernible. The twilight threw a wan light on hisfine brow, and covered his eyes in shadows. Beneath a veil ofincomparable sweetness, he had something about him that suggested deathand night. His face was illuminated by the light of the dying day, andby the thought of a soul that is taking flight.
He seemed to be not yet a ghost, and he was no longer a man.
He had flung away his hat in the thicket, a few paces distant.
Cosette, though ready to swoon, uttered no cry. She retreated slowly,for she felt herself attracted. He did not stir. By virtue of somethingineffable and melancholy which enveloped him, she felt the look in hiseyes which she could not see.
Cosette, in her retreat, encountered a tree and leaned against it. Hadit not been for this tree, she would have fallen.
Then she heard his voice, that voice which she had really never heard,barely rising above the rustle of the leaves, and murmuring:—
“Pardon me, here I am. My heart is full. I could not live on as I wasliving, and I have come. Have you read what I placed there on thebench? Do you recognize me at all? Have no fear of me. It is a longtime, you remember the day, since you looked at me at the Luxembourg,near the Gladiator. And the day when you passed before me? It was onthe 16th of June and the 2d of July. It is nearly a year ago. I havenot seen you for a long time. I inquired of the woman who let thechairs, and she told me that she no longer saw you. You lived in theRue de l’Ouest, on the third floor, in the front apartments of a newhouse,—you see that I know! I followed you. What else was there for meto do? And then you disappeared. I thought I saw you pass once, while Iwas reading the newspapers under the arcade of the Odéon. I ran afteryou. But no. It was a person who had a bonnet like yours. At night Icame hither. Do not be afraid, no one sees me. I come to gaze upon yourwindows near at hand. I walk very softly, so that you may not hear, foryou might be alarmed. The other evening I was behind you, you turnedround, I fled. Once, I heard you singing. I was happy. Did it affectyou because I heard you singing through the shutters? That could nothurt you. No, it is not so? You see, you are my angel! Let me comesometimes; I think that I am going to die. If you only knew! I adoreyou. Forgive me, I speak to you, but I do not know what I am saying; Imay have displeased you; have I displeased you?”

“Oh! my mother!” said she.
And she sank down as though on the point of death.
He grasped her, she fell, he took her in his arms, he pressed herclose, without knowing what he was doing. He supported her, though hewas tottering himself. It was as though his brain were full of smoke;lightnings darted between his lips; his ideas vanished; it seemed tohim that he was accomplishing some religious act, and that he wascommitting a profanation. Moreover, he had not the least passion forthis lovely woman whose force he felt against his breast. He was besidehimself with love.
She took his hand and laid it on her heart. He felt the paper there, hestammered:—
“You love me, then?”

She replied in a voice so low that it was no longer anything more thana barely audible breath:—
“Hush! Thou knowest it!”

And she hid her blushing face on the breast of the superb andintoxicated young man.
He fell upon the bench, and she beside him. They had no words more. Thestars were beginning to gleam. How did it come to pass that their lipsmet? How comes it to pass that the birds sing, that snow melts, thatthe rose unfolds, that May expands, that the dawn grows white behindthe black trees on the shivering crest of the hills?
A kiss, and that was all.
Both started, and gazed into the darkness with sparkling eyes.
They felt neither the cool night, nor the cold stone, nor the dampearth, nor the wet grass; they looked at each other, and their heartswere full of thoughts. They had clasped hands unconsciously.
She did not ask him, she did not even wonder, how he had entered there,and how he had made his way into the garden. It seemed so simple to herthat he should be there!
From time to time, Marius’ knee touched Cosette’s knee, and bothshivered.
At intervals, Cosette stammered a word. Her soul fluttered on her lipslike a drop of dew on a flower.
Little by little they began to talk to each other. Effusion followedsilence, which is fulness. The night was serene and splendid overhead.These two beings, pure as spirits, told each other everything, theirdreams, their intoxications, their ecstasies, their chimæras, theirweaknesses, how they had adored each other from afar, how they hadlonged for each other, their despair when they had ceased to see eachother. They confided to each other in an ideal intimacy, which nothingcould augment, their most secret and most mysterious thoughts. Theyrelated to each other, with candid faith in their illusions, all thatlove, youth, and the remains of childhood which still lingered aboutthem, suggested to their minds. Their two hearts poured themselves outinto each other in such wise, that at the expiration of a quarter of anhour, it was the young man who had the young girl’s soul, and the younggirl who had the young man’s soul. Each became permeated with theother, they were enchanted with each other, they dazzled each other.
When they had finished, when they had told each other everything, shelaid her head on his shoulder and asked him:—
“What is your name?”

“My name is Marius,” said he. “And yours?”

“My name is Cosette.”




BOOK SIXTH—LITTLE GAVROCHE



CHAPTER I—THE MALICIOUS PLAYFULNESS OF THE WIND

Since 1823, when the tavern of Montfermeil was on the way to shipwreckand was being gradually engulfed, not in the abyss of a bankruptcy, butin the cesspool of petty debts, the Thénardier pair had had two otherchildren; both males. That made five; two girls and three boys.
Madame Thénardier had got rid of the last two, while they were stillyoung and very small, with remarkable luck.
_Got rid of_ is the word. There was but a mere fragment of nature inthat woman. A phenomenon, by the way, of which there is more than oneexample extant. Like the Maréchale de La Mothe-Houdancourt, theThénardier was a mother to her daughters only. There her maternityended. Her hatred of the human race began with her own sons. In thedirection of her sons her evil disposition was uncompromising, and herheart had a lugubrious wall in that quarter. As the reader has seen,she detested the eldest; she cursed the other two. Why? Because. Themost terrible of motives, the most unanswerable of retorts—Because. “Ihave no need of a litter of squalling brats,” said this mother.
Let us explain how the Thénardiers had succeeded in getting rid oftheir last two children; and even in drawing profit from the operation.
The woman Magnon, who was mentioned a few pages further back, was thesame one who had succeeded in making old Gillenormand support the twochildren which she had had. She lived on the Quai des Célestins, at thecorner of this ancient street of the Petit-Musc which afforded her theopportunity of changing her evil repute into good odor. The reader willremember the great epidemic of croup which ravaged the river districtsof the Seine in Paris thirty-five years ago, and of which science tookadvantage to make experiments on a grand scale as to the efficacy ofinhalations of alum, so beneficially replaced at the present day by theexternal tincture of iodine. During this epidemic, the Magnon lost bothher boys, who were still very young, one in the morning, the other inthe evening of the same day. This was a blow. These children wereprecious to their mother; they represented eighty francs a month. Theseeighty francs were punctually paid in the name of M. Gillenormand, bycollector of his rents, M. Barge, a retired tip-staff, in the Rue duRoi-de-Sicile. The children dead, the income was at an end. The Magnonsought an expedient. In that dark free-masonry of evil of which sheformed a part, everything is known, all secrets are kept, and all lendmutual aid. Magnon needed two children; the Thénardiers had two. Thesame sex, the same age. A good arrangement for the one, a goodinvestment for the other. The little Thénardiers became little Magnons.Magnon quitted the Quai des Célestins and went to live in the RueClocheperce. In Paris, the identity which binds an individual tohimself is broken between one street and another.
The registry office being in no way warned, raised no objections, andthe substitution was effected in the most simple manner in the world.Only, the Thénardier exacted for this loan of her children, ten francsa month, which Magnon promised to pay, and which she actually did pay.It is unnecessary to add that M. Gillenormand continued to perform hiscompact. He came to see the children every six months. He did notperceive the change. “Monsieur,” Magnon said to him, “how much theyresemble you!”

Thénardier, to whom avatars were easy, seized this occasion to becomeJondrette. His two daughters and Gavroche had hardly had time todiscover that they had two little brothers. When a certain degree ofmisery is reached, one is overpowered with a sort of spectralindifference, and one regards human beings as though they werespectres. Your nearest relations are often no more for you than vagueshadowy forms, barely outlined against a nebulous background of lifeand easily confounded again with the invisible.
On the evening of the day when she had handed over her two little onesto Magnon, with express intention of renouncing them forever, theThénardier had felt, or had appeared to feel, a scruple. She said toher husband: “But this is abandoning our children!” Thénardier,masterful and phlegmatic, cauterized the scruple with this saying:“Jean Jacques Rousseau did even better!” From scruples, the motherproceeded to uneasiness: “But what if the police were to annoy us? Tellme, Monsieur Thénardier, is what we have done permissible?” Thénardierreplied: “Everything is permissible. No one will see anything but trueblue in it. Besides, no one has any interest in looking closely afterchildren who have not a sou.”

Magnon was a sort of fashionable woman in the sphere of crime. She wascareful about her toilet. She shared her lodgings, which were furnishedin an affected and wretched style, with a clever gallicized Englishthief. This English woman, who had become a naturalized Parisienne,recommended by very wealthy relations, intimately connected with themedals in the Library and Mademoiselle Mar’s diamonds, becamecelebrated later on in judicial accounts. She was called _MamselleMiss_.
The two little creatures who had fallen to Magnon had no reason tocomplain of their lot. Recommended by the eighty francs, they were wellcared for, as is everything from which profit is derived; they wereneither badly clothed, nor badly fed; they were treated almost like“little gentlemen,”—better by their false mother than by their realone. Magnon played the lady, and talked no thieves’ slang in theirpresence.
Thus passed several years. Thénardier augured well from the fact. Oneday, he chanced to say to Magnon as she handed him his monthly stipendof ten francs: “The father must give them some education.”

All at once, these two poor children, who had up to that time beenprotected tolerably well, even by their evil fate, were abruptly hurledinto life and forced to begin it for themselves.
A wholesale arrest of malefactors, like that in the Jondrette garret,necessarily complicated by investigations and subsequentincarcerations, is a veritable disaster for that hideous and occultcounter-society which pursues its existence beneath public society; anadventure of this description entails all sorts of catastrophes in thatsombre world. The Thénardier catastrophe involved the catastrophe ofMagnon.
One day, a short time after Magnon had handed to Éponine the noterelating to the Rue Plumet, a sudden raid was made by the police in theRue Clocheperce; Magnon was seized, as was also Mamselle Miss; and allthe inhabitants of the house, which was of a suspicious character, weregathered into the net. While this was going on, the two little boyswere playing in the back yard, and saw nothing of the raid. When theytried to enter the house again, they found the door fastened and thehouse empty. A cobbler opposite called them to him, and delivered tothem a paper which “their mother” had left for them. On this paperthere was an address: _M. Barge, collector of rents, Rue duRoi-de-Sicile, No_. 8. The proprietor of the stall said to them: “Youcannot live here any longer. Go there. It is nearby. The first streeton the left. Ask your way from this paper.”

The children set out, the elder leading the younger, and holding in hishand the paper which was to guide them. It was cold, and his benumbedlittle fingers could not close very firmly, and they did not keep avery good hold on the paper. At the corner of the Rue Clocheperce, agust of wind tore it from him, and as night was falling, the child wasnot able to find it again.
They began to wander aimlessly through the streets.



CHAPTER II—IN WHICH LITTLE GAVROCHE EXTRACTS PROFIT FROM NAPOLEON THEGREAT

Spring in Paris is often traversed by harsh and piercing breezes whichdo not precisely chill but freeze one; these north winds which saddenthe most beautiful days produce exactly the effect of those puffs ofcold air which enter a warm room through the cracks of a badly fittingdoor or window. It seems as though the gloomy door of winter hadremained ajar, and as though the wind were pouring through it. In thespring of 1832, the epoch when the first great epidemic of this centurybroke out in Europe, these north gales were more harsh and piercingthan ever. It was a door even more glacial than that of winter whichwas ajar. It was the door of the sepulchre. In these winds one felt thebreath of the cholera.
From a meteorological point of view, these cold winds possessed thispeculiarity, that they did not preclude a strong electric tension.Frequent storms, accompanied by thunder and lightning, burst forth atthis epoch.
One evening, when these gales were blowing rudely, to such a degreethat January seemed to have returned and that the bourgeois had resumedtheir cloaks, Little Gavroche, who was always shivering gayly under hisrags, was standing as though in ecstasy before a wig-maker’s shop inthe vicinity of the Orme-Saint-Gervais. He was adorned with a woman’swoollen shawl, picked up no one knows where, and which he had convertedinto a neck comforter. Little Gavroche appeared to be engaged in intentadmiration of a wax bride, in a low-necked dress, and crowned withorange-flowers, who was revolving in the window, and displaying hersmile to passers-by, between two argand lamps; but in reality, he wastaking an observation of the shop, in order to discover whether hecould not “prig” from the shop-front a cake of soap, which he wouldthen proceed to sell for a sou to a “hair-dresser” in the suburbs. Hehad often managed to breakfast off of such a roll. He called hisspecies of work, for which he possessed special aptitude, “shavingbarbers.”

While contemplating the bride, and eyeing the cake of soap, he mutteredbetween his teeth: “Tuesday. It was not Tuesday. Was it Tuesday?Perhaps it was Tuesday. Yes, it was Tuesday.”

No one has ever discovered to what this monologue referred.
Yes, perchance, this monologue had some connection with the lastoccasion on which he had dined, three days before, for it was nowFriday.
The barber in his shop, which was warmed by a good stove, was shaving acustomer and casting a glance from time to time at the enemy, thatfreezing and impudent street urchin both of whose hands were in hispockets, but whose mind was evidently unsheathed.
While Gavroche was scrutinizing the shop-window and the cakes ofwindsor soap, two children of unequal stature, very neatly dressed, andstill smaller than himself, one apparently about seven years of age,the other five, timidly turned the handle and entered the shop, with arequest for something or other, alms possibly, in a plaintive murmurwhich resembled a groan rather than a prayer. They both spoke at once,and their words were unintelligible because sobs broke the voice of theyounger, and the teeth of the elder were chattering with cold. Thebarber wheeled round with a furious look, and without abandoning hisrazor, thrust back the elder with his left hand and the younger withhis knee, and slammed his door, saying: “The idea of coming in andfreezing everybody for nothing!”

The two children resumed their march in tears. In the meantime, a cloudhad risen; it had begun to rain.
Little Gavroche ran after them and accosted them:—
“What’s the matter with you, brats?”

“We don’t know where we are to sleep,” replied the elder.
“Is that all?” said Gavroche. “A great matter, truly. The idea ofbawling about that. They must be greenies!”

And adopting, in addition to his superiority, which was ratherbantering, an accent of tender authority and gentle patronage:—
“Come along with me, young ‘uns!”

“Yes, sir,” said the elder.
And the two children followed him as they would have followed anarchbishop. They had stopped crying.
Gavroche led them up the Rue Saint-Antoine in the direction of theBastille.
As Gavroche walked along, he cast an indignant backward glance at thebarber’s shop.
“That fellow has no heart, the whiting,"35 he muttered. “He’s anEnglishman.”

A woman who caught sight of these three marching in a file, withGavroche at their head, burst into noisy laughter. This laugh waswanting in respect towards the group.
“Good day, Mamselle Omnibus,” said Gavroche to her.
An instant later, the wig-maker occurred to his mind once more, and headded:—
“I am making a mistake in the beast; he’s not a whiting, he’s aserpent. Barber, I’ll go and fetch a locksmith, and I’ll have a bellhung to your tail.”

This wig-maker had rendered him aggressive. As he strode over a gutter,he apostrophized a bearded portress who was worthy to meet Faust on theBrocken, and who had a broom in her hand.
“Madam,” said he, “so you are going out with your horse?”

And thereupon, he spattered the polished boots of a pedestrian.
“You scamp!” shouted the furious pedestrian.
Gavroche elevated his nose above his shawl.
“Is Monsieur complaining?”

“Of you!” ejaculated the man.
“The office is closed,” said Gavroche, “I do not receive any morecomplaints.”

In the meanwhile, as he went on up the street, he perceived abeggar-girl, thirteen or fourteen years old, and clad in so short agown that her knees were visible, lying thoroughly chilled under aporte-cochère. The little girl was getting to be too old for such athing. Growth does play these tricks. The petticoat becomes short atthe moment when nudity becomes indecent.
“Poor girl!” said Gavroche. “She hasn’t even trousers. Hold on, takethis.”

And unwinding all the comfortable woollen which he had around his neck,he flung it on the thin and purple shoulders of the beggar-girl, wherethe scarf became a shawl once more.
The child stared at him in astonishment, and received the shawl insilence. When a certain stage of distress has been reached in hismisery, the poor man no longer groans over evil, no longer returnsthanks for good.
That done: “Brrr!” said Gavroche, who was shivering more than SaintMartin, for the latter retained one-half of his cloak.
At this _brrr!_ the downpour of rain, redoubled in its spite, becamefurious. The wicked skies punish good deeds.
“Ah, come now!” exclaimed Gavroche, “what’s the meaning of this? It’sre-raining! Good Heavens, if it goes on like this, I shall stop mysubscription.”

And he set out on the march once more.
“It’s all right,” he resumed, casting a glance at the beggar-girl, asshe coiled up under the shawl, “she’s got a famous peel.”

And looking up at the clouds he exclaimed:—
“Caught!”

The two children followed close on his heels.
As they were passing one of these heavy grated lattices, which indicatea baker’s shop, for bread is put behind bars like gold, Gavroche turnedround:—
“Ah, by the way, brats, have we dined?”

“Monsieur,” replied the elder, “we have had nothing to eat since thismorning.”

“So you have neither father nor mother?” resumed Gavroche majestically.
“Excuse us, sir, we have a papa and a mamma, but we don’t know wherethey are.”

“Sometimes that’s better than knowing where they are,” said Gavroche,who was a thinker.
“We have been wandering about these two hours,” continued the elder,“we have hunted for things at the corners of the streets, but we havefound nothing.”

“I know,” ejaculated Gavroche, “it’s the dogs who eat everything.”

He went on, after a pause:—
“Ah! we have lost our authors. We don’t know what we have done withthem. This should not be, gamins. It’s stupid to let old people strayoff like that. Come now! we must have a snooze all the same.”

However, he asked them no questions. What was more simple than thatthey should have no dwelling place!
The elder of the two children, who had almost entirely recovered theprompt heedlessness of childhood, uttered this exclamation:—
“It’s queer, all the same. Mamma told us that she would take us to geta blessed spray on Palm Sunday.”

“Bosh,” said Gavroche.
“Mamma,” resumed the elder, “is a lady who lives with Mamselle Miss.”

“Tanflûte!” retorted Gavroche.
Meanwhile he had halted, and for the last two minutes he had beenfeeling and fumbling in all sorts of nooks which his rags contained.
At last he tossed his head with an air intended to be merely satisfied,but which was triumphant, in reality.
“Let us be calm, young ‘uns. Here’s supper for three.”

And from one of his pockets he drew forth a sou.
Without allowing the two urchins time for amazement, he pushed both ofthem before him into the baker’s shop, and flung his sou on thecounter, crying:—
“Boy! five centimes’ worth of bread.”

The baker, who was the proprietor in person, took up a loaf and aknife.
“In three pieces, my boy!” went on Gavroche.
And he added with dignity:—
“There are three of us.”

And seeing that the baker, after scrutinizing the three customers, hadtaken down a black loaf, he thrust his finger far up his nose with aninhalation as imperious as though he had had a pinch of the greatFrederick’s snuff on the tip of his thumb, and hurled this indignantapostrophe full in the baker’s face:—
“Keksekça?”

Those of our readers who might be tempted to espy in thisinterpellation of Gavroche’s to the baker a Russian or a Polish word,or one of those savage cries which the Yoways and the Botocudos hurl ateach other from bank to bank of a river, athwart the solitudes, arewarned that it is a word which they [our readers] utter every day, andwhich takes the place of the phrase: “Qu’est-ce que c’est que cela?”The baker understood perfectly, and replied:—
“Well! It’s bread, and very good bread of the second quality.”

“You mean _larton brutal_ [black bread]!” retorted Gavroche, calmly andcoldly disdainful. “White bread, boy! white bread [_larton savonné_]!I’m standing treat.”

The baker could not repress a smile, and as he cut the white bread hesurveyed them in a compassionate way which shocked Gavroche.
“Come, now, baker’s boy!” said he, “what are you taking our measurelike that for?”

All three of them placed end to end would have hardly made a measure.
When the bread was cut, the baker threw the sou into his drawer, andGavroche said to the two children:—
“Grub away.”

The little boys stared at him in surprise.
Gavroche began to laugh.
“Ah! hullo, that’s so! they don’t understand yet, they’re too small.”

And he repeated:—
“Eat away.”

At the same time, he held out a piece of bread to each of them.
And thinking that the elder, who seemed to him the more worthy of hisconversation, deserved some special encouragement and ought to berelieved from all hesitation to satisfy his appetite, he added, as hehanded him the largest share:—
“Ram that into your muzzle.”

One piece was smaller than the others; he kept this for himself.
The poor children, including Gavroche, were famished. As they toretheir bread apart in big mouthfuls, they blocked up the shop of thebaker, who, now that they had paid their money, looked angrily at them.
“Let’s go into the street again,” said Gavroche.
They set off once more in the direction of the Bastille.
From time to time, as they passed the lighted shop-windows, thesmallest halted to look at the time on a leaden watch which wassuspended from his neck by a cord.
“Well, he is a very green ‘un,” said Gavroche.
Then, becoming thoughtful, he muttered between his teeth:—
“All the same, if I had charge of the babes I’d lock ‘em up better thanthat.”

Just as they were finishing their morsel of bread, and had reached theangle of that gloomy Rue des Ballets, at the other end of which the lowand threatening wicket of La Force was visible:—
“Hullo, is that you, Gavroche?” said some one.
“Hullo, is that you, Montparnasse?” said Gavroche.
A man had just accosted the street urchin, and the man was no otherthan Montparnasse in disguise, with blue spectacles, but recognizableto Gavroche.
“The bow-wows!” went on Gavroche, “you’ve got a hide the color of alinseed plaster, and blue specs like a doctor. You’re putting on style,‘pon my word!”

“Hush!” ejaculated Montparnasse, “not so loud.”

And he drew Gavroche hastily out of range of the lighted shops.
The two little ones followed mechanically, holding each other by thehand.
When they were ensconced under the arch of a porte-cochère, shelteredfrom the rain and from all eyes:—
“Do you know where I’m going?” demanded Montparnasse.
“To the Abbey of Ascend-with-Regret,"36 replied Gavroche.
“Joker!”

And Montparnasse went on:—
“I’m going to find Babet.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Gavroche, “so her name is Babet.”

Montparnasse lowered his voice:—
“Not she, he.”

“Ah! Babet.”

“Yes, Babet.”

“I thought he was buckled.”

“He has undone the buckle,” replied Montparnasse.
And he rapidly related to the gamin how, on the morning of that veryday, Babet, having been transferred to La Conciergerie, had made hisescape, by turning to the left instead of to the right in “the policeoffice.”

Gavroche expressed his admiration for this skill.
“What a dentist!” he cried.
Montparnasse added a few details as to Babet’s flight, and ended with:—
“Oh! That’s not all.”

Gavroche, as he listened, had seized a cane that Montparnasse held inhis hand, and mechanically pulled at the upper part, and the blade of adagger made its appearance.
“Ah!” he exclaimed, pushing the dagger back in haste, “you have broughtalong your gendarme disguised as a bourgeois.”

Montparnasse winked.
“The deuce!” resumed Gavroche, “so you’re going to have a bout with thebobbies?”

“You can’t tell,” replied Montparnasse with an indifferent air. “It’salways a good thing to have a pin about one.”

Gavroche persisted:—
“What are you up to to-night?”

Again Montparnasse took a grave tone, and said, mouthing everysyllable: “Things.”

And abruptly changing the conversation:—
“By the way!”

“What?”

“Something happened t’other day. Fancy. I meet a bourgeois. He makes mea present of a sermon and his purse. I put it in my pocket. A minutelater, I feel in my pocket. There’s nothing there.”

“Except the sermon,” said Gavroche.
“But you,” went on Montparnasse, “where are you bound for now?”

Gavroche pointed to his two protégés, and said:—
“I’m going to put these infants to bed.”

“Whereabouts is the bed?”

“At my house.”

“Where’s your house?”

“At my house.”

“So you have a lodging?”

“Yes, I have.”

“And where is your lodging?”

“In the elephant,” said Gavroche.
Montparnasse, though not naturally inclined to astonishment, could notrestrain an exclamation.
“In the elephant!”

“Well, yes, in the elephant!” retorted Gavroche. “Kekçaa?”

This is another word of the language which no one writes, and whichevery one speaks.
Kekçaa signifies: _Qu’est que c’est que cela a? _ [What’s the matterwith that?]
The urchin’s profound remark recalled Montparnasse to calmness and goodsense. He appeared to return to better sentiments with regard toGavroche’s lodging.
“Of course,” said he, “yes, the elephant. Is it comfortable there?”

“Very,” said Gavroche. “It’s really bully there. There ain’t anydraughts, as there are under the bridges.”

“How do you get in?”

“Oh, I get in.”

“So there is a hole?” demanded Montparnasse.
“Parbleu! I should say so. But you mustn’t tell. It’s between the forelegs. The bobbies haven’t seen it.”

“And you climb up? Yes, I understand.”

“A turn of the hand, cric, crac, and it’s all over, no one there.”

After a pause, Gavroche added:—
“I shall have a ladder for these children.”

Montparnasse burst out laughing:—
“Where the devil did you pick up those young ‘uns?”

Gavroche replied with great simplicity:—
“They are some brats that a wig-maker made me a present of.”

Meanwhile, Montparnasse had fallen to thinking:—
“You recognized me very readily,” he muttered.
He took from his pocket two small objects which were nothing more thantwo quills wrapped in cotton, and thrust one up each of his nostrils.This gave him a different nose.
“That changes you,” remarked Gavroche, “you are less homely so, youought to keep them on all the time.”

Montparnasse was a handsome fellow, but Gavroche was a tease.
“Seriously,” demanded Montparnasse, “how do you like me so?”

The sound of his voice was different also. In a twinkling, Montparnassehad become unrecognizable.
“Oh! Do play Porrichinelle for us!” exclaimed Gavroche.
The two children, who had not been listening up to this point, beingoccupied themselves in thrusting their fingers up their noses, drewnear at this name, and stared at Montparnasse with dawning joy andadmiration.
Unfortunately, Montparnasse was troubled.
He laid his hand on Gavroche’s shoulder, and said to him, emphasizinghis words: “Listen to what I tell you, boy! if I were on the squarewith my dog, my knife, and my wife, and if you were to squander tensous on me, I wouldn’t refuse to work, but this isn’t Shrove Tuesday.”

This odd phrase produced a singular effect on the gamin. He wheeledround hastily, darted his little sparkling eyes about him with profoundattention, and perceived a police sergeant standing with his back tothem a few paces off. Gavroche allowed an: “Ah! good!” to escape him,but immediately suppressed it, and shaking Montparnasse’s hand:—
“Well, good evening,” said he, “I’m going off to my elephant with mybrats. Supposing that you should need me some night, you can come andhunt me up there. I lodge on the entresol. There is no porter. You willinquire for Monsieur Gavroche.”

“Very good,” said Montparnasse.
And they parted, Montparnasse betaking himself in the direction of theGrève, and Gavroche towards the Bastille. The little one of five,dragged along by his brother who was dragged by Gavroche, turned hishead back several times to watch “Porrichinelle” as he went.
The ambiguous phrase by means of which Montparnasse had warned Gavrocheof the presence of the policeman, contained no other talisman than theassonance _dig_ repeated five or six times in different forms. Thissyllable, _dig_, uttered alone or artistically mingled with the wordsof a phrase, means: “Take care, we can no longer talk freely.” Therewas besides, in Montparnasse’s sentence, a literary beauty which waslost upon Gavroche, that is _mon dogue, ma dague et ma digue_, a slangexpression of the Temple, which signifies my dog, my knife, and mywife, greatly in vogue among clowns and the red-tails in the greatcentury when Molière wrote and Callot drew.
Twenty years ago, there was still to be seen in the southwest corner ofthe Place de la Bastille, near the basin of the canal, excavated in theancient ditch of the fortress-prison, a singular monument, which hasalready been effaced from the memories of Parisians, and which deservedto leave some trace, for it was the idea of a “member of the Institute,the General-in-chief of the army of Egypt.”

We say monument, although it was only a rough model. But this modelitself, a marvellous sketch, the grandiose skeleton of an idea ofNapoleon’s, which successive gusts of wind have carried away andthrown, on each occasion, still further from us, had become historicaland had acquired a certain definiteness which contrasted with itsprovisional aspect. It was an elephant forty feet high, constructed oftimber and masonry, bearing on its back a tower which resembled ahouse, formerly painted green by some dauber, and now painted black byheaven, the wind, and time. In this deserted and unprotected corner ofthe place, the broad brow of the colossus, his trunk, his tusks, histower, his enormous crupper, his four feet, like columns produced, atnight, under the starry heavens, a surprising and terrible form. It wasa sort of symbol of popular force. It was sombre, mysterious, andimmense. It was some mighty, visible phantom, one knew not what,standing erect beside the invisible spectre of the Bastille.
Few strangers visited this edifice, no passer-by looked at it. It wasfalling into ruins; every season the plaster which detached itself fromits sides formed hideous wounds upon it. “The ædiles,” as theexpression ran in elegant dialect, had forgotten it ever since 1814.There it stood in its corner, melancholy, sick, crumbling, surroundedby a rotten palisade, soiled continually by drunken coachmen; cracksmeandered athwart its belly, a lath projected from its tail, tall grassflourished between its legs; and, as the level of the place had beenrising all around it for a space of thirty years, by that slow andcontinuous movement which insensibly elevates the soil of large towns,it stood in a hollow, and it looked as though the ground were givingway beneath it. It was unclean, despised, repulsive, and superb, uglyin the eyes of the bourgeois, melancholy in the eyes of the thinker.There was something about it of the dirt which is on the point of beingswept out, and something of the majesty which is on the point of beingdecapitated. As we have said, at night, its aspect changed. Night isthe real element of everything that is dark. As soon as twilightdescended, the old elephant became transfigured; he assumed a tranquiland redoubtable appearance in the formidable serenity of the shadows.Being of the past, he belonged to night; and obscurity was in keepingwith his grandeur.
This rough, squat, heavy, hard, austere, almost misshapen, butassuredly majestic monument, stamped with a sort of magnificent andsavage gravity, has disappeared, and left to reign in peace, a sort ofgigantic stove, ornamented with its pipe, which has replaced the sombrefortress with its nine towers, very much as the bourgeoisie replacesthe feudal classes. It is quite natural that a stove should be thesymbol of an epoch in which a pot contains power. This epoch will passaway, people have already begun to understand that, if there can beforce in a boiler, there can be no force except in the brain; in otherwords, that which leads and drags on the world, is not locomotives, butideas. Harness locomotives to ideas,—that is well done; but do notmistake the horse for the rider.
At all events, to return to the Place de la Bastille, the architect ofthis elephant succeeded in making a grand thing out of plaster; thearchitect of the stove has succeeded in making a pretty thing out ofbronze.
This stove-pipe, which has been baptized by a sonorous name, and calledthe column of July, this monument of a revolution that miscarried, wasstill enveloped in 1832, in an immense shirt of woodwork, which weregret, for our part, and by a vast plank enclosure, which completedthe task of isolating the elephant.
It was towards this corner of the place, dimly lighted by thereflection of a distant street lamp, that the gamin guided his two“brats.”

The reader must permit us to interrupt ourselves here and to remind himthat we are dealing with simple reality, and that twenty years ago, thetribunals were called upon to judge, under the charge of vagabondage,and mutilation of a public monument, a child who had been caught asleepin this very elephant of the Bastille. This fact noted, we proceed.
On arriving in the vicinity of the colossus, Gavroche comprehended theeffect which the infinitely great might produce on the infinitelysmall, and said:—
“Don’t be scared, infants.”

Then he entered through a gap in the fence into the elephant’senclosure and helped the young ones to clamber through the breach. Thetwo children, somewhat frightened, followed Gavroche without uttering aword, and confided themselves to this little Providence in rags whichhad given them bread and had promised them a shelter.
There, extended along the fence, lay a ladder which by day served thelaborers in the neighboring timber-yard. Gavroche raised it withremarkable vigor, and placed it against one of the elephant’s forelegs.Near the point where the ladder ended, a sort of black hole in thebelly of the colossus could be distinguished.
Gavroche pointed out the ladder and the hole to his guests, and said tothem:—
“Climb up and go in.”

The two little boys exchanged terrified glances.
“You’re afraid, brats!” exclaimed Gavroche.
And he added:—
“You shall see!”

He clasped the rough leg of the elephant, and in a twinkling, withoutdeigning to make use of the ladder, he had reached the aperture. Heentered it as an adder slips through a crevice, and disappeared within,and an instant later, the two children saw his head, which looked pale,appear vaguely, on the edge of the shadowy hole, like a wan and whitishspectre.
“Well!” he exclaimed, “climb up, young ‘uns! You’ll see how snug it ishere! Come up, you!” he said to the elder, “I’ll lend you a hand.”

The little fellows nudged each other, the gamin frightened and inspiredthem with confidence at one and the same time, and then, it was rainingvery hard. The elder one undertook the risk. The younger, on seeing hisbrother climbing up, and himself left alone between the paws of thishuge beast, felt greatly inclined to cry, but he did not dare.
The elder lad climbed, with uncertain steps, up the rungs of theladder; Gavroche, in the meanwhile, encouraging him with exclamationslike a fencing-master to his pupils, or a muleteer to his mules.
“Don’t be afraid!—That’s it!—Come on!—Put your feet there!—Give us yourhand here!—Boldly!”

And when the child was within reach, he seized him suddenly andvigorously by the arm, and pulled him towards him.
“Nabbed!” said he.
The brat had passed through the crack.
“Now,” said Gavroche, “wait for me. Be so good as to take a seat,Monsieur.”

And making his way out of the hole as he had entered it, he slippeddown the elephant’s leg with the agility of a monkey, landed on hisfeet in the grass, grasped the child of five round the body, andplanted him fairly in the middle of the ladder, then he began to climbup behind him, shouting to the elder:—
“I’m going to boost him, do you tug.”

And in another instant, the small lad was pushed, dragged, pulled,thrust, stuffed into the hole, before he had time to recover himself,and Gavroche, entering behind him, and repulsing the ladder with a kickwhich sent it flat on the grass, began to clap his hands and to cry:—
“Here we are! Long live General Lafayette!”

This explosion over, he added:—
“Now, young ‘uns, you are in my house.”

Gavroche was at home, in fact.
Oh, unforeseen utility of the useless! Charity of great things!Goodness of giants! This huge monument, which had embodied an idea ofthe Emperor’s, had become the box of a street urchin. The brat had beenaccepted and sheltered by the colossus. The bourgeois decked out intheir Sunday finery who passed the elephant of the Bastille, were fondof saying as they scanned it disdainfully with their prominent eyes:“What’s the good of that?” It served to save from the cold, the frost,the hail, and rain, to shelter from the winds of winter, to preservefrom slumber in the mud which produces fever, and from slumber in thesnow which produces death, a little being who had no father, no mother,no bread, no clothes, no refuge. It served to receive the innocent whomsociety repulsed. It served to diminish public crime. It was a lairopen to one against whom all doors were shut. It seemed as though themiserable old mastodon, invaded by vermin and oblivion, covered withwarts, with mould, and ulcers, tottering, worm-eaten, abandoned,condemned, a sort of mendicant colossus, asking alms in vain with abenevolent look in the midst of the crossroads, had taken pity on thatother mendicant, the poor pygmy, who roamed without shoes to his feet,without a roof over his head, blowing on his fingers, clad in rags, fedon rejected scraps. That was what the elephant of the Bastille was goodfor. This idea of Napoleon, disdained by men, had been taken back byGod. That which had been merely illustrious, had become august. Inorder to realize his thought, the Emperor should have had porphyry,brass, iron, gold, marble; the old collection of planks, beams andplaster sufficed for God. The Emperor had had the dream of a genius; inthat Titanic elephant, armed, prodigious, with trunk uplifted, bearingits tower and scattering on all sides its merry and vivifying waters,he wished to incarnate the people. God had done a grander thing withit, he had lodged a child there.
The hole through which Gavroche had entered was a breach which washardly visible from the outside, being concealed, as we have stated,beneath the elephant’s belly, and so narrow that it was only cats andhomeless children who could pass through it.
“Let’s begin,” said Gavroche, “by telling the porter that we are not athome.”

And plunging into the darkness with the assurance of a person who iswell acquainted with his apartments, he took a plank and stopped up theaperture.
Again Gavroche plunged into the obscurity. The children heard thecrackling of the match thrust into the phosphoric bottle. The chemicalmatch was not yet in existence; at that epoch the Fumade steelrepresented progress.
A sudden light made them blink; Gavroche had just managed to ignite oneof those bits of cord dipped in resin which are called _cellar rats_.The _cellar rat_, which emitted more smoke than light, rendered theinterior of the elephant confusedly visible.
Gavroche’s two guests glanced about them, and the sensation which theyexperienced was something like that which one would feel if shut up inthe great tun of Heidelberg, or, better still, like what Jonah musthave felt in the biblical belly of the whale. An entire and giganticskeleton appeared enveloping them. Above, a long brown beam, whencestarted at regular distances, massive, arching ribs, represented thevertebral column with its sides, stalactites of plaster depended fromthem like entrails, and vast spiders’ webs stretching from side toside, formed dirty diaphragms. Here and there, in the corners, werevisible large blackish spots which had the appearance of being alive,and which changed places rapidly with an abrupt and frightenedmovement.
Fragments which had fallen from the elephant’s back into his belly hadfilled up the cavity, so that it was possible to walk upon it as on afloor.
The smaller child nestled up against his brother, and whispered tohim:—
“It’s black.”

This remark drew an exclamation from Gavroche. The petrified air of thetwo brats rendered some shock necessary.
“What’s that you are gabbling about there?” he exclaimed. “Are youscoffing at me? Are you turning up your noses? Do you want theTuileries? Are you brutes? Come, say! I warn you that I don’t belong tothe regiment of simpletons. Ah, come now, are you brats from the Pope’sestablishment?”

A little roughness is good in cases of fear. It is reassuring. The twochildren drew close to Gavroche.
Gavroche, paternally touched by this confidence, passed from grave togentle, and addressing the smaller:—
“Stupid,” said he, accenting the insulting word, with a caressingintonation, “it’s outside that it is black. Outside it’s raining, hereit does not rain; outside it’s cold, here there’s not an atom of wind;outside there are heaps of people, here there’s no one; outside thereain’t even the moon, here there’s my candle, confound it!”

The two children began to look upon the apartment with less terror; butGavroche allowed them no more time for contemplation.
“Quick,” said he.
And he pushed them towards what we are very glad to be able to call theend of the room.
There stood his bed.
Gavroche’s bed was complete; that is to say, it had a mattress, ablanket, and an alcove with curtains.
The mattress was a straw mat, the blanket a rather large strip of graywoollen stuff, very warm and almost new. This is what the alcoveconsisted of:—
Three rather long poles, thrust into and consolidated, with the rubbishwhich formed the floor, that is to say, the belly of the elephant, twoin front and one behind, and united by a rope at their summits, so asto form a pyramidal bundle. This cluster supported a trellis-work ofbrass wire which was simply placed upon it, but artistically applied,and held by fastenings of iron wire, so that it enveloped all threeholes. A row of very heavy stones kept this network down to the floorso that nothing could pass under it. This grating was nothing else thana piece of the brass screens with which aviaries are covered inmenageries. Gavroche’s bed stood as in a cage, behind this net. Thewhole resembled an Esquimaux tent.
This trellis-work took the place of curtains.
Gavroche moved aside the stones which fastened the net down in front,and the two folds of the net which lapped over each other fell apart.
“Down on all fours, brats!” said Gavroche.
He made his guests enter the cage with great precaution, then hecrawled in after them, pulled the stones together, and closed theopening hermetically again.
All three had stretched out on the mat. Gavroche still had the _cellarrat_ in his hand.
“Now,” said he, “go to sleep! I’m going to suppress the candelabra.”

“Monsieur,” the elder of the brothers asked Gavroche, pointing to thenetting, “what’s that for?”

“That,” answered Gavroche gravely, “is for the rats. Go to sleep!”

Nevertheless, he felt obliged to add a few words of instruction for thebenefit of these young creatures, and he continued:—
“It’s a thing from the Jardin des Plantes. It’s used for fierceanimals. There’s a whole shopful of them there. All you’ve got to do isto climb over a wall, crawl through a window, and pass through a door.You can get as much as you want.”

As he spoke, he wrapped the younger one up bodily in a fold of theblanket, and the little one murmured:—
“Oh! how good that is! It’s warm!”

Gavroche cast a pleased eye on the blanket.
“That’s from the Jardin des Plantes, too,” said he. “I took that fromthe monkeys.”

And, pointing out to the eldest the mat on which he was lying, a verythick and admirably made mat, he added:—
“That belonged to the giraffe.”

After a pause he went on:—
“The beasts had all these things. I took them away from them. It didn’ttrouble them. I told them: ‘It’s for the elephant.’”

He paused, and then resumed:—
“You crawl over the walls and you don’t care a straw for thegovernment. So there now!”

The two children gazed with timid and stupefied respect on thisintrepid and ingenious being, a vagabond like themselves, isolated likethemselves, frail like themselves, who had something admirable andall-powerful about him, who seemed supernatural to them, and whosephysiognomy was composed of all the grimaces of an old mountebank,mingled with the most ingenuous and charming smiles.
“Monsieur,” ventured the elder timidly, “you are not afraid of thepolice, then?”

Gavroche contented himself with replying:—
“Brat! Nobody says ‘police,’ they say ‘bobbies.’”

The smaller had his eyes wide open, but he said nothing. As he was onthe edge of the mat, the elder being in the middle, Gavroche tucked theblanket round him as a mother might have done, and heightened the matunder his head with old rags, in such a way as to form a pillow for thechild. Then he turned to the elder:—
“Hey! We’re jolly comfortable here, ain’t we?”

“Ah, yes!” replied the elder, gazing at Gavroche with the expression ofa saved angel.
The two poor little children who had been soaked through, began to growwarm once more.
“Ah, by the way,” continued Gavroche, “what were you bawling about?”

And pointing out the little one to his brother:—
“A mite like that, I’ve nothing to say about, but the idea of a bigfellow like you crying! It’s idiotic; you looked like a calf.”

“Gracious,” replied the child, “we have no lodging.”

“Bother!” retorted Gavroche, “you don’t say ‘lodgings,’ you say‘crib.’”

“And then, we were afraid of being alone like that at night.”

“You don’t say ‘night,’ you say ‘darkmans.’”

“Thank you, sir,” said the child.
“Listen,” went on Gavroche, “you must never bawl again over anything.I’ll take care of you. You shall see what fun we’ll have. In summer,we’ll go to the Glacière with Navet, one of my pals, we’ll bathe in theGare, we’ll run stark naked in front of the rafts on the bridge atAusterlitz,—that makes the laundresses raging. They scream, they getmad, and if you only knew how ridiculous they are! We’ll go and see theman-skeleton. And then I’ll take you to the play. I’ll take you to seeFrédérick Lemaître. I have tickets, I know some of the actors, I evenplayed in a piece once. There were a lot of us fellers, and we ranunder a cloth, and that made the sea. I’ll get you an engagement at mytheatre. We’ll go to see the savages. They ain’t real, those savagesain’t. They wear pink tights that go all in wrinkles, and you can seewhere their elbows have been darned with white. Then, we’ll go to theOpera. We’ll get in with the hired applauders. The Opera claque is wellmanaged. I wouldn’t associate with the claque on the boulevard. At theOpera, just fancy! some of them pay twenty sous, but they’re ninnies.They’re called dishclouts. And then we’ll go to see the guillotinework. I’ll show you the executioner. He lives in the Rue des Marais.Monsieur Sanson. He has a letter-box at his door. Ah! we’ll have famousfun!”

At that moment a drop of wax fell on Gavroche’s finger, and recalledhim to the realities of life.
“The deuce!” said he, “there’s the wick giving out. Attention! I can’tspend more than a sou a month on my lighting. When a body goes to bed,he must sleep. We haven’t the time to read M. Paul de Kock’s romances.And besides, the light might pass through the cracks of theporte-cochère, and all the bobbies need to do is to see it.”

“And then,” remarked the elder timidly,—he alone dared talk toGavroche, and reply to him, “a spark might fall in the straw, and wemust look out and not burn the house down.”

“People don’t say ‘burn the house down,’” remarked Gavroche, “they say‘blaze the crib.’”

The storm increased in violence, and the heavy downpour beat upon theback of the colossus amid claps of thunder. “You’re taken in, rain!”said Gavroche. “It amuses me to hear the decanter run down the legs ofthe house. Winter is a stupid; it wastes its merchandise, it loses itslabor, it can’t wet us, and that makes it kick up a row, oldwater-carrier that it is.”

This allusion to the thunder, all the consequences of which Gavroche,in his character of a philosopher of the nineteenth century, accepted,was followed by a broad flash of lightning, so dazzling that a hint ofit entered the belly of the elephant through the crack. Almost at thesame instant, the thunder rumbled with great fury. The two littlecreatures uttered a shriek, and started up so eagerly that the networkcame near being displaced, but Gavroche turned his bold face to them,and took advantage of the clap of thunder to burst into a laugh.
“Calm down, children. Don’t topple over the edifice. That’s fine,first-class thunder; all right. That’s no slouch of a streak oflightning. Bravo for the good God! Deuce take it! It’s almost as goodas it is at the Ambigu.”

That said, he restored order in the netting, pushed the two childrengently down on the bed, pressed their knees, in order to stretch themout at full length, and exclaimed:—
“Since the good God is lighting his candle, I can blow out mine. Now,babes, now, my young humans, you must shut your peepers. It’s very badnot to sleep. It’ll make you swallow the strainer, or, as they say, infashionable society, stink in the gullet. Wrap yourself up well in thehide! I’m going to put out the light. Are you ready?”

“Yes,” murmured the elder, “I’m all right. I seem to have feathersunder my head.”

“People don’t say ‘head,’” cried Gavroche, “they say ‘nut’.”

The two children nestled close to each other, Gavroche finishedarranging them on the mat, drew the blanket up to their very ears, thenrepeated, for the third time, his injunction in the hieratical tongue:—
“Shut your peepers!”

And he snuffed out his tiny light.
Hardly had the light been extinguished, when a peculiar trembling beganto affect the netting under which the three children lay.
It consisted of a multitude of dull scratches which produced a metallicsound, as if claws and teeth were gnawing at the copper wire. This wasaccompanied by all sorts of little piercing cries.
The little five-year-old boy, on hearing this hubbub overhead, andchilled with terror, jogged his brother’s elbow; but the elder brotherhad already shut his peepers, as Gavroche had ordered. Then the littleone, who could no longer control his terror, questioned Gavroche, butin a very low tone, and with bated breath:—
“Sir?”

“Hey?” said Gavroche, who had just closed his eyes.
“What is that?”

“It’s the rats,” replied Gavroche.
And he laid his head down on the mat again.
The rats, in fact, who swarmed by thousands in the carcass of theelephant, and who were the living black spots which we have alreadymentioned, had been held in awe by the flame of the candle, so long asit had been lighted; but as soon as the cavern, which was the same astheir city, had returned to darkness, scenting what the goodstory-teller Perrault calls “fresh meat,” they had hurled themselves inthrongs on Gavroche’s tent, had climbed to the top of it, and had begunto bite the meshes as though seeking to pierce this new-fangled trap.
Still the little one could not sleep.
“Sir?” he began again.
“Hey?” said Gavroche.
“What are rats?”

“They are mice.”

This explanation reassured the child a little. He had seen white micein the course of his life, and he was not afraid of them. Nevertheless,he lifted up his voice once more.
“Sir?”

“Hey?” said Gavroche again.
“Why don’t you have a cat?”

“I did have one,” replied Gavroche, “I brought one here, but they ateher.”

This second explanation undid the work of the first, and the littlefellow began to tremble again.
The dialogue between him and Gavroche began again for the fourth time:—
“Monsieur?”

“Hey?”

“Who was it that was eaten?”

“The cat.”

“And who ate the cat?”

“The rats.”

“The mice?”

“Yes, the rats.”

The child, in consternation, dismayed at the thought of mice which atecats, pursued:—
“Sir, would those mice eat us?”

“Wouldn’t they just!” ejaculated Gavroche.
The child’s terror had reached its climax. But Gavroche added:—
“Don’t be afraid. They can’t get in. And besides, I’m here! Here, catchhold of my hand. Hold your tongue and shut your peepers!”

At the same time Gavroche grasped the little fellow’s hand across hisbrother. The child pressed the hand close to him, and felt reassured.Courage and strength have these mysterious ways of communicatingthemselves. Silence reigned round them once more, the sound of theirvoices had frightened off the rats; at the expiration of a few minutes,they came raging back, but in vain, the three little fellows were fastasleep and heard nothing more.
The hours of the night fled away. Darkness covered the vast Place de laBastille. A wintry gale, which mingled with the rain, blew in gusts,the patrol searched all the doorways, alleys, enclosures, and obscurenooks, and in their search for nocturnal vagabonds they passed insilence before the elephant; the monster, erect, motionless, staringopen-eyed into the shadows, had the appearance of dreaming happily overhis good deed; and sheltered from heaven and from men the three poorsleeping children.
In order to understand what is about to follow, the reader mustremember, that, at that epoch, the Bastille guard-house was situated atthe other end of the square, and that what took place in the vicinityof the elephant could neither be seen nor heard by the sentinel.
Towards the end of that hour which immediately precedes the dawn, a manturned from the Rue Saint-Antoine at a run, made the circuit of theenclosure of the column of July, and glided between the palings untilhe was underneath the belly of the elephant. If any light hadilluminated that man, it might have been divined from the thoroughmanner in which he was soaked that he had passed the night in the rain.Arrived beneath the elephant, he uttered a peculiar cry, which did notbelong to any human tongue, and which a paroquet alone could haveimitated. Twice he repeated this cry, of whose orthography thefollowing barely conveys an idea:—
“Kirikikiou!”

At the second cry, a clear, young, merry voice responded from the bellyof the elephant:—
“Yes!”

Almost immediately, the plank which closed the hole was drawn aside,and gave passage to a child who descended the elephant’s leg, and fellbriskly near the man. It was Gavroche. The man was Montparnasse.
As for his cry of _Kirikikiou_,—that was, doubtless, what the child hadmeant, when he said:—
“You will ask for Monsieur Gavroche.”

On hearing it, he had waked with a start, had crawled out of his“alcove,” pushing apart the netting a little, and carefully drawing ittogether again, then he had opened the trap, and descended.
The man and the child recognized each other silently amid the gloom:Montparnasse confined himself to the remark:—
“We need you. Come, lend us a hand.”

The lad asked for no further enlightenment.
“I’m with you,” said he.
And both took their way towards the Rue Saint-Antoine, whenceMontparnasse had emerged, winding rapidly through the long file ofmarket-gardeners’ carts which descend towards the markets at that hour.
The market-gardeners, crouching, half-asleep, in their wagons, amid thesalads and vegetables, enveloped to their very eyes in their mufflerson account of the beating rain, did not even glance at these strangepedestrians.



CHAPTER III—THE VICISSITUDES OF FLIGHT

This is what had taken place that same night at the La Force:—
An escape had been planned between Babet, Brujon, Guelemer, andThénardier, although Thénardier was in close confinement. Babet hadarranged the matter for his own benefit, on the same day, as the readerhas seen from Montparnasse’s account to Gavroche. Montparnasse was tohelp them from outside.
Brujon, after having passed a month in the punishment cell, had hadtime, in the first place, to weave a rope, in the second, to mature aplan. In former times, those severe places where the discipline of theprison delivers the convict into his own hands, were composed of fourstone walls, a stone ceiling, a flagged pavement, a camp bed, a gratedwindow, and a door lined with iron, and were called _dungeons_; but thedungeon was judged to be too terrible; nowadays they are composed of aniron door, a grated window, a camp bed, a flagged pavement, four stonewalls, and a stone ceiling, and are called _chambers of punishment_. Alittle light penetrates towards midday. The inconvenient point aboutthese chambers which, as the reader sees, are not dungeons, is thatthey allow the persons who should be at work to think.
So Brujon meditated, and he emerged from the chamber of punishment witha rope. As he had the name of being very dangerous in the Charlemagnecourtyard, he was placed in the New Building. The first thing he foundin the New Building was Guelemer, the second was a nail; Guelemer, thatis to say, crime; a nail, that is to say, liberty. Brujon, of whom itis high time that the reader should have a complete idea, was, with anappearance of delicate health and a profoundly premeditated languor, apolished, intelligent sprig, and a thief, who had a caressing glance,and an atrocious smile. His glance resulted from his will, and hissmile from his nature. His first studies in his art had been directedto roofs. He had made great progress in the industry of the men whotear off lead, who plunder the roofs and despoil the gutters by theprocess called _double pickings_.
The circumstance which put the finishing touch on the moment peculiarlyfavorable for an attempt at escape, was that the roofers were re-layingand re-jointing, at that very moment, a portion of the slates on theprison. The Saint-Bernard courtyard was no longer absolutely isolatedfrom the Charlemagne and the Saint-Louis courts. Up above there werescaffoldings and ladders; in other words, bridges and stairs in thedirection of liberty.
The New Building, which was the most cracked and decrepit thing to beseen anywhere in the world, was the weak point in the prison. The wallswere eaten by saltpetre to such an extent that the authorities had beenobliged to line the vaults of the dormitories with a sheathing of wood,because stones were in the habit of becoming detached and falling onthe prisoners in their beds. In spite of this antiquity, theauthorities committed the error of confining in the New Building themost troublesome prisoners, of placing there “the hard cases,” as theysay in prison parlance.
The New Building contained four dormitories, one above the other, and atop story which was called the Bel-Air (Fine-Air). A largechimney-flue, probably from some ancient kitchen of the Dukes de laForce, started from the ground floor, traversed all four stories, cutthe dormitories, where it figured as a flattened pillar, into twoportions, and finally pierced the roof.
Guelemer and Brujon were in the same dormitory. They had been placed,by way of precaution, on the lower story. Chance ordained that theheads of their beds should rest against the chimney.
Thénardier was directly over their heads in the top story known asFine-Air. The pedestrian who halts on the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine,after passing the barracks of the firemen, in front of theporte-cochère of the bathing establishment, beholds a yard full offlowers and shrubs in wooden boxes, at the extremity of which spreadsout a little white rotunda with two wings, brightened up with greenshutters, the bucolic dream of Jean Jacques.
Not more than ten years ago, there rose above that rotunda an enormousblack, hideous, bare wall by which it was backed up.
This was the outer wall of La Force.
This wall, beside that rotunda, was Milton viewed through Berquin.
Lofty as it was, this wall was overtopped by a still blacker roof,which could be seen beyond. This was the roof of the New Building.There one could descry four dormer-windows, guarded with bars; theywere the windows of the Fine-Air.
A chimney pierced the roof; this was the chimney which traversed thedormitories.
The Bel-Air, that top story of the New Building, was a sort of largehall, with a Mansard roof, guarded with triple gratings and doubledoors of sheet iron, which were studded with enormous bolts. When oneentered from the north end, one had on one’s left the fourdormer-windows, on one’s right, facing the windows, at regularintervals, four square, tolerably vast cages, separated by narrowpassages, built of masonry to about the height of the elbow, and therest, up to the roof, of iron bars.
Thénardier had been in solitary confinement in one of these cages sincethe night of the 3d of February. No one was ever able to discover how,and by what connivance, he succeeded in procuring, and secreting abottle of wine, invented, so it is said, by Desrues, with which anarcotic is mixed, and which the band of the _Endormeurs_, or_Sleep-compellers_, rendered famous.
There are, in many prisons, treacherous employees, half-jailers,half-thieves, who assist in escapes, who sell to the police anunfaithful service, and who turn a penny whenever they can.
On that same night, then, when Little Gavroche picked up the two lostchildren, Brujon and Guelemer, who knew that Babet, who had escapedthat morning, was waiting for them in the street as well asMontparnasse, rose softly, and with the nail which Brujon had found,began to pierce the chimney against which their beds stood. The rubbishfell on Brujon’s bed, so that they were not heard. Showers mingled withthunder shook the doors on their hinges, and created in the prison aterrible and opportune uproar. Those of the prisoners who woke,pretended to fall asleep again, and left Guelemer and Brujon to theirown devices. Brujon was adroit; Guelemer was vigorous. Before any soundhad reached the watcher, who was sleeping in the grated cell whichopened into the dormitory, the wall had been pierced, the chimneyscaled, the iron grating which barred the upper orifice of the flueforced, and the two redoubtable ruffians were on the roof. The wind andrain redoubled, the roof was slippery.
“What a good night to leg it!” said Brujon.
An abyss six feet broad and eighty feet deep separated them from thesurrounding wall. At the bottom of this abyss, they could see themusket of a sentinel gleaming through the gloom. They fastened one endof the rope which Brujon had spun in his dungeon to the stumps of theiron bars which they had just wrenched off, flung the other over theouter wall, crossed the abyss at one bound, clung to the coping of thewall, got astride of it, let themselves slip, one after the other,along the rope, upon a little roof which touches the bath-house, pulledtheir rope after them, jumped down into the courtyard of thebath-house, traversed it, pushed open the porter’s wicket, beside whichhung his rope, pulled this, opened the porte-cochère, and foundthemselves in the street.
Three-quarters of an hour had not elapsed since they had risen in bedin the dark, nail in hand, and their project in their heads.
A few moments later they had joined Babet and Montparnasse, who wereprowling about the neighborhood.
They had broken their rope in pulling it after them, and a bit of itremained attached to the chimney on the roof. They had sustained noother damage, however, than that of scratching nearly all the skin offtheir hands.
That night, Thénardier was warned, without any one being able toexplain how, and was not asleep.
Towards one o’clock in the morning, the night being very dark, he sawtwo shadows pass along the roof, in the rain and squalls, in front ofthe dormer-window which was opposite his cage. One halted at thewindow, long enough to dart in a glance. This was Brujon.
Thénardier recognized him, and understood. This was enough.
Thénardier, rated as a burglar, and detained as a measure of precautionunder the charge of organizing a nocturnal ambush, with armed force,was kept in sight. The sentry, who was relieved every two hours,marched up and down in front of his cage with loaded musket. TheFine-Air was lighted by a skylight. The prisoner had on his feetfetters weighing fifty pounds. Every day, at four o’clock in theafternoon, a jailer, escorted by two dogs,—this was still in vogue atthat time,—entered his cage, deposited beside his bed a loaf of blackbread weighing two pounds, a jug of water, a bowl filled with ratherthin bouillon, in which swam a few Mayagan beans, inspected his ironsand tapped the bars. This man and his dogs made two visits during thenight.
Thénardier had obtained permission to keep a sort of iron bolt which heused to spike his bread into a crack in the wall, “in order to preserveit from the rats,” as he said. As Thénardier was kept in sight, noobjection had been made to this spike. Still, it was rememberedafterwards, that one of the jailers had said: “It would be better tolet him have only a wooden spike.”

At two o’clock in the morning, the sentinel, who was an old soldier,was relieved, and replaced by a conscript. A few moments later, the manwith the dogs paid his visit, and went off without noticing anything,except, possibly, the excessive youth and “the rustic air” of the “rawrecruit.” Two hours afterwards, at four o’clock, when they came torelieve the conscript, he was found asleep on the floor, lying like alog near Thénardier’s cage. As for Thénardier, he was no longer there.There was a hole in the ceiling of his cage, and, above it, anotherhole in the roof. One of the planks of his bed had been wrenched off,and probably carried away with him, as it was not found. They alsoseized in his cell a half-empty bottle which contained the remains ofthe stupefying wine with which the soldier had been drugged. Thesoldier’s bayonet had disappeared.
At the moment when this discovery was made, it was assumed thatThénardier was out of reach. The truth is, that he was no longer in theNew Building, but that he was still in great danger.
Thénardier, on reaching the roof of the New Building, had found theremains of Brujon’s rope hanging to the bars of the upper trap of thechimney, but, as this broken fragment was much too short, he had notbeen able to escape by the outer wall, as Brujon and Guelemer had done.
When one turns from the Rue des Ballets into the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile,one almost immediately encounters a repulsive ruin. There stood on thatspot, in the last century, a house of which only the back wall nowremains, a regular wall of masonry, which rises to the height of thethird story between the adjoining buildings. This ruin can berecognized by two large square windows which are still to be seenthere; the middle one, that nearest the right gable, is barred with aworm-eaten beam adjusted like a prop. Through these windows there wasformerly visible a lofty and lugubrious wall, which was a fragment ofthe outer wall of La Force.
The empty space on the street left by the demolished house ishalf-filled by a fence of rotten boards, shored up by five stone posts.In this recess lies concealed a little shanty which leans against theportion of the ruin which has remained standing. The fence has a gate,which, a few years ago, was fastened only by a latch.
It was the crest of this ruin that Thénardier had succeeded inreaching, a little after one o’clock in the morning.
How had he got there? That is what no one has ever been able to explainor understand. The lightning must, at the same time, have hindered andhelped him. Had he made use of the ladders and scaffoldings of theslaters to get from roof to roof, from enclosure to enclosure, fromcompartment to compartment, to the buildings of the Charlemagne court,then to the buildings of the Saint-Louis court, to the outer wall, andthence to the hut on the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile? But in that itinerarythere existed breaks which seemed to render it an impossibility. Had heplaced the plank from his bed like a bridge from the roof of theFine-Air to the outer wall, and crawled flat, on his belly on thecoping of the outer wall the whole distance round the prison as far asthe hut? But the outer wall of La Force formed a crenellated andunequal line; it mounted and descended, it dropped at the firemen’sbarracks, it rose towards the bath-house, it was cut in twain bybuildings, it was not even of the same height on the Hotel Lamoignon ason the Rue Pavée; everywhere occurred falls and right angles; and then,the sentinels must have espied the dark form of the fugitive; hence,the route taken by Thénardier still remains rather inexplicable. In twomanners, flight was impossible. Had Thénardier, spurred on by thatthirst for liberty which changes precipices into ditches, iron barsinto wattles of osier, a legless man into an athlete, a gouty man intoa bird, stupidity into instinct, instinct into intelligence, andintelligence into genius, had Thénardier invented a third mode? No onehas ever found out.
The marvels of escape cannot always be accounted for. The man who makeshis escape, we repeat, is inspired; there is something of the star andof the lightning in the mysterious gleam of flight; the effort towardsdeliverance is no less surprising than the flight towards the sublime,and one says of the escaped thief: “How did he contrive to scale thatwall?” in the same way that one says of Corneille: “Where did he find_the means of dying?_”

At all events, dripping with perspiration, drenched with rain, with hisclothes hanging in ribbons, his hands flayed, his elbows bleeding, hisknees torn, Thénardier had reached what children, in their figurativelanguage, call _the edge_ of the wall of the ruin, there he hadstretched himself out at full length, and there his strength had failedhim. A steep escarpment three stories high separated him from thepavement of the street.
The rope which he had was too short.
There he waited, pale, exhausted, desperate with all the despair whichhe had undergone, still hidden by the night, but telling himself thatthe day was on the point of dawning, alarmed at the idea of hearing theneighboring clock of Saint-Paul strike four within a few minutes, anhour when the sentinel was relieved and when the latter would be foundasleep under the pierced roof, staring in horror at a terrible depth,at the light of the street lanterns, the wet, black pavement, thatpavement longed for yet frightful, which meant death, and which meantliberty.
He asked himself whether his three accomplices in flight had succeeded,if they had heard him, and if they would come to his assistance. Helistened. With the exception of the patrol, no one had passed throughthe street since he had been there. Nearly the whole of the descent ofthe market-gardeners from Montreuil, from Charonne, from Vincennes, andfrom Bercy to the markets was accomplished through the RueSaint-Antoine.
Four o’clock struck. Thénardier shuddered. A few moments later, thatterrified and confused uproar which follows the discovery of an escapebroke forth in the prison. The sound of doors opening and shutting, thecreaking of gratings on their hinges, a tumult in the guard-house, thehoarse shouts of the turnkeys, the shock of musket-butts on thepavement of the courts, reached his ears. Lights ascended and descendedpast the grated windows of the dormitories, a torch ran along theridge-pole of the top story of the New Building, the firemen belongingin the barracks on the right had been summoned. Their helmets, whichthe torch lighted up in the rain, went and came along the roofs. At thesame time, Thénardier perceived in the direction of the Bastille a wanwhiteness lighting up the edge of the sky in doleful wise.
He was on top of a wall ten inches wide, stretched out under the heavyrains, with two gulfs to right and left, unable to stir, subject to thegiddiness of a possible fall, and to the horror of a certain arrest,and his thoughts, like the pendulum of a clock, swung from one of theseideas to the other: “Dead if I fall, caught if I stay.” In the midst ofthis anguish, he suddenly saw, the street being still dark, a man whowas gliding along the walls and coming from the Rue Pavée, halt in therecess above which Thénardier was, as it were, suspended. Here this manwas joined by a second, who walked with the same caution, then by athird, then by a fourth. When these men were re-united, one of themlifted the latch of the gate in the fence, and all four entered theenclosure in which the shanty stood. They halted directly underThénardier. These men had evidently chosen this vacant space in orderthat they might consult without being seen by the passers-by or by thesentinel who guards the wicket of La Force a few paces distant. It mustbe added, that the rain kept this sentinel blocked in his box.Thénardier, not being able to distinguish their visages, lent an ear totheir words with the desperate attention of a wretch who feels himselflost.
Thénardier saw something resembling a gleam of hope flash before hiseyes,—these men conversed in slang.
The first said in a low but distinct voice:—
“Let’s cut. What are we up to here?”

The second replied: “It’s raining hard enough to put out the verydevil’s fire. And the bobbies will be along instanter. There’s asoldier on guard yonder. We shall get nabbed here.”

These two words, _icigo_ and _icicaille_, both of which mean _ici_, andwhich belong, the first to the slang of the barriers, the second to theslang of the Temple, were flashes of light for Thénardier. By the_icigo_ he recognized Brujon, who was a prowler of the barriers, by the_icicaille_ he knew Babet, who, among his other trades, had been anold-clothes broker at the Temple.
The antique slang of the great century is no longer spoken except inthe Temple, and Babet was really the only person who spoke it in allits purity. Had it not been for the _icicaille_, Thénardier would nothave recognized him, for he had entirely changed his voice.
In the meanwhile, the third man had intervened.
“There’s no hurry yet, let’s wait a bit. How do we know that he doesn’tstand in need of us?”

By this, which was nothing but French, Thénardier recognizedMontparnasse, who made it a point in his elegance to understand allslangs and to speak none of them.
As for the fourth, he held his peace, but his huge shoulders betrayedhim. Thénardier did not hesitate. It was Guelemer.
Brujon replied almost impetuously but still in a low tone:—
“What are you jabbering about? The tavern-keeper hasn’t managed to cuthis stick. He don’t tumble to the racket, that he don’t! You have to bea pretty knowing cove to tear up your shirt, cut up your sheet to makea rope, punch holes in doors, get up false papers, make false keys,file your irons, hang out your cord, hide yourself, and disguiseyourself! The old fellow hasn’t managed to play it, he doesn’tunderstand how to work the business.”

Babet added, still in that classical slang which was spoken byPoulailler and Cartouche, and which is to the bold, new, highly coloredand risky argot used by Brujon what the language of Racine is to thelanguage of André Chenier:—
“Your tavern-keeper must have been nabbed in the act. You have to beknowing. He’s only a greenhorn. He must have let himself be taken in bya bobby, perhaps even by a sheep who played it on him as his pal.Listen, Montparnasse, do you hear those shouts in the prison? You haveseen all those lights. He’s recaptured, there! He’ll get off withtwenty years. I ain’t afraid, I ain’t a coward, but there ain’tanything more to do, or otherwise they’d lead us a dance. Don’t getmad, come with us, let’s go drink a bottle of old wine together.”

“One doesn’t desert one’s friends in a scrape,” grumbled Montparnasse.
“I tell you he’s nabbed!” retorted Brujon. “At the present moment, theinn-keeper ain’t worth a ha’penny. We can’t do nothing for him. Let’sbe off. Every minute I think a bobby has got me in his fist.”

Montparnasse no longer offered more than a feeble resistance; the factis, that these four men, with the fidelity of ruffians who neverabandon each other, had prowled all night long about La Force, great aswas their peril, in the hope of seeing Thénardier make his appearanceon the top of some wall. But the night, which was really growing toofine,—for the downpour was such as to render all the streetsdeserted,—the cold which was overpowering them, their soaked garments,their hole-ridden shoes, the alarming noise which had just burst forthin the prison, the hours which had elapsed, the patrol which they hadencountered, the hope which was vanishing, all urged them to beat aretreat. Montparnasse himself, who was, perhaps, almost Thénardier’sson-in-law, yielded. A moment more, and they would be gone. Thénardierwas panting on his wall like the shipwrecked sufferers of the _Méduse_on their raft when they beheld the vessel which had appeared in sightvanish on the horizon.
He dared not call to them; a cry might be heard and ruin everything. Anidea occurred to him, a last idea, a flash of inspiration; he drew fromhis pocket the end of Brujon’s rope, which he had detached from thechimney of the New Building, and flung it into the space enclosed bythe fence.
This rope fell at their feet.
“A widow,"37 said Babet.
“My tortouse!”38 said Brujon.
“The tavern-keeper is there,” said Montparnasse.
They raised their eyes. Thénardier thrust out his head a very little.
“Quick!” said Montparnasse, “have you the other end of the rope,Brujon?”

“Yes.”

“Knot the two pieces together, we’ll fling him the rope, he can fastenit to the wall, and he’ll have enough of it to get down with.”

Thénardier ran the risk, and spoke:—
“I am paralyzed with cold.”

“We’ll warm you up.”

“I can’t budge.”

“Let yourself slide, we’ll catch you.”

“My hands are benumbed.”

“Only fasten the rope to the wall.”

“I can’t.”

“Then one of us must climb up,” said Montparnasse.
“Three stories!” ejaculated Brujon.
An ancient plaster flue, which had served for a stove that had beenused in the shanty in former times, ran along the wall and mountedalmost to the very spot where they could see Thénardier. This flue,then much damaged and full of cracks, has since fallen, but the marksof it are still visible.
It was very narrow.
“One might get up by the help of that,” said Montparnasse.
“By that flue?” exclaimed Babet, “a grown-up cove, never! it would takea brat.”

“A brat must be got,” resumed Brujon.
“Where are we to find a young ‘un?” said Guelemer.
“Wait,” said Montparnasse. “I’ve got the very article.”

He opened the gate of the fence very softly, made sure that no one waspassing along the street, stepped out cautiously, shut the gate behindhim, and set off at a run in the direction of the Bastille.
Seven or eight minutes elapsed, eight thousand centuries to Thénardier;Babet, Brujon, and Guelemer did not open their lips; at last the gateopened once more, and Montparnasse appeared, breathless, and followedby Gavroche. The rain still rendered the street completely deserted.
Little Gavroche entered the enclosure and gazed at the forms of theseruffians with a tranquil air. The water was dripping from his hair.Guelemer addressed him:—
“Are you a man, young ‘un?”

Gavroche shrugged his shoulders, and replied:—
“A young ‘un like me’s a man, and men like you are babes.”

“The brat’s tongue’s well hung!” exclaimed Babet.
“The Paris brat ain’t made of straw,” added Brujon.
“What do you want?” asked Gavroche.
Montparnasse answered:—
“Climb up that flue.”

“With this rope,” said Babet.
“And fasten it,” continued Brujon.
“To the top of the wall,” went on Babet.
“To the cross-bar of the window,” added Brujon.
“And then?” said Gavroche.
“There!” said Guelemer.
The gamin examined the rope, the flue, the wall, the windows, and madethat indescribable and disdainful noise with his lips which signifies:—
“Is that all!”

“There’s a man up there whom you are to save,” resumed Montparnasse.
“Will you?” began Brujon again.
“Greenhorn!” replied the lad, as though the question appeared a mostunprecedented one to him.
And he took off his shoes.
Guelemer seized Gavroche by one arm, set him on the roof of the shanty,whose worm-eaten planks bent beneath the urchin’s weight, and handedhim the rope which Brujon had knotted together during Montparnasse’sabsence. The gamin directed his steps towards the flue, which it waseasy to enter, thanks to a large crack which touched the roof. At themoment when he was on the point of ascending, Thénardier, who saw lifeand safety approaching, bent over the edge of the wall; the first lightof dawn struck white upon his brow dripping with sweat, upon his lividcheek-bones, his sharp and savage nose, his bristling gray beard, andGavroche recognized him.
“Hullo! it’s my father! Oh, that won’t hinder.”

And taking the rope in his teeth, he resolutely began the ascent.
He reached the summit of the hut, bestrode the old wall as though ithad been a horse, and knotted the rope firmly to the upper cross-bar ofthe window.
A moment later, Thénardier was in the street.
As soon as he touched the pavement, as soon as he found himself out ofdanger, he was no longer either weary, or chilled or trembling; theterrible things from which he had escaped vanished like smoke, all thatstrange and ferocious mind awoke once more, and stood erect and free,ready to march onward.
These were this man’s first words:—
“Now, whom are we to eat?”

It is useless to explain the sense of this frightfully transparentremark, which signifies both to kill, to assassinate, and to plunder._To eat_, true sense: _to devour_.
“Let’s get well into a corner,” said Brujon. “Let’s settle it in threewords, and part at once. There was an affair that promised well in theRue Plumet, a deserted street, an isolated house, an old rotten gate ona garden, and lone women.”

“Well! why not?” demanded Thénardier.
“Your girl, Éponine, went to see about the matter,” replied Babet.
“And she brought a biscuit to Magnon,” added Guelemer. “Nothing to bemade there.”

“The girl’s no fool,” said Thénardier. “Still, it must be seen to.”

“Yes, yes,” said Brujon, “it must be looked up.”

In the meanwhile, none of the men seemed to see Gavroche, who, duringthis colloquy, had seated himself on one of the fence-posts; he waiteda few moments, thinking that perhaps his father would turn towards him,then he put on his shoes again, and said:—
“Is that all? You don’t want any more, my men? Now you’re out of yourscrape. I’m off. I must go and get my brats out of bed.”

And off he went.
The five men emerged, one after another, from the enclosure.
When Gavroche had disappeared at the corner of the Rue des Ballets,Babet took Thénardier aside.
“Did you take a good look at that young ‘un?” he asked.
“What young ‘un?”

“The one who climbed the wall and carried you the rope.”

“Not particularly.”

“Well, I don’t know, but it strikes me that it was your son.”

“Bah!” said Thénardier, “do you think so?”




BOOK SEVENTH—SLANG


  Enlarge
Slang B7-1-slang



CHAPTER I—ORIGIN

_Pigritia_ is a terrible word.
It engenders a whole world, _la pègre_, for which read _theft_, and ahell, _la pègrenne_, for which read _hunger_.
Thus, idleness is the mother.
She has a son, theft, and a daughter, hunger.
Where are we at this moment? In the land of slang.
What is slang? It is at one and the same time, a nation and a dialect;it is theft in its two kinds; people and language.
When, four and thirty years ago, the narrator of this grave and sombrehistory introduced into a work written with the same aim as this39 athief who talked argot, there arose amazement and clamor.—“What! How!Argot! Why, argot is horrible! It is the language of prisons, galleys,convicts, of everything that is most abominable in society!” etc., etc.
We have never understood this sort of objections.
Since that time, two powerful romancers, one of whom is a profoundobserver of the human heart, the other an intrepid friend of thepeople, Balzac and Eugène Sue, having represented their ruffians astalking their natural language, as the author of _The Last Day of aCondemned Man_ did in 1828, the same objections have been raised.People repeated: “What do authors mean by that revolting dialect? Slangis odious! Slang makes one shudder!”

Who denies that? Of course it does.
When it is a question of probing a wound, a gulf, a society, since whenhas it been considered wrong to go too far? to go to the bottom? Wehave always thought that it was sometimes a courageous act, and, atleast, a simple and useful deed, worthy of the sympathetic attentionwhich duty accepted and fulfilled merits. Why should one not exploreeverything, and study everything? Why should one halt on the way? Thehalt is a matter depending on the sounding-line, and not on theleadsman.
Certainly, too, it is neither an attractive nor an easy task toundertake an investigation into the lowest depths of the social order,where terra firma comes to an end and where mud begins, to rummage inthose vague, murky waves, to follow up, to seize and to fling, stillquivering, upon the pavement that abject dialect which is dripping withfilth when thus brought to the light, that pustulous vocabulary eachword of which seems an unclean ring from a monster of the mire and theshadows. Nothing is more lugubrious than the contemplation thus in itsnudity, in the broad light of thought, of the horrible swarming ofslang. It seems, in fact, to be a sort of horrible beast made for thenight which has just been torn from its cesspool. One thinks onebeholds a frightful, living, and bristling thicket which quivers,rustles, wavers, returns to shadow, threatens and glares. One wordresembles a claw, another an extinguished and bleeding eye, such andsuch a phrase seems to move like the claw of a crab. All this is alivewith the hideous vitality of things which have been organized out ofdisorganization.
Now, when has horror ever excluded study? Since when has maladybanished medicine? Can one imagine a naturalist refusing to study theviper, the bat, the scorpion, the centipede, the tarantula, and one whowould cast them back into their darkness, saying: “Oh! how ugly thatis!” The thinker who should turn aside from slang would resemble asurgeon who should avert his face from an ulcer or a wart. He would belike a philologist refusing to examine a fact in language, aphilosopher hesitating to scrutinize a fact in humanity. For, it mustbe stated to those who are ignorant of the case, that argot is both aliterary phenomenon and a social result. What is slang, properlyspeaking? It is the language of wretchedness.
We may be stopped; the fact may be put to us in general terms, which isone way of attenuating it; we may be told, that all trades,professions, it may be added, all the accidents of the social hierarchyand all forms of intelligence, have their own slang. The merchant whosays: “Montpellier not active, Marseilles fine quality,” the broker on‘change who says: “Assets at end of current month,” the gambler whosays: _“Tiers et tout, refait de pique,”_ the sheriff of the NormanIsles who says: “The holder in fee reverting to his landed estatecannot claim the fruits of that estate during the hereditary seizure ofthe real estate by the mortgagor,” the playwright who says: “The piecewas hissed,” the comedian who says: “I’ve made a hit,” the philosopherwho says: “Phenomenal triplicity,” the huntsman who says: _“Voileciallais, Voileci fuyant,”_ the phrenologist who says: “Amativeness,combativeness, secretiveness,” the infantry soldier who says: “Myshooting-iron,” the cavalry-man who says: “My turkey-cock,” thefencing-master who says: “Tierce, quarte, break,” the printer who says:“My shooting-stick and galley,”—all, printer, fencing-master, cavalrydragoon, infantry-man, phrenologist, huntsman, philosopher, comedian,playwright, sheriff, gambler, stock-broker, and merchant, speak slang.The painter who says: “My grinder,” the notary who says: “MySkip-the-Gutter,” the hairdresser who says: “My mealyback,” the cobblerwho says: “My cub,” talks slang. Strictly speaking, if one absolutelyinsists on the point, all the different fashions of saying the rightand the left, the sailor’s _port_ and _starboard_, the scene-shifter’s_court-side_, and _garden-side_, the beadle’s _Gospel-side_ and_Epistle-side_, are slang. There is the slang of the affected lady aswell as of the _précieuses_. The Hotel Rambouillet nearly adjoins theCour des Miracles. There is a slang of duchesses, witness this phrasecontained in a love-letter from a very great lady and a very prettywoman of the Restoration: “You will find in this gossip a fultitude ofreasons why I should libertize."40 Diplomatic ciphers are slang; thepontifical chancellery by using 26 for Rome, _grkztntgzyal_ fordespatch, and _abfxustgrnogrkzu tu XI_. for the Duc de Modena, speaksslang. The physicians of the Middle Ages who, for carrot, radish, andturnip, said _Opoponach, perfroschinum, reptitalmus, dracatholicum,angelorum, postmegorum_, talked slang. The sugar-manufacturer who says:“Loaf, clarified, lumps, bastard, common, burnt,”—this honestmanufacturer talks slang. A certain school of criticism twenty yearsago, which used to say: “Half of the works of Shakespeare consists ofplays upon words and puns,”—talked slang. The poet, and the artist who,with profound understanding, would designate M. de Montmorency as “abourgeois,” if he were not a judge of verses and statues, speak slang.The classic Academician who calls flowers “Flora,” fruits, “Pomona,”the sea, “Neptune,” love, “fires,” beauty, “charms,” a horse, “acourser,” the white or tricolored cockade, “the rose of Bellona,” thethree-cornered hat, “Mars’ triangle,”—that classical Academician talksslang. Algebra, medicine, botany, have each their slang. The tonguewhich is employed on board ship, that wonderful language of the sea,which is so complete and so picturesque, which was spoken by Jean Bart,Duquesne, Suffren, and Duperré, which mingles with the whistling of therigging, the sound of the speaking-trumpets, the shock of theboarding-irons, the roll of the sea, the wind, the gale, the cannon, iswholly a heroic and dazzling slang, which is to the fierce slang of thethieves what the lion is to the jackal.
No doubt. But say what we will, this manner of understanding the word_slang_ is an extension which every one will not admit. For our part,we reserve to the word its ancient and precise, circumscribed anddetermined significance, and we restrict slang to slang. The veritableslang and the slang that is pre-eminently slang, if the two words canbe coupled thus, the slang immemorial which was a kingdom, is nothingelse, we repeat, than the homely, uneasy, crafty, treacherous,venomous, cruel, equivocal, vile, profound, fatal tongue ofwretchedness. There exists, at the extremity of all abasement and allmisfortunes, a last misery which revolts and makes up its mind to enterinto conflict with the whole mass of fortunate facts and reigningrights; a fearful conflict, where, now cunning, now violent, unhealthyand ferocious at one and the same time, it attacks the social orderwith pin-pricks through vice, and with club-blows through crime. Tomeet the needs of this conflict, wretchedness has invented a languageof combat, which is slang.
To keep afloat and to rescue from oblivion, to hold above the gulf,were it but a fragment of some language which man has spoken and whichwould, otherwise, be lost, that is to say, one of the elements, good orbad, of which civilization is composed, or by which it is complicated,to extend the records of social observation; is to serve civilizationitself. This service Plautus rendered, consciously or unconsciously, bymaking two Carthaginian soldiers talk Phœnician; that service Molièrerendered, by making so many of his characters talk Levantine and allsorts of dialects. Here objections spring up afresh. Phœnician, verygood! Levantine, quite right! Even dialect, let that pass! They aretongues which have belonged to nations or provinces; but slang! What isthe use of preserving slang? What is the good of assisting slang “tosurvive”?
To this we reply in one word, only. Assuredly, if the tongue which anation or a province has spoken is worthy of interest, the languagewhich has been spoken by a misery is still more worthy of attention andstudy.
It is the language which has been spoken, in France, for example, formore than four centuries, not only by a misery, but by every possiblehuman misery.
And then, we insist upon it, the study of social deformities andinfirmities, and the task of pointing them out with a view to remedy,is not a business in which choice is permitted. The historian ofmanners and ideas has no less austere a mission than the historian ofevents. The latter has the surface of civilization, the conflicts ofcrowns, the births of princes, the marriages of kings, battles,assemblages, great public men, revolutions in the daylight, everythingon the exterior; the other historian has the interior, the depths, thepeople who toil, suffer, wait, the oppressed woman, the agonizingchild, the secret war between man and man, obscure ferocities,prejudices, plotted iniquities, the subterranean, the indistincttremors of multitudes, the die-of-hunger, the counter-blows of the law,the secret evolution of souls, the go-bare-foot, the bare-armed, thedisinherited, the orphans, the unhappy, and the infamous, all the formswhich roam through the darkness. He must descend with his heart full ofcharity, and severity at the same time, as a brother and as a judge, tothose impenetrable casemates where crawl, pell-mell, those who bleedand those who deal the blow, those who weep and those who curse, thosewho fast and those who devour, those who endure evil and those whoinflict it. Have these historians of hearts and souls duties at allinferior to the historians of external facts? Does any one think thatAlighieri has any fewer things to say than Machiavelli? Is the underside of civilization any less important than the upper side merelybecause it is deeper and more sombre? Do we really know the mountainwell when we are not acquainted with the cavern?
Let us say, moreover, parenthetically, that from a few words of whatprecedes a marked separation might be inferred between the two classesof historians which does not exist in our mind. No one is a goodhistorian of the patent, visible, striking, and public life of peoples,if he is not, at the same time, in a certain measure, the historian oftheir deep and hidden life; and no one is a good historian of theinterior unless he understands how, at need, to be the historian of theexterior also. The history of manners and ideas permeates the historyof events, and this is true reciprocally. They constitute two differentorders of facts which correspond to each other, which are alwaysinterlaced, and which often bring forth results. All the lineamentswhich providence traces on the surface of a nation have theirparallels, sombre but distinct, in their depths, and all convulsions ofthe depths produce ebullitions on the surface. True history being amixture of all things, the true historian mingles in everything.
Man is not a circle with a single centre; he is an ellipse with adouble focus. Facts form one of these, and ideas the other.
Slang is nothing but a dressing-room where the tongue having some badaction to perform, disguises itself. There it clothes itself inword-masks, in metaphor-rags. In this guise it becomes horrible.
One finds it difficult to recognize. Is it really the French tongue,the great human tongue? Behold it ready to step upon the stage and toretort upon crime, and prepared for all the employments of therepertory of evil. It no longer walks, it hobbles; it limps on thecrutch of the Court of Miracles, a crutch metamorphosable into a club;it is called vagrancy; every sort of spectre, its dressers, havepainted its face, it crawls and rears, the double gait of the reptile.Henceforth, it is apt at all rôles, it is made suspicious by thecounterfeiter, covered with verdigris by the forger, blacked by thesoot of the incendiary; and the murderer applies its rouge.
When one listens, by the side of honest men, at the portals of society,one overhears the dialogues of those who are on the outside. Onedistinguishes questions and replies. One perceives, withoutunderstanding it, a hideous murmur, sounding almost like human accents,but more nearly resembling a howl than an articulate word. It is slang.The words are misshapen and stamped with an indescribable and fantasticbestiality. One thinks one hears hydras talking.
It is unintelligible in the dark. It gnashes and whispers, completingthe gloom with mystery. It is black in misfortune, it is blacker stillin crime; these two blacknesses amalgamated, compose slang. Obscurityin the atmosphere, obscurity in acts, obscurity in voices. Terrible,toad-like tongue which goes and comes, leaps, crawls, slobbers, andstirs about in monstrous wise in that immense gray fog composed of rainand night, of hunger, of vice, of falsehood, of injustice, of nudity,of suffocation, and of winter, the high noonday of the miserable.
Let us have compassion on the chastised. Alas! Who are we ourselves?Who am I who now address you? Who are you who are listening to me? Andare you very sure that we have done nothing before we were born? Theearth is not devoid of resemblance to a jail. Who knows whether man isnot a recaptured offender against divine justice? Look closely at life.It is so made, that everywhere we feel the sense of punishment.
Are you what is called a happy man? Well! you are sad every day. Eachday has its own great grief or its little care. Yesterday you weretrembling for a health that is dear to you, to-day you fear for yourown; to-morrow it will be anxiety about money, the day after to-morrowthe diatribe of a slanderer, the day after that, the misfortune of somefriend; then the prevailing weather, then something that has beenbroken or lost, then a pleasure with which your conscience and yourvertebral column reproach you; again, the course of public affairs.This without reckoning in the pains of the heart. And so it goes on.One cloud is dispelled, another forms. There is hardly one day out of ahundred which is wholly joyous and sunny. And you belong to that smallclass who are happy! As for the rest of mankind, stagnating night restsupon them.
Thoughtful minds make but little use of the phrase: the fortunate andthe unfortunate. In this world, evidently the vestibule of another,there are no fortunate.
The real human division is this: the luminous and the shady. Todiminish the number of the shady, to augment the number of theluminous,—that is the object. That is why we cry: Education! science!To teach reading, means to light the fire; every syllable spelled outsparkles.
However, he who says light does not, necessarily, say joy. Peoplesuffer in the light; excess burns. The flame is the enemy of the wing.To burn without ceasing to fly,—therein lies the marvel of genius.
When you shall have learned to know, and to love, you will stillsuffer. The day is born in tears. The luminous weep, if only over thosein darkness.



CHAPTER II—ROOTS

Slang is the tongue of those who sit in darkness.
Thought is moved in its most sombre depths, social philosophy is biddento its most poignant meditations, in the presence of that enigmaticdialect at once so blighted and rebellious. Therein lies chastisementmade visible. Every syllable has an air of being marked. The words ofthe vulgar tongue appear therein wrinkled and shrivelled, as it were,beneath the hot iron of the executioner. Some seem to be still smoking.Such and such a phrase produces upon you the effect of the shoulder ofa thief branded with the fleur-de-lys, which has suddenly been laidbare. Ideas almost refuse to be expressed in these substantives whichare fugitives from justice. Metaphor is sometimes so shameless, thatone feels that it has worn the iron neck-fetter.
Moreover, in spite of all this, and because of all this, this strangedialect has by rights, its own compartment in that great impartial caseof pigeon-holes where there is room for the rusty farthing as well asfor the gold medal, and which is called literature. Slang, whether thepublic admit the fact or not has its syntax and its poetry. It is alanguage. Yes, by the deformity of certain terms, we recognize the factthat it was chewed by Mandrin, and by the splendor of certainmetonymies, we feel that Villon spoke it.
That exquisite and celebrated verse—
Mais où sont les neiges d’antan?But where are the snows of years gone by?

is a verse of slang. _Antan—ante annum_—is a word of Thunes slang,which signified the past year, and by extension, _formerly_.Thirty-five years ago, at the epoch of the departure of the greatchain-gang, there could be read in one of the cells at Bicêtre, thismaxim engraved with a nail on the wall by a king of Thunes condemned tothe galleys: _Les dabs d’antan trimaient siempre pour la pierre duCoësre_. This means _Kings in days gone by always went and hadthemselves anointed_. In the opinion of that king, anointment meant thegalleys.
The word _décarade_, which expresses the departure of heavy vehicles ata gallop, is attributed to Villon, and it is worthy of him. This word,which strikes fire with all four of its feet, sums up in a masterlyonomatopœia the whole of La Fontaine’s admirable verse:—
Six forts chevaux tiraient un coche.Six stout horses drew a coach.

From a purely literary point of view, few studies would prove morecurious and fruitful than the study of slang. It is a whole languagewithin a language, a sort of sickly excrescence, an unhealthy graftwhich has produced a vegetation, a parasite which has its roots in theold Gallic trunk, and whose sinister foliage crawls all over one sideof the language. This is what may be called the first, the vulgaraspect of slang. But, for those who study the tongue as it should bestudied, that is to say, as geologists study the earth, slang appearslike a veritable alluvial deposit. According as one digs a longer orshorter distance into it, one finds in slang, below the old popularFrench, Provençal, Spanish, Italian, Levantine, that language of theMediterranean ports, English and German, the Romance language in itsthree varieties, French, Italian, and Romance Romance, Latin, andfinally Basque and Celtic. A profound and unique formation. Asubterranean edifice erected in common by all the miserable. Eachaccursed race has deposited its layer, each suffering has dropped itsstone there, each heart has contributed its pebble. A throng of evil,base, or irritated souls, who have traversed life and have vanishedinto eternity, linger there almost entirely visible still beneath theform of some monstrous word.
Do you want Spanish? The old Gothic slang abounded in it. Here is_boffete_, a box on the ear, which is derived from _bofeton; vantane_,window (later on _vanterne_), which comes from _vantana; gat_, cat,which comes from _gato; acite_, oil, which comes from _aceyte_. Do youwant Italian? Here is _spade_, sword, which comes from _spada; carvel_,boat, which comes from _caravella_. Do you want English? Here is_bichot_, which comes from _bishop; raille_, spy, which comes from_rascal, rascalion; pilche_, a case, which comes from _pilcher_, asheath. Do you want German? Here is the _caleur_, the waiter,_kellner_; the _hers_, the master, _herzog_ (duke). Do you want Latin?Here is _frangir_, to break, _frangere; affurer_, to steal, _fur;cadene_, chain, _catena_. There is one word which crops up in everylanguage of the continent, with a sort of mysterious power andauthority. It is the word _magnus_; the Scotchman makes of it his_mac_, which designates the chief of the clan; Mac-Farlane,Mac-Callumore, the great Farlane, the great Callumore41; slang turns itinto _meck_ and later _le meg_, that is to say, God. Would you likeBasque? Here is _gahisto_, the devil, which comes from _gaïztoa_, evil;_sorgabon_, good night, which comes from _gabon_, good evening. Do youwant Celtic? Here is _blavin_, a handkerchief, which comes from_blavet_, gushing water; _ménesse_, a woman (in a bad sense), whichcomes from _meinec_, full of stones; _barant_, brook, from _baranton_,fountain; _goffeur_, locksmith, from _goff_, blacksmith; _guedouze_,death, which comes from _guenn-du_, black-white. Finally, would youlike history? Slang calls crowns _les maltèses_, a souvenir of the coinin circulation on the galleys of Malta.
In addition to the philological origins just indicated, slang possessesother and still more natural roots, which spring, so to speak, from themind of man itself.
In the first place, the direct creation of words. Therein lies themystery of tongues. To paint with words, which contains figures oneknows not how or why, is the primitive foundation of all humanlanguages, what may be called their granite.
Slang abounds in words of this description, immediate words, wordscreated instantaneously no one knows either where or by whom, withoutetymology, without analogies, without derivatives, solitary, barbarous,sometimes hideous words, which at times possess a singular power ofexpression and which live. The executioner, _le taule_; the forest, _lesabri_; fear, flight, _taf_; the lackey, _le larbin_; the mineral, theprefect, the minister, _pharos_; the devil, _le rabouin_. Nothing isstranger than these words which both mask and reveal. Some, _lerabouin_, for example, are at the same time grotesque and terrible, andproduce on you the effect of a cyclopean grimace.
In the second place, metaphor. The peculiarity of a language which isdesirous of saying all yet concealing all is that it is rich infigures. Metaphor is an enigma, wherein the thief who is plotting astroke, the prisoner who is arranging an escape, take refuge. No idiomis more metaphorical than slang: _dévisser le coco_ (to unscrew thenut), to twist the neck; _tortiller_ (to wriggle), to eat; _êtregerbé_, to be tried; _a rat_, a bread thief; _il lansquine_, it rains,a striking, ancient figure which partly bears its date about it, whichassimilates long oblique lines of rain, with the dense and slantingpikes of the lancers, and which compresses into a single word thepopular expression: it rains halberds. Sometimes, in proportion asslang progresses from the first epoch to the second, words pass fromthe primitive and savage sense to the metaphorical sense. The devilceases to be _le rabouin_, and becomes _le boulanger_ (the baker), whoputs the bread into the oven. This is more witty, but less grand,something like Racine after Corneille, like Euripides after Æschylus.Certain slang phrases which participate in the two epochs and have atonce the barbaric character and the metaphorical character resemblephantasmagories. _Les sorgueuers vont solliciter des gails à lalune_—the prowlers are going to steal horses by night,—this passesbefore the mind like a group of spectres. One knows not what one sees.
In the third place, the expedient. Slang lives on the language. It usesit in accordance with its fancy, it dips into it hap-hazard, and itoften confines itself, when occasion arises, to alter it in a gross andsummary fashion. Occasionally, with the ordinary words thus deformedand complicated with words of pure slang, picturesque phrases areformed, in which there can be felt the mixture of the two precedingelements, the direct creation and the metaphor: _le cab jaspine, jemarronne que la roulotte de Pantin trime dans le sabri_, the dog isbarking, I suspect that the diligence for Paris is passing through thewoods. _Le dab est sinve, la dabuge est merloussière, la fée estbative_, the bourgeois is stupid, the bourgeoise is cunning, thedaughter is pretty. Generally, to throw listeners off the track, slangconfines itself to adding to all the words of the language withoutdistinction, an ignoble tail, a termination in _aille_, in _orgue_, in_iergue_, or in _uche_. Thus: _Vousiergue trouvaille bonorgue cegigotmuche?_ Do you think that leg of mutton good? A phrase addressedby Cartouche to a turnkey in order to find out whether the sum offeredfor his escape suited him.
The termination in _mar_ has been added recently.
Slang, being the dialect of corruption, quickly becomes corrupteditself. Besides this, as it is always seeking concealment, as soon asit feels that it is understood, it changes its form. Contrary to whathappens with every other vegetation, every ray of light which fallsupon it kills whatever it touches. Thus slang is in constant process ofdecomposition and recomposition; an obscure and rapid work which neverpauses. It passes over more ground in ten years than a language in tencenturies. Thus _le larton_ (bread) becomes _le lartif; le gail_(horse) becomes _le gaye; la fertanche_ (straw) becomes _la fertille;le momignard_ (brat), _le momacque; les fiques_ (duds), _frusques; lachique_ (the church), _l‘égrugeoir; le colabre_ (neck), _le colas_. Thedevil is at first, _gahisto_, then _le rabouin_, then _the baker_; thepriest is a _ratichon_, then the boar (_le sanglier_); the dagger is_le vingt-deux_ (twenty-two), then _le surin_, then _le lingre_; thepolice are _railles_, then _roussins_, then _rousses_, then _marchandsde lacets_ (dealers in stay-laces), then _coquers_, then _cognes_; theexecutioner is _le taule_, then _Charlot, l’atigeur_, then _lebecquillard_. In the seventeenth century, to fight was “to give eachother snuff”; in the nineteenth it is “to chew each other’s throats.”There have been twenty different phrases between these two extremes.Cartouche’s talk would have been Hebrew to Lacenaire. All the words ofthis language are perpetually engaged in flight like the men who utterthem.
Still, from time to time, and in consequence of this very movement, theancient slang crops up again and becomes new once more. It has itsheadquarters where it maintains its sway. The Temple preserved theslang of the seventeenth century; Bicêtre, when it was a prison,preserved the slang of Thunes. There one could hear the termination in_anche_ of the old Thuneurs. _Boyanches-tu_ (bois-tu), do you drink?But perpetual movement remains its law, nevertheless.
If the philosopher succeeds in fixing, for a moment, for purposes ofobservation, this language which is incessantly evaporating, he fallsinto doleful and useful meditation. No study is more efficacious andmore fecund in instruction. There is not a metaphor, not an analogy, inslang, which does not contain a lesson. Among these men, to beat meansto feign; one beats a malady; ruse is their strength.
For them, the idea of the man is not separated from the idea ofdarkness. The night is called _la sorgue_; man, _l’orgue_. Man is aderivative of the night.
They have taken up the practice of considering society in the light ofan atmosphere which kills them, of a fatal force, and they speak oftheir liberty as one would speak of his health. A man under arrest is a_sick man_; one who is condemned is a _dead man_.
The most terrible thing for the prisoner within the four walls in whichhe is buried, is a sort of glacial chastity, and he calls the dungeonthe _castus_. In that funereal place, life outside always presentsitself under its most smiling aspect. The prisoner has irons on hisfeet; you think, perhaps, that his thought is that it is with the feetthat one walks? No; he is thinking that it is with the feet that onedances; so, when he has succeeded in severing his fetters, his firstidea is that now he can dance, and he calls the saw the _bastringue_(public-house ball).—A name is a centre; profound assimilation.—Theruffian has two heads, one of which reasons out his actions and leadshim all his life long, and the other which he has upon his shoulders onthe day of his death; he calls the head which counsels him in crime _lasorbonne_, and the head which expiates it _la tronche_.—When a man hasno longer anything but rags upon his body and vices in his heart, whenhe has arrived at that double moral and material degradation which theword blackguard characterizes in its two acceptations, he is ripe forcrime; he is like a well-whetted knife; he has two cutting edges, hisdistress and his malice; so slang does not say a blackguard, it says_un réguisé_.—What are the galleys? A brazier of damnation, a hell. Theconvict calls himself a _fagot_.—And finally, what name do malefactorsgive to their prison? The _college_. A whole penitentiary system can beevolved from that word.
Does the reader wish to know where the majority of the songs of thegalleys, those refrains called in the special vocabulary _lirlonfa_,have had their birth?
Let him listen to what follows:—
There existed at the Châtelet in Paris a large and long cellar. Thiscellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine. It had neitherwindows nor air-holes, its only aperture was the door; men could enterthere, air could not. This vault had for ceiling a vault of stone, andfor floor ten inches of mud. It was flagged; but the pavement hadrotted and cracked under the oozing of the water. Eight feet above thefloor, a long and massive beam traversed this subterranean excavationfrom side to side; from this beam hung, at short distances apart,chains three feet long, and at the end of these chains there were ringsfor the neck. In this vault, men who had been condemned to the galleyswere incarcerated until the day of their departure for Toulon. Theywere thrust under this beam, where each one found his fetters swingingin the darkness and waiting for him.
The chains, those pendant arms, and the necklets, those open hands,caught the unhappy wretches by the throat. They were rivetted and leftthere. As the chain was too short, they could not lie down. Theyremained motionless in that cavern, in that night, beneath that beam,almost hanging, forced to unheard-of efforts to reach their bread, jug,or their vault overhead, mud even to mid-leg, filth flowing to theirvery calves, broken asunder with fatigue, with thighs and knees givingway, clinging fast to the chain with their hands in order to obtainsome rest, unable to sleep except when standing erect, and awakenedevery moment by the strangling of the collar; some woke no more. Inorder to eat, they pushed the bread, which was flung to them in themud, along their leg with their heel until it reached their hand.
How long did they remain thus? One month, two months, six monthssometimes; one stayed a year. It was the antechamber of the galleys.Men were put there for stealing a hare from the king. In thissepulchre-hell, what did they do? What man can do in a sepulchre, theywent through the agonies of death, and what can man do in hell, theysang; for song lingers where there is no longer any hope. In the watersof Malta, when a galley was approaching, the song could be heard beforethe sound of the oars. Poor Survincent, the poacher, who had gonethrough the prison-cellar of the Châtelet, said: “It was the rhymesthat kept me up.” Uselessness of poetry. What is the good of rhyme?
It is in this cellar that nearly all the slang songs had their birth.It is from the dungeon of the Grand-Châtelet of Paris that comes themelancholy refrain of the Montgomery galley: _“Timaloumisaine,timaloumison.”_ The majority of these songs are melancholy; some aregay; one is tender:—
Icicaille est la theatre        Here is the theatreDu petit dardant.               Of the little archer (Cupid).

Do what you will, you cannot annihilate that eternal relic in the heartof man, love.
In this world of dismal deeds, people keep their secrets. The secret isthe thing above all others. The secret, in the eyes of these wretches,is unity which serves as a base of union. To betray a secret is to tearfrom each member of this fierce community something of his ownpersonality. To inform against, in the energetic slang dialect, iscalled: “to eat the bit.” As though the informer drew to himself alittle of the substance of all and nourished himself on a bit of eachone’s flesh.
What does it signify to receive a box on the ear? Commonplace metaphorreplies: “It is to see thirty-six candles.” Here slang intervenes andtakes it up: Candle, _camoufle_. Thereupon, the ordinary tongue gives_camouflet_42 as the synonym for _soufflet_. Thus, by a sort ofinfiltration from below upwards, with the aid of metaphor, thatincalculable, trajectory slang mounts from the cavern to the Academy;and Poulailler saying: “I light my _camoufle_,” causes Voltaire towrite: “Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred _camouflets_.”

Researches in slang mean discoveries at every step. Study andinvestigation of this strange idiom lead to the mysterious point ofintersection of regular society with society which is accursed.
The thief also has his food for cannon, stealable matter, you, I,whoever passes by; _le pantre_. (_Pan_, everybody.)
Slang is language turned convict.
That the thinking principle of man be thrust down ever so low, that itcan be dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality,that it can be bound by no one knows what fetters in that abyss, issufficient to create consternation.
Oh, poor thought of miserable wretches!
Alas! will no one come to the succor of the human soul in thatdarkness? Is it her destiny there to await forever the mind, theliberator, the immense rider of Pegasi and hippogriffs, the combatantof heroes of the dawn who shall descend from the azure between twowings, the radiant knight of the future? Will she forever summon invain to her assistance the lance of light of the ideal? Is shecondemned to hear the fearful approach of Evil through the density ofthe gulf, and to catch glimpses, nearer and nearer at hand, beneath thehideous water of that dragon’s head, that maw streaked with foam, andthat writhing undulation of claws, swellings, and rings? Must it remainthere, without a gleam of light, without hope, given over to thatterrible approach, vaguely scented out by the monster, shuddering,dishevelled, wringing its arms, forever chained to the rock of night, asombre Andromeda white and naked amid the shadows!



CHAPTER III—SLANG WHICH WEEPS AND SLANG WHICH LAUGHS

As the reader perceives, slang in its entirety, slang of four hundredyears ago, like the slang of to-day, is permeated with that sombre,symbolical spirit which gives to all words a mien which is nowmournful, now menacing. One feels in it the wild and ancient sadness ofthose vagrants of the Court of Miracles who played at cards with packsof their own, some of which have come down to us. The eight of clubs,for instance, represented a huge tree bearing eight enormous trefoilleaves, a sort of fantastic personification of the forest. At the footof this tree a fire was burning, over which three hares were roasting ahuntsman on a spit, and behind him, on another fire, hung a steamingpot, whence emerged the head of a dog. Nothing can be more melancholythan these reprisals in painting, by a pack of cards, in the presenceof stakes for the roasting of smugglers and of the cauldron for theboiling of counterfeiters. The diverse forms assumed by thought in therealm of slang, even song, even raillery, even menace, all partook ofthis powerless and dejected character. All the songs, the melodies ofsome of which have been collected, were humble and lamentable to thepoint of evoking tears. The _pègre_ is always the poor _pègre_, and heis always the hare in hiding, the fugitive mouse, the flying bird. Hehardly complains, he contents himself with sighing; one of his moanshas come down to us: “I do not understand how God, the father of men,can torture his children and his grandchildren and hear them cry,without himself suffering torture."43 The wretch, whenever he has timeto think, makes himself small before the low, and frail in the presenceof society; he lies down flat on his face, he entreats, he appeals tothe side of compassion; we feel that he is conscious of his guilt.
Towards the middle of the last century a change took place, prisonsongs and thieves’ ritournelles assumed, so to speak, an insolent andjovial mien. The plaintive _maluré_ was replaced by the _larifla_. Wefind in the eighteenth century, in nearly all the songs of the galleysand prisons, a diabolical and enigmatical gayety. We hear this stridentand lilting refrain which we should say had been lighted up by aphosphorescent gleam, and which seems to have been flung into theforest by a will-o’-the-wisp playing the fife:—
Miralabi suslababoMirliton ribonribetteSurlababi mirlababoMirliton ribonribo.

This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting aman’s throat.
A serious symptom. In the eighteenth century, the ancient melancholy ofthe dejected classes vanishes. They began to laugh. They rally the_grand meg_ and the _grand dab_. Given Louis XV. they call the King ofFrance “le Marquis de Pantin.” And behold, they are almost gay. A sortof gleam proceeds from these miserable wretches, as though theirconsciences were not heavy within them any more. These lamentabletribes of darkness have no longer merely the desperate audacity ofactions, they possess the heedless audacity of mind. A sign that theyare losing the sense of their criminality, and that they feel, evenamong thinkers and dreamers, some indefinable support which the latterthemselves know not of. A sign that theft and pillage are beginning tofilter into doctrines and sophisms, in such a way as to lose somewhatof their ugliness, while communicating much of it to sophisms anddoctrines. A sign, in short, of some outbreak which is prodigious andnear unless some diversion shall arise.
Let us pause a moment. Whom are we accusing here? Is it the eighteenthcentury? Is it philosophy? Certainly not. The work of the eighteenthcentury is healthy and good and wholesome. The encyclopedists, Diderotat their head; the physiocrates, Turgot at their head; thephilosophers, Voltaire at their head; the Utopians, Rousseau at theirhead,—these are four sacred legions. Humanity’s immense advance towardsthe light is due to them. They are the four vanguards of the humanrace, marching towards the four cardinal points of progress. Diderottowards the beautiful, Turgot towards the useful, Voltaire towards thetrue, Rousseau towards the just. But by the side of and above thephilosophers, there were the sophists, a venomous vegetation mingledwith a healthy growth, hemlock in the virgin forest. While theexecutioner was burning the great books of the liberators of thecentury on the grand staircase of the court-house, writers nowforgotten were publishing, with the King’s sanction, no one knows whatstrangely disorganizing writings, which were eagerly read by theunfortunate. Some of these publications, odd to say, which werepatronized by a prince, are to be found in the Secret Library. Thesefacts, significant but unknown, were imperceptible on the surface.Sometimes, in the very obscurity of a fact lurks its danger. It isobscure because it is underhand. Of all these writers, the one whoprobably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery wasRestif de La Bretonne.
This work, peculiar to the whole of Europe, effected more ravages inGermany than anywhere else. In Germany, during a given period, summedup by Schiller in his famous drama _The Robbers_, theft and pillagerose up in protest against property and labor, assimilated certainspecious and false elementary ideas, which, though just in appearance,were absurd in reality, enveloped themselves in these ideas,disappeared within them, after a fashion, assumed an abstract name,passed into the state of theory, and in that shape circulated among thelaborious, suffering, and honest masses, unknown even to the imprudentchemists who had prepared the mixture, unknown even to the masses whoaccepted it. Whenever a fact of this sort presents itself, the case isgrave. Suffering engenders wrath; and while the prosperous classesblind themselves or fall asleep, which is the same thing as shuttingone’s eyes, the hatred of the unfortunate classes lights its torch atsome aggrieved or ill-made spirit which dreams in a corner, and setsitself to the scrutiny of society. The scrutiny of hatred is a terriblething.
Hence, if the ill-fortune of the times so wills it, those fearfulcommotions which were formerly called _jacqueries_, beside which purelypolitical agitations are the merest child’s play, which are no longerthe conflict of the oppressed and the oppressor, but the revolt ofdiscomfort against comfort. Then everything crumbles.
Jacqueries are earthquakes of the people.
It is this peril, possibly imminent towards the close of the eighteenthcentury, which the French Revolution, that immense act of probity, cutshort.
The French Revolution, which is nothing else than the idea armed withthe sword, rose erect, and, with the same abrupt movement, closed thedoor of ill and opened the door of good.
It put a stop to torture, promulgated the truth, expelled miasma,rendered the century healthy, crowned the populace.
It may be said of it that it created man a second time, by giving him asecond soul, the right.
The nineteenth century has inherited and profited by its work, andto-day, the social catastrophe to which we lately alluded is simplyimpossible. Blind is he who announces it! Foolish is he who fears it!Revolution is the vaccine of Jacquerie.
Thanks to the Revolution, social conditions have changed. Feudal andmonarchical maladies no longer run in our blood. There is no more ofthe Middle Ages in our constitution. We no longer live in the days whenterrible swarms within made irruptions, when one heard beneath his feetthe obscure course of a dull rumble, when indescribable elevations frommole-like tunnels appeared on the surface of civilization, where thesoil cracked open, where the roofs of caverns yawned, and where onesuddenly beheld monstrous heads emerging from the earth.
The revolutionary sense is a moral sense. The sentiment of right, oncedeveloped, develops the sentiment of duty. The law of all is liberty,which ends where the liberty of others begins, according toRobespierre’s admirable definition. Since ’89, the whole people hasbeen dilating into a sublime individual; there is not a poor man, who,possessing his right, has not his ray of sun; the die-of-hunger feelswithin him the honesty of France; the dignity of the citizen is aninternal armor; he who is free is scrupulous; he who votes reigns.Hence incorruptibility; hence the miscarriage of unhealthy lusts; henceeyes heroically lowered before temptations. The revolutionarywholesomeness is such, that on a day of deliverance, a 14th of July, a10th of August, there is no longer any populace. The first cry of theenlightened and increasing throngs is: death to thieves! Progress is anhonest man; the ideal and the absolute do not filchpocket-handkerchiefs. By whom were the wagons containing the wealth ofthe Tuileries escorted in 1848? By the rag-pickers of the FaubourgSaint-Antoine. Rags mounted guard over the treasure. Virtue renderedthese tatterdemalions resplendent. In those wagons in chests, hardlyclosed, and some, even, half-open, amid a hundred dazzling caskets, wasthat ancient crown of France, studded with diamonds, surmounted by thecarbuncle of royalty, by the Regent diamond, which was worth thirtymillions. Barefooted, they guarded that crown.
Hence, no more Jacquerie. I regret it for the sake of the skilful. Theold fear has produced its last effects in that quarter; and henceforthit can no longer be employed in politics. The principal spring of thered spectre is broken. Every one knows it now. The scare-crow scares nolonger. The birds take liberties with the mannikin, foul creaturesalight upon it, the bourgeois laugh at it.



CHAPTER IV—THE TWO DUTIES: TO WATCH AND TO HOPE

This being the case, is all social danger dispelled? Certainly not.There is no Jacquerie; society may rest assured on that point; bloodwill no longer rush to its head. But let society take heed to themanner in which it breathes. Apoplexy is no longer to be feared, butphthisis is there. Social phthisis is called misery.
One can perish from being undermined as well as from being struck bylightning.
Let us not weary of repeating, and sympathetic souls must not forgetthat this is the first of fraternal obligations, and selfish heartsmust understand that the first of political necessities consists inthinking first of all of the disinherited and sorrowing throngs, insolacing, airing, enlightening, loving them, in enlarging their horizonto a magnificent extent, in lavishing upon them education in everyform, in offering them the example of labor, never the example ofidleness, in diminishing the individual burden by enlarging the notionof the universal aim, in setting a limit to poverty without setting alimit to wealth, in creating vast fields of public and popularactivity, in having, like Briareus, a hundred hands to extend in alldirections to the oppressed and the feeble, in employing the collectivepower for that grand duty of opening workshops for all arms, schoolsfor all aptitudes, and laboratories for all degrees of intelligence, inaugmenting salaries, diminishing trouble, balancing what should be andwhat is, that is to say, in proportioning enjoyment to effort and aglut to need; in a word, in evolving from the social apparatus morelight and more comfort for the benefit of those who suffer and thosewho are ignorant.
And, let us say it, all this is but the beginning. The true question isthis: labor cannot be a law without being a right.
We will not insist upon this point; this is not the proper place forthat.
If nature calls itself Providence, society should call itselfforesight.
Intellectual and moral growth is no less indispensable than materialimprovement. To know is a sacrament, to think is the prime necessity,truth is nourishment as well as grain. A reason which fasts fromscience and wisdom grows thin. Let us enter equal complaint againststomachs and minds which do not eat. If there is anything moreheart-breaking than a body perishing for lack of bread, it is a soulwhich is dying from hunger for the light.
The whole of progress tends in the direction of solution. Some day weshall be amazed. As the human race mounts upward, the deep layersemerge naturally from the zone of distress. The obliteration of miserywill be accomplished by a simple elevation of level.
We should do wrong were we to doubt this blessed consummation.
The past is very strong, it is true, at the present moment. Itcensures. This rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising. Behold, it iswalking and advancing. It seems a victor; this dead body is aconqueror. He arrives with his legions, superstitions, with his sword,despotism, with his banner, ignorance; a while ago, he won ten battles.He advances, he threatens, he laughs, he is at our doors. Let us notdespair, on our side. Let us sell the field on which Hannibal isencamped.
What have we to fear, we who believe?
No such thing as a back-flow of ideas exists any more than there existsa return of a river on its course.
But let those who do not desire a future reflect on this matter. Whenthey say “no” to progress, it is not the future but themselves thatthey are condemning. They are giving themselves a sad malady; they areinoculating themselves with the past. There is but one way of rejectingTo-morrow, and that is to die.
Now, no death, that of the body as late as possible, that of the soulnever,—this is what we desire.
Yes, the enigma will utter its word, the sphinx will speak, the problemwill be solved.
Yes, the people, sketched out by the eighteenth century, will befinished by the nineteenth. He who doubts this is an idiot! The futureblossoming, the near blossoming forth of universal well-being, is adivinely fatal phenomenon.
Immense combined propulsions direct human affairs and conduct themwithin a given time to a logical state, that is to say, to a state ofequilibrium; that is to say, to equity. A force composed of earth andheaven results from humanity and governs it; this force is a worker ofmiracles; marvellous issues are no more difficult to it thanextraordinary vicissitudes. Aided by science, which comes from one man,and by the event, which comes from another, it is not greatly alarmedby these contradictions in the attitude of problems, which seemimpossibilities to the vulgar herd. It is no less skilful at causing asolution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas, than alesson from the reconciliation of facts, and we may expect anythingfrom that mysterious power of progress, which brought the Orient andthe Occident face to face one fine day, in the depths of a sepulchre,and made the imaums converse with Bonaparte in the interior of theGreat Pyramid.
In the meantime, let there be no halt, no hesitation, no pause in thegrandiose onward march of minds. Social philosophy consists essentiallyin science and peace. Its object is, and its result must be, todissolve wrath by the study of antagonisms. It examines, itscrutinizes, it analyzes; then it puts together once more, it proceedsby means of reduction, discarding all hatred.
More than once, a society has been seen to give way before the windwhich is let loose upon mankind; history is full of the shipwrecks ofnations and empires; manners, customs, laws, religions,—and some fineday that unknown force, the hurricane, passes by and bears them allaway. The civilizations of India, of Chaldea, of Persia, of Syria, ofEgypt, have disappeared one after the other. Why? We know not. What arethe causes of these disasters? We do not know. Could these societieshave been saved? Was it their fault? Did they persist in the fatal vicewhich destroyed them? What is the amount of suicide in these terribledeaths of a nation and a race? Questions to which there exists noreply. Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations. They sprung a leak,then they sank. We have nothing more to say; and it is with a sort ofterror that we look on, at the bottom of that sea which is called thepast, behind those colossal waves, at the shipwreck of those immensevessels, Babylon, Nineveh, Tarsus, Thebes, Rome, beneath the fearfulgusts which emerge from all the mouths of the shadows. But shadows arethere, and light is here. We are not acquainted with the maladies ofthese ancient civilizations, we do not know the infirmities of our own.Everywhere upon it we have the right of light, we contemplate itsbeauties, we lay bare its defects. Where it is ill, we probe; and thesickness once diagnosed, the study of the cause leads to the discoveryof the remedy. Our civilization, the work of twenty centuries, is itslaw and its prodigy; it is worth the trouble of saving. It will besaved. It is already much to have solaced it; its enlightenment is yetanother point. All the labors of modern social philosophies mustconverge towards this point. The thinker of to-day has a great duty—toauscultate civilization.
We repeat, that this auscultation brings encouragement; it is by thispersistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages, anaustere interlude in a mournful drama. Beneath the social mortality, wefeel human imperishableness. The globe does not perish, because it hasthese wounds, craters, eruptions, sulphur pits, here and there, norbecause of a volcano which ejects its pus. The maladies of the peopledo not kill man.
And yet, any one who follows the course of social clinics shakes hishead at times. The strongest, the tenderest, the most logical havetheir hours of weakness.
Will the future arrive? It seems as though we might almost put thisquestion, when we behold so much terrible darkness. Melancholyface-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched. On the part of theselfish, the prejudices, shadows of costly education, appetiteincreasing through intoxication, a giddiness of prosperity which dulls,a fear of suffering which, in some, goes as far as an aversion for thesuffering, an implacable satisfaction, the _I_ so swollen that it barsthe soul; on the side of the wretched covetousness, envy, hatred ofseeing others enjoy, the profound impulses of the human beast towardsassuaging its desires, hearts full of mist, sadness, need, fatality,impure and simple ignorance.
Shall we continue to raise our eyes to heaven? is the luminous pointwhich we distinguish there one of those which vanish? The ideal isfrightful to behold, thus lost in the depths, small, isolated,imperceptible, brilliant, but surrounded by those great, black menaces,monstrously heaped around it; yet no more in danger than a star in themaw of the clouds.



BOOK EIGHTH—ENCHANTMENTS AND DESOLATIONS



CHAPTER I—FULL LIGHT

The reader has probably understood that Éponine, having recognizedthrough the gate, the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon hadsent her, had begun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet,and had then conducted Marius thither, and that, after many days spentin ecstasy before that gate, Marius, drawn on by that force which drawsthe iron to the magnet and a lover towards the stones of which is builtthe house of her whom he loves, had finally entered Cosette’s garden asRomeo entered the garden of Juliet. This had even proved easier for himthan for Romeo; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall, Marius had only touse a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate whichvacillated in its rusty recess, after the fashion of old people’steeth. Marius was slender and readily passed through.
As there was never any one in the street, and as Marius never enteredthe garden except at night, he ran no risk of being seen.
Beginning with that blessed and holy hour when a kiss betrothed thesetwo souls, Marius was there every evening. If, at that period of herexistence, Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the leastunscrupulous or debauched, she would have been lost; for there aregenerous natures which yield themselves, and Cosette was one of them.One of woman’s magnanimities is to yield. Love, at the height where itis absolute, is complicated with some indescribably celestial blindnessof modesty. But what dangers you run, O noble souls! Often you give theheart, and we take the body. Your heart remains with you, you gaze uponit in the gloom with a shudder. Love has no middle course; it eitherruins or it saves. All human destiny lies in this dilemma. Thisdilemma, ruin, or safety, is set forth no more inexorably by anyfatality than by love. Love is life, if it is not death. Cradle; alsocoffin. The same sentiment says “yes” and “no” in the human heart. Ofall the things that God has made, the human heart is the one whichsheds the most light, alas! and the most darkness.
God willed that Cosette’s love should encounter one of the loves whichsave.
Throughout the whole of the month of May of that year 1832, there werethere, in every night, in that poor, neglected garden, beneath thatthicket which grew thicker and more fragrant day by day, two beingscomposed of all chastity, all innocence, overflowing with all thefelicity of heaven, nearer to the archangels than to mankind, pure,honest, intoxicated, radiant, who shone for each other amid theshadows. It seemed to Cosette that Marius had a crown, and to Mariusthat Cosette had a nimbus. They touched each other, they gazed at eachother, they clasped each other’s hands, they pressed close to eachother; but there was a distance which they did not pass. Not that theyrespected it; they did not know of its existence. Marius was consciousof a barrier, Cosette’s innocence; and Cosette of a support, Marius’loyalty. The first kiss had also been the last. Marius, since thattime, had not gone further than to touch Cosette’s hand, or herkerchief, or a lock of her hair, with his lips. For him, Cosette was aperfume and not a woman. He inhaled her. She refused nothing, and heasked nothing. Cosette was happy, and Marius was satisfied. They livedin this ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of onesoul by another soul. It was the ineffable first embrace of two maidensouls in the ideal. Two swans meeting on the Jungfrau.
At that hour of love, an hour when voluptuousness is absolutely mute,beneath the omnipotence of ecstasy, Marius, the pure and seraphicMarius, would rather have gone to a woman of the town than have raisedCosette’s robe to the height of her ankle. Once, in the moonlight,Cosette stooped to pick up something on the ground, her bodice fellapart and permitted a glimpse of the beginning of her throat. Mariusturned away his eyes.
What took place between these two beings? Nothing. They adored eachother.
At night, when they were there, that garden seemed a living and asacred spot. All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense;and they opened their souls and scattered them over the flowers. Thewanton and vigorous vegetation quivered, full of strength andintoxication, around these two innocents, and they uttered words oflove which set the trees to trembling.
What words were these? Breaths. Nothing more. These breaths sufficed totrouble and to touch all nature round about. Magic power which weshould find it difficult to understand were we to read in a book theseconversations which are made to be borne away and dispersed like smokewreaths by the breeze beneath the leaves. Take from those murmurs oftwo lovers that melody which proceeds from the soul and whichaccompanies them like a lyre, and what remains is nothing more than ashade; you say: “What! is that all!” eh! yes, childish prattle,repetitions, laughter at nothing, nonsense, everything that is deepestand most sublime in the world! The only things which are worth thetrouble of saying and hearing!
The man who has never heard, the man who has never uttered theseabsurdities, these paltry remarks, is an imbecile and a maliciousfellow. Cosette said to Marius:—
“Dost thou know?—”

[In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness, and withouteither of them being able to say how it had come about, they had begunto call each other _thou_.]
“Dost thou know? My name is Euphrasie.”

“Euphrasie? Why, no, thy name is Cosette.”

“Oh! Cosette is a very ugly name that was given to me when I was alittle thing. But my real name is Euphrasie. Dost thou like thatname—Euphrasie?”

“Yes. But Cosette is not ugly.”

“Do you like it better than Euphrasie?”

“Why, yes.”

“Then I like it better too. Truly, it is pretty, Cosette. Call meCosette.”

And the smile that she added made of this dialogue an idyl worthy of agrove situated in heaven. On another occasion she gazed intently at himand exclaimed:—
“Monsieur, you are handsome, you are good-looking, you are witty, youare not at all stupid, you are much more learned than I am, but I bidyou defiance with this word: I love you!”

And Marius, in the very heavens, thought he heard a strain sung by astar.
Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed, and she said tohim:—
“Don’t cough, sir; I will not have people cough on my domain without mypermission. It’s very naughty to cough and to disturb me. I want you tobe well, because, in the first place, if you were not well, I should bevery unhappy. What should I do then?”

And this was simply divine.
Once Marius said to Cosette:—
“Just imagine, I thought at one time that your name was Ursule.”

This made both of them laugh the whole evening.
In the middle of another conversation, he chanced to exclaim:—
“Oh! One day, at the Luxembourg, I had a good mind to finish breakingup a veteran!” But he stopped short, and went no further. He would havebeen obliged to speak to Cosette of her garter, and that wasimpossible. This bordered on a strange theme, the flesh, before whichthat immense and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright.
Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this, withoutanything else; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet, to displace theold and accommodating bar of the chief-justice’s gate, to sit elbow toelbow on that bench, to gaze through the trees at the scintillation ofthe on-coming night, to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into theample fall of Cosette’s gown, to caress her thumb-nail, to call her_thou_, to smell of the same flower, one after the other, forever,indefinitely. During this time, clouds passed above their heads. Everytime that the wind blows it bears with it more of the dreams of menthan of the clouds of heaven.
This chaste, almost shy love was not devoid of gallantry, by any means.To pay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method ofbestowing caresses, and he is half audacious who tries it. A complimentis something like a kiss through a veil. Voluptuousness mingles therewith its sweet tiny point, while it hides itself. The heart draws backbefore voluptuousness only to love the more. Marius’ blandishments, allsaturated with fancy, were, so to speak, of azure hue. The birds whenthey fly up yonder, in the direction of the angels, must hear suchwords. There were mingled with them, nevertheless, life, humanity, allthe positiveness of which Marius was capable. It was what is said inthe bower, a prelude to what will be said in the chamber; a lyricaleffusion, strophe and sonnet intermingled, pleasing hyperboles ofcooing, all the refinements of adoration arranged in a bouquet andexhaling a celestial perfume, an ineffable twitter of heart to heart.
“Oh!” murmured Marius, “how beautiful you are! I dare not look at you.It is all over with me when I contemplate you. You are a grace. I knownot what is the matter with me. The hem of your gown, when the tip ofyour shoe peeps from beneath, upsets me. And then, what an enchantedgleam when you open your thought even but a little! You talkastonishingly good sense. It seems to me at times that you are a dream.Speak, I listen, I admire. Oh Cosette! how strange it is and howcharming! I am really beside myself. You are adorable, Mademoiselle. Istudy your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope.”

And Cosette answered:—
“I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed sincethis morning.”

Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue, whichalways turned with mutual consent upon love, as the little pith figuresalways turn on their peg.
Cosette’s whole person was ingenuousness, ingenuity, transparency,whiteness, candor, radiance. It might have been said of Cosette thatshe was clear. She produced on those who saw her the sensation of Apriland dawn. There was dew in her eyes. Cosette was a condensation of theauroral light in the form of a woman.
It was quite simple that Marius should admire her, since he adored her.But the truth is, that this little school-girl, fresh from the convent,talked with exquisite penetration and uttered, at times, all sorts oftrue and delicate sayings. Her prattle was conversation. She never madea mistake about anything, and she saw things justly. The woman feelsand speaks with the tender instinct of the heart, which is infallible.
No one understands so well as a woman, how to say things that are, atonce, both sweet and deep. Sweetness and depth, they are the whole ofwoman; in them lies the whole of heaven.
In this full felicity, tears welled up to their eyes every instant. Acrushed lady-bug, a feather fallen from a nest, a branch of hawthornbroken, aroused their pity, and their ecstasy, sweetly mingled withmelancholy, seemed to ask nothing better than to weep. The mostsovereign symptom of love is a tenderness that is, at times, almostunbearable.
And, in addition to this,—all these contradictions are the lightningplay of love,—they were fond of laughing, they laughed readily and witha delicious freedom, and so familiarly that they sometimes presentedthe air of two boys.
Still, though unknown to hearts intoxicated with purity, nature isalways present and will not be forgotten. She is there with her brutaland sublime object; and however great may be the innocence of souls,one feels in the most modest private interview, the adorable andmysterious shade which separates a couple of lovers from a pair offriends.
They idolized each other.
The permanent and the immutable are persistent. People live, theysmile, they laugh, they make little grimaces with the tips of theirlips, they interlace their fingers, they call each other _thou_, andthat does not prevent eternity.
Two lovers hide themselves in the evening, in the twilight, in theinvisible, with the birds, with the roses; they fascinate each other inthe darkness with their hearts which they throw into their eyes, theymurmur, they whisper, and in the meantime, immense librations of theplanets fill the infinite universe.



CHAPTER II—THE BEWILDERMENT OF PERFECT HAPPINESS

They existed vaguely, frightened at their happiness. They did notnotice the cholera which decimated Paris precisely during that verymonth. They had confided in each other as far as possible, but this hadnot extended much further than their names. Marius had told Cosettethat he was an orphan, that his name was Marius Pontmercy, that he wasa lawyer, that he lived by writing things for publishers, that hisfather had been a colonel, that the latter had been a hero, and thathe, Marius, was on bad terms with his grandfather who was rich. He hadalso hinted at being a baron, but this had produced no effect onCosette. She did not know the meaning of the word. Marius was Marius.On her side, she had confided to him that she had been brought up atthe Petit-Picpus convent, that her mother, like his own, was dead, thather father’s name was M. Fauchelevent, that he was very good, that hegave a great deal to the poor, but that he was poor himself, and thathe denied himself everything though he denied her nothing.
Strange to say, in the sort of symphony which Marius had lived since hehad been in the habit of seeing Cosette, the past, even the most recentpast, had become so confused and distant to him, that what Cosette toldhim satisfied him completely. It did not even occur to him to tell herabout the nocturnal adventure in the hovel, about Thénardier, about theburn, and about the strange attitude and singular flight of her father.Marius had momentarily forgotten all this; in the evening he did noteven know that there had been a morning, what he had done, where he hadbreakfasted, nor who had spoken to him; he had songs in his ears whichrendered him deaf to every other thought; he only existed at the hourswhen he saw Cosette. Then, as he was in heaven, it was quite naturalthat he should forget earth. Both bore languidly the indefinable burdenof immaterial pleasures. Thus lived these somnambulists who are calledlovers.
Alas! Who is there who has not felt all these things? Why does therecome an hour when one emerges from this azure, and why does life go onafterwards?
Loving almost takes the place of thinking. Love is an ardentforgetfulness of all the rest. Then ask logic of passion if you will.There is no more absolute logical sequence in the human heart thanthere is a perfect geometrical figure in the celestial mechanism. ForCosette and Marius nothing existed except Marius and Cosette. Theuniverse around them had fallen into a hole. They lived in a goldenminute. There was nothing before them, nothing behind. It hardlyoccurred to Marius that Cosette had a father. His brain was dazzled andobliterated. Of what did these lovers talk then? We have seen, of theflowers, and the swallows, the setting sun and the rising moon, and allsorts of important things. They had told each other everything excepteverything. The everything of lovers is nothing. But the father, therealities, that lair, the ruffians, that adventure, to what purpose?And was he very sure that this nightmare had actually existed? Theywere two, and they adored each other, and beyond that there wasnothing. Nothing else existed. It is probable that this vanishing ofhell in our rear is inherent to the arrival of paradise. Have we behelddemons? Are there any? Have we trembled? Have we suffered? We no longerknow. A rosy cloud hangs over it.
So these two beings lived in this manner, high aloft, with all thatimprobability which is in nature; neither at the nadir nor at thezenith, between man and seraphim, above the mire, below the ether, inthe clouds; hardly flesh and blood, soul and ecstasy from head to foot;already too sublime to walk the earth, still too heavily charged withhumanity to disappear in the blue, suspended like atoms which arewaiting to be precipitated; apparently beyond the bounds of destiny;ignorant of that rut; yesterday, to-day, to-morrow; amazed, rapturous,floating, soaring; at times so light that they could take their flightout into the infinite; almost prepared to soar away to all eternity.They slept wide-awake, thus sweetly lulled. Oh! splendid lethargy ofthe real overwhelmed by the ideal.
Sometimes, beautiful as Cosette was, Marius shut his eyes in herpresence. The best way to look at the soul is through closed eyes.
Marius and Cosette never asked themselves whither this was to leadthem. They considered that they had already arrived. It is a strangeclaim on man’s part to wish that love should lead to something.



CHAPTER III—THE BEGINNING OF SHADOW

Jean Valjean suspected nothing.
Cosette, who was rather less dreamy than Marius, was gay, and thatsufficed for Jean Valjean’s happiness. The thoughts which Cosettecherished, her tender preoccupations, Marius’ image which filled herheart, took away nothing from the incomparable purity of her beautiful,chaste, and smiling brow. She was at the age when the virgin bears herlove as the angel his lily. So Jean Valjean was at ease. And then, whentwo lovers have come to an understanding, things always go well; thethird party who might disturb their love is kept in a state of perfectblindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always thesame in the case of all lovers. Thus, Cosette never objected to any ofJean Valjean’s proposals. Did she want to take a walk? “Yes, dearlittle father.” Did she want to stay at home? Very good. Did he wish topass the evening with Cosette? She was delighted. As he always went tobed at ten o’clock, Marius did not come to the garden on such occasionsuntil after that hour, when, from the street, he heard Cosette open thelong glass door on the veranda. Of course, no one ever met Marius inthe daytime. Jean Valjean never even dreamed any longer that Marius wasin existence. Only once, one morning, he chanced to say to Cosette:“Why, you have whitewash on your back!” On the previous evening,Marius, in a transport, had pushed Cosette against the wall.
Old Toussaint, who retired early, thought of nothing but her sleep, andwas as ignorant of the whole matter as Jean Valjean.
Marius never set foot in the house. When he was with Cosette, they hidthemselves in a recess near the steps, in order that they might neitherbe seen nor heard from the street, and there they sat, frequentlycontenting themselves, by way of conversation, with pressing eachother’s hands twenty times a minute as they gazed at the branches ofthe trees. At such times, a thunderbolt might have fallen thirty pacesfrom them, and they would not have noticed it, so deeply was thereverie of the one absorbed and sunk in the reverie of the other.
Limpid purity. Hours wholly white; almost all alike. This sort of loveis a recollection of lily petals and the plumage of the dove.
The whole extent of the garden lay between them and the street. Everytime that Marius entered and left, he carefully adjusted the bar of thegate in such a manner that no displacement was visible.
He usually went away about midnight, and returned to Courfeyrac’slodgings. Courfeyrac said to Bahorel:—
“Would you believe it? Marius comes home nowadays at one o’clock in themorning.”

Bahorel replied:—
“What do you expect? There’s always a petard in a seminary fellow.”

At times, Courfeyrac folded his arms, assumed a serious air, and saidto Marius:—
“You are getting irregular in your habits, young man.”

Courfeyrac, being a practical man, did not take in good part thisreflection of an invisible paradise upon Marius; he was not much in thehabit of concealed passions; it made him impatient, and now and then hecalled upon Marius to come back to reality.
One morning, he threw him this admonition:—
“My dear fellow, you produce upon me the effect of being located in themoon, the realm of dreams, the province of illusions, capital,soap-bubble. Come, be a good boy, what’s her name?”

But nothing could induce Marius “to talk.” They might have torn out hisnails before one of the two sacred syllables of which that ineffablename, Cosette, was composed. True love is as luminous as the dawn andas silent as the tomb. Only, Courfeyrac saw this change in Marius, thathis taciturnity was of the beaming order.
During this sweet month of May, Marius and Cosette learned to knowthese immense delights. To dispute and to say _you_ for _thou_, simplythat they might say _thou_ the better afterwards. To talk at greatlength with very minute details, of persons in whom they took not theslightest interest in the world; another proof that in that ravishingopera called love, the libretto counts for almost nothing;
For Marius, to listen to Cosette discussing finery;
For Cosette, to listen to Marius talk in politics;
To listen, knee pressed to knee, to the carriages rolling along the Ruede Babylone;
To gaze upon the same planet in space, or at the same glowworm gleamingin the grass;
To hold their peace together; a still greater delight thanconversation;
Etc., etc.
In the meantime, divers complications were approaching.
One evening, Marius was on his way to the rendezvous, by way of theBoulevard des Invalides. He habitually walked with drooping head. As hewas on the point of turning the corner of the Rue Plumet, he heard someone quite close to him say:—
“Good evening, Monsieur Marius.”

He raised his head and recognized Éponine.
This produced a singular effect upon him. He had not thought of thatgirl a single time since the day when she had conducted him to the RuePlumet, he had not seen her again, and she had gone completely out ofhis mind. He had no reasons for anything but gratitude towards her, heowed her his happiness, and yet, it was embarrassing to him to meether.
It is an error to think that passion, when it is pure and happy, leadsman to a state of perfection; it simply leads him, as we have noted, toa state of oblivion. In this situation, man forgets to be bad, but healso forgets to be good. Gratitude, duty, matters essential andimportant to be remembered, vanish. At any other time, Marius wouldhave behaved quite differently to Éponine. Absorbed in Cosette, he hadnot even clearly put it to himself that this Éponine was named ÉponineThénardier, and that she bore the name inscribed in his father’s will,that name, for which, but a few months before, he would have soardently sacrificed himself. We show Marius as he was. His fatherhimself was fading out of his soul to some extent, under the splendorof his love.
He replied with some embarrassment:—
“Ah! so it’s you, Éponine?”

“Why do you call me _you?_ Have I done anything to you?”

“No,” he answered.
Certainly, he had nothing against her. Far from it. Only, he felt thathe could not do otherwise, now that he used _thou_ to Cosette, than say_you_ to Éponine.
As he remained silent, she exclaimed:—
“Say—”

Then she paused. It seemed as though words failed that creatureformerly so heedless and so bold. She tried to smile and could not.Then she resumed:—
“Well?”

Then she paused again, and remained with downcast eyes.
“Good evening, Mr. Marius,” said she suddenly and abruptly; and awayshe went.



CHAPTER IV—A CAB RUNS IN ENGLISH AND BARKS IN SLANG

The following day was the 3d of June, 1832, a date which it isnecessary to indicate on account of the grave events which at thatepoch hung on the horizon of Paris in the state of lightning-chargedclouds. Marius, at nightfall, was pursuing the same road as on thepreceding evening, with the same thoughts of delight in his heart, whenhe caught sight of Éponine approaching, through the trees of theboulevard. Two days in succession—this was too much. He turned hastilyaside, quitted the boulevard, changed his course and went to the RuePlumet through the Rue Monsieur.
This caused Éponine to follow him to the Rue Plumet, a thing which shehad not yet done. Up to that time, she had contented herself withwatching him on his passage along the boulevard without ever seeking toencounter him. It was only on the evening before that she had attemptedto address him.
So Éponine followed him, without his suspecting the fact. She saw himdisplace the bar and slip into the garden.
She approached the railing, felt of the bars one after the other, andreadily recognized the one which Marius had moved.
She murmured in a low voice and in gloomy accents:—
“None of that, Lisette!”

She seated herself on the underpinning of the railing, close beside thebar, as though she were guarding it. It was precisely at the pointwhere the railing touched the neighboring wall. There was a dim nookthere, in which Éponine was entirely concealed.
She remained thus for more than an hour, without stirring and withoutbreathing, a prey to her thoughts.
Towards ten o’clock in the evening, one of the two or three persons whopassed through the Rue Plumet, an old, belated bourgeois who was makinghaste to escape from this deserted spot of evil repute, as he skirtedthe garden railings and reached the angle which it made with the wall,heard a dull and threatening voice saying:—
“I’m no longer surprised that he comes here every evening.”

The passer-by cast a glance around him, saw no one, dared not peer intothe black niche, and was greatly alarmed. He redoubled his pace.
This passer-by had reason to make haste, for a very few instants later,six men, who were marching separately and at some distance from eachother, along the wall, and who might have been taken for a gray patrol,entered the Rue Plumet.
The first to arrive at the garden railing halted, and waited for theothers; a second later, all six were reunited.
These men began to talk in a low voice.
“This is the place,” said one of them.
“Is there a _cab_ [dog] in the garden?” asked another.
“I don’t know. In any case, I have fetched a ball that we’ll make himeat.”

“Have you some putty to break the pane with?”

“Yes.”

“The railing is old,” interpolated a fifth, who had the voice of aventriloquist.
“So much the better,” said the second who had spoken. “It won’t screechunder the saw, and it won’t be hard to cut.”

The sixth, who had not yet opened his lips, now began to inspect thegate, as Éponine had done an hour earlier, grasping each bar insuccession, and shaking them cautiously.
Thus he came to the bar which Marius had loosened. As he was on thepoint of grasping this bar, a hand emerged abruptly from the darkness,fell upon his arm; he felt himself vigorously thrust aside by a push inthe middle of his breast, and a hoarse voice said to him, but notloudly:—
“There’s a dog.”

At the same moment, he perceived a pale girl standing before him.
The man underwent that shock which the unexpected always brings. Hebristled up in hideous wise; nothing is so formidable to behold asferocious beasts who are uneasy; their terrified air evokes terror.
He recoiled and stammered:—
“What jade is this?”

“Your daughter.”

It was, in fact, Éponine, who had addressed Thénardier.
At the apparition of Éponine, the other five, that is to say,Claquesous, Guelemer, Babet, Brujon, and Montparnasse had noiselesslydrawn near, without precipitation, without uttering a word, with thesinister slowness peculiar to these men of the night.
Some indescribable but hideous tools were visible in their hands.Guelemer held one of those pairs of curved pincers which prowlers call_fanchons_.
“Ah, see here, what are you about there? What do you want with us? Areyou crazy?” exclaimed Thénardier, as loudly as one can exclaim andstill speak low; “what have you come here to hinder our work for?”

Éponine burst out laughing, and threw herself on his neck.
“I am here, little father, because I am here. Isn’t a person allowed tosit on the stones nowadays? It’s you who ought not to be here. Whathave you come here for, since it’s a biscuit? I told Magnon so. There’snothing to be done here. But embrace me, my good little father! It’s along time since I’ve seen you! So you’re out?”

Thénardier tried to disentangle himself from Éponine’s arms, andgrumbled:—
“That’s good. You’ve embraced me. Yes, I’m out. I’m not in. Now, getaway with you.”

But Éponine did not release her hold, and redoubled her caresses.
“But how did you manage it, little pa? You must have been very cleverto get out of that. Tell me about it! And my mother? Where is mother?Tell me about mamma.”

Thénardier replied:—
“She’s well. I don’t know, let me alone, and be off, I tell you.”

“I won’t go, so there now,” pouted Éponine like a spoiled child; “yousend me off, and it’s four months since I saw you, and I’ve hardly hadtime to kiss you.”

And she caught her father round the neck again.
“Come, now, this is stupid!” said Babet.
“Make haste!” said Guelemer, “the cops may pass.”

The ventriloquist’s voice repeated his distich:—
“Nous n’ sommes pas le jour de l’an,“This isn’t New Year’s dayA bécoter papa, maman.” To peck at pa and ma.”

Éponine turned to the five ruffians.
“Why, it’s Monsieur Brujon. Good day, Monsieur Babet. Good day,Monsieur Claquesous. Don’t you know me, Monsieur Guelemer? How goes it,Montparnasse?”

“Yes, they know you!” ejaculated Thénardier. “But good day, goodevening, sheer off! leave us alone!”

“It’s the hour for foxes, not for chickens,” said Montparnasse.
“You see the job we have on hand here,” added Babet.
Éponine caught Montparnasse’s hand.
“Take care,” said he, “you’ll cut yourself, I’ve a knife open.”

“My little Montparnasse,” responded Éponine very gently, “you must haveconfidence in people. I am the daughter of my father, perhaps. MonsieurBabet, Monsieur Guelemer, I’m the person who was charged to investigatethis matter.”

It is remarkable that Éponine did not talk slang. That frightful tonguehad become impossible to her since she had known Marius.
She pressed in her hand, small, bony, and feeble as that of a skeleton,Guelemer’s huge, coarse fingers, and continued:—
“You know well that I’m no fool. Ordinarily, I am believed. I haverendered you service on various occasions. Well, I have made inquiries;you will expose yourselves to no purpose, you see. I swear to you thatthere is nothing in this house.”

“There are lone women,” said Guelemer.
“No, the persons have moved away.”

“The candles haven’t, anyway!” ejaculated Babet.
And he pointed out to Éponine, across the tops of the trees, a lightwhich was wandering about in the mansard roof of the pavilion. It wasToussaint, who had stayed up to spread out some linen to dry.
Éponine made a final effort.
“Well,” said she, “they’re very poor folks, and it’s a hovel wherethere isn’t a sou.”

“Go to the devil!” cried Thénardier. “When we’ve turned the houseupside down and put the cellar at the top and the attic below, we’lltell you what there is inside, and whether it’s francs or sous orhalf-farthings.”

And he pushed her aside with the intention of entering.
“My good friend, Mr. Montparnasse,” said Éponine, “I entreat you, youare a good fellow, don’t enter.”

“Take care, you’ll cut yourself,” replied Montparnasse.
Thénardier resumed in his decided tone:—
“Decamp, my girl, and leave men to their own affairs!”

Éponine released Montparnasse’s hand, which she had grasped again, andsaid:—
“So you mean to enter this house?”

“Rather!” grinned the ventriloquist.
Then she set her back against the gate, faced the six ruffians who werearmed to the teeth, and to whom the night lent the visages of demons,and said in a firm, low voice:—
“Well, I don’t mean that you shall.”

They halted in amazement. The ventriloquist, however, finished hisgrin. She went on:—
“Friends! Listen well. This is not what you want. Now I’m talking. Inthe first place, if you enter this garden, if you lay a hand on thisgate, I’ll scream, I’ll beat on the door, I’ll rouse everybody, I’llhave the whole six of you seized, I’ll call the police.”

“She’d do it, too,” said Thénardier in a low tone to Brujon and theventriloquist.
She shook her head and added:—
“Beginning with my father!”

Thénardier stepped nearer.
“Not so close, my good man!” said she.
He retreated, growling between his teeth:—
“Why, what’s the matter with her?”

And he added:—
“Bitch!”

She began to laugh in a terrible way:—
“As you like, but you shall not enter here. I’m not the daughter of adog, since I’m the daughter of a wolf. There are six of you, whatmatters that to me? You are men. Well, I’m a woman. You don’t frightenme. I tell you that you shan’t enter this house, because it doesn’tsuit me. If you approach, I’ll bark. I told you, I’m the dog, and Idon’t care a straw for you. Go your way, you bore me! Go where youplease, but don’t come here, I forbid it! You can use your knives. I’lluse kicks; it’s all the same to me, come on!”

She advanced a pace nearer the ruffians, she was terrible, she burstout laughing:—
“Pardine! I’m not afraid. I shall be hungry this summer, and I shall becold this winter. Aren’t they ridiculous, these ninnies of men, tothink they can scare a girl! What! Scare? Oh, yes, much! Because youhave finical poppets of mistresses who hide under the bed when you puton a big voice, forsooth! I ain’t afraid of anything, that I ain’t!”

She fastened her intent gaze upon Thénardier and said:—
“Not even of you, father!”

Then she continued, as she cast her blood-shot, spectre-like eyes uponthe ruffians in turn:—
“What do I care if I’m picked up to-morrow morning on the pavement ofthe Rue Plumet, killed by the blows of my father’s club, or whether I’mfound a year from now in the nets at Saint-Cloud or the Isle of Swansin the midst of rotten old corks and drowned dogs?”

She was forced to pause; she was seized by a dry cough, her breath camefrom her weak and narrow chest like the death-rattle.
She resumed:—
“I have only to cry out, and people will come, and then slap, bang!There are six of you; I represent the whole world.”

Thénardier made a movement towards her.
“Don’t approach!” she cried.
He halted, and said gently:—
“Well, no; I won’t approach, but don’t speak so loud. So you intend tohinder us in our work, my daughter? But we must earn our living all thesame. Have you no longer any kind feeling for your father?”

“You bother me,” said Éponine.
“But we must live, we must eat—”

“Burst!”

So saying, she seated herself on the underpinning of the fence andhummed:—
“Mon bras si dodu,            “My arm so plump,Ma jambe bien faite           My leg well formed,Et le temps perdu.”           And time wasted.”

She had set her elbow on her knee and her chin in her hand, and sheswung her foot with an air of indifference. Her tattered gown permitteda view of her thin shoulder-blades. The neighboring street lanternilluminated her profile and her attitude. Nothing more resolute andmore surprising could be seen.
The six rascals, speechless and gloomy at being held in check by agirl, retreated beneath the shadow cast by the lantern, and heldcounsel with furious and humiliated shrugs.
In the meantime she stared at them with a stern but peaceful air.
“There’s something the matter with her,” said Babet. “A reason. Is shein love with the dog? It’s a shame to miss this, anyway. Two women, anold fellow who lodges in the back-yard, and curtains that ain’t so badat the windows. The old cove must be a Jew. I think the job’s a goodone.”

“Well, go in, then, the rest of you,” exclaimed Montparnasse. “Do thejob. I’ll stay here with the girl, and if she fails us—”

He flashed the knife, which he held open in his hand, in the light ofthe lantern.
Thénardier said not a word, and seemed ready for whatever the restpleased.
Brujon, who was somewhat of an oracle, and who had, as the readerknows, “put up the job,” had not as yet spoken. He seemed thoughtful.He had the reputation of not sticking at anything, and it was knownthat he had plundered a police post simply out of bravado. Besides thishe made verses and songs, which gave him great authority.
Babet interrogated him:—
“You say nothing, Brujon?”

Brujon remained silent an instant longer, then he shook his head invarious ways, and finally concluded to speak:—
“See here; this morning I came across two sparrows fighting, thisevening I jostled a woman who was quarrelling. All that’s bad. Let’squit.”

They went away.
As they went, Montparnasse muttered:—
“Never mind! if they had wanted, I’d have cut her throat.”

Babet responded
“I wouldn’t. I don’t hit a lady.”

At the corner of the street they halted and exchanged the followingenigmatical dialogue in a low tone:—
“Where shall we go to sleep to-night?”

“Under Pantin [Paris].”

“Have you the key to the gate, Thénardier?”

“Pardi.”

Éponine, who never took her eyes off of them, saw them retreat by theroad by which they had come. She rose and began to creep after themalong the walls and the houses. She followed them thus as far as theboulevard.
There they parted, and she saw these six men plunge into the gloom,where they appeared to melt away.



CHAPTER V—THINGS OF THE NIGHT

After the departure of the ruffians, the Rue Plumet resumed itstranquil, nocturnal aspect. That which had just taken place in thisstreet would not have astonished a forest. The lofty trees, the copses,the heaths, the branches rudely interlaced, the tall grass, exist in asombre manner; the savage swarming there catches glimpses of suddenapparitions of the invisible; that which is below man distinguishes,through the mists, that which is beyond man; and the things of which weliving beings are ignorant there meet face to face in the night.Nature, bristling and wild, takes alarm at certain approaches in whichshe fancies that she feels the supernatural. The forces of the gloomknow each other, and are strangely balanced by each other. Teeth andclaws fear what they cannot grasp. Blood-drinking bestiality, voraciousappetites, hunger in search of prey, the armed instincts of nails andjaws which have for source and aim the belly, glare and smell outuneasily the impassive spectral forms straying beneath a shroud, erectin its vague and shuddering robe, and which seem to them to live with adead and terrible life. These brutalities, which are only matter,entertain a confused fear of having to deal with the immense obscuritycondensed into an unknown being. A black figure barring the way stopsthe wild beast short. That which emerges from the cemetery intimidatesand disconcerts that which emerges from the cave; the ferocious fearthe sinister; wolves recoil when they encounter a ghoul.



CHAPTER VI—MARIUS BECOMES PRACTICAL ONCE MORE TO THE EXTENT OF GIVINGCOSETTE HIS ADDRESS

While this sort of a dog with a human face was mounting guard over thegate, and while the six ruffians were yielding to a girl, Marius was byCosette’s side.
Never had the sky been more studded with stars and more charming, thetrees more trembling, the odor of the grass more penetrating; never hadthe birds fallen asleep among the leaves with a sweeter noise; neverhad all the harmonies of universal serenity responded more thoroughlyto the inward music of love; never had Marius been more captivated,more happy, more ecstatic.
But he had found Cosette sad; Cosette had been weeping. Her eyes werered.
This was the first cloud in that wonderful dream.
Marius’ first word had been: “What is the matter?”

And she had replied: “This.”

Then she had seated herself on the bench near the steps, and while hetremblingly took his place beside her, she had continued:—
“My father told me this morning to hold myself in readiness, because hehas business, and we may go away from here.”

Marius shivered from head to foot.
When one is at the end of one’s life, to die means to go away; when oneis at the beginning of it, to go away means to die.
For the last six weeks, Marius had little by little, slowly, bydegrees, taken possession of Cosette each day. As we have alreadyexplained, in the case of first love, the soul is taken long before thebody; later on, one takes the body long before the soul; sometimes onedoes not take the soul at all; the Faublas and the Prudhommes add:“Because there is none”; but the sarcasm is, fortunately, a blasphemy.So Marius possessed Cosette, as spirits possess, but he enveloped herwith all his soul, and seized her jealously with incredible conviction.He possessed her smile, her breath, her perfume, the profound radianceof her blue eyes, the sweetness of her skin when he touched her hand,the charming mark which she had on her neck, all her thoughts.Therefore, he possessed all Cosette’s dreams.
He incessantly gazed at, and he sometimes touched lightly with hisbreath, the short locks on the nape of her neck, and he declared tohimself that there was not one of those short hairs which did notbelong to him, Marius. He gazed upon and adored the things that shewore, her knot of ribbon, her gloves, her sleeves, her shoes, hercuffs, as sacred objects of which he was the master. He dreamed that hewas the lord of those pretty shell combs which she wore in her hair,and he even said to himself, in confused and suppressed stammerings ofvoluptuousness which did not make their way to the light, that therewas not a ribbon of her gown, not a mesh in her stockings, not a foldin her bodice, which was not his. Beside Cosette he felt himself besidehis own property, his own thing, his own despot and his slave. Itseemed as though they had so intermingled their souls, that it wouldhave been impossible to tell them apart had they wished to take themback again.—“This is mine.” “No, it is mine.” “I assure you that youare mistaken. This is my property.” “What you are taking as your own ismyself.”—Marius was something that made a part of Cosette, and Cosettewas something which made a part of Marius. Marius felt Cosette withinhim. To have Cosette, to possess Cosette, this, to him, was not to bedistinguished from breathing. It was in the midst of this faith, ofthis intoxication, of this virgin possession, unprecedented andabsolute, of this sovereignty, that these words: “We are going away,”fell suddenly, at a blow, and that the harsh voice of reality cried tohim: “Cosette is not yours!”

Marius awoke. For six weeks Marius had been living, as we have said,outside of life; those words, _going away!_ caused him to re-enter itharshly.
He found not a word to say. Cosette merely felt that his hand was verycold. She said to him in her turn: “What is the matter?”

He replied in so low a tone that Cosette hardly heard him:—
“I did not understand what you said.”

She began again:—
“This morning my father told me to settle all my little affairs and tohold myself in readiness, that he would give me his linen to put in atrunk, that he was obliged to go on a journey, that we were to go away,that it is necessary to have a large trunk for me and a small one forhim, and that all is to be ready in a week from now, and that we mightgo to England.”

“But this is outrageous!” exclaimed Marius.
It is certain, that, at that moment, no abuse of power, no violence,not one of the abominations of the worst tyrants, no action of Busiris,of Tiberius, or of Henry VIII., could have equalled this in atrocity,in the opinion of Marius; M. Fauchelevent taking his daughter off toEngland because he had business there.
He demanded in a weak voice:—
“And when do you start?”

“He did not say when.”

“And when shall you return?”

“He did not say when.”

Marius rose and said coldly:—
“Cosette, shall you go?”

Cosette turned toward him her beautiful eyes, all filled with anguish,and replied in a sort of bewilderment:—
“Where?”

“To England. Shall you go?”

“Why do you say _you_ to me?”

“I ask you whether you will go?”

“What do you expect me to do?” she said, clasping her hands.
“So, you will go?”

“If my father goes.”

“So, you will go?”

Cosette took Marius’ hand, and pressed it without replying.
“Very well,” said Marius, “then I will go elsewhere.”

Cosette felt rather than understood the meaning of these words. Sheturned so pale that her face shone white through the gloom. Shestammered:—
“What do you mean?”

Marius looked at her, then raised his eyes to heaven, and answered:“Nothing.”

When his eyes fell again, he saw Cosette smiling at him. The smile of awoman whom one loves possesses a visible radiance, even at night.
“How silly we are! Marius, I have an idea.”

“What is it?”

“If we go away, do you go too! I will tell you where! Come and join mewherever I am.”

Marius was now a thoroughly roused man. He had fallen back intoreality. He cried to Cosette:—
“Go away with you! Are you mad? Why, I should have to have money, and Ihave none! Go to England? But I am in debt now, I owe, I don’t know howmuch, more than ten louis to Courfeyrac, one of my friends with whomyou are not acquainted! I have an old hat which is not worth threefrancs, I have a coat which lacks buttons in front, my shirt is allragged, my elbows are torn, my boots let in the water; for the last sixweeks I have not thought about it, and I have not told you about it.You only see me at night, and you give me your love; if you were to seeme in the daytime, you would give me a sou! Go to England! Eh! Ihaven’t enough to pay for a passport!”

He threw himself against a tree which was close at hand, erect, hisbrow pressed close to the bark, feeling neither the wood which flayedhis skin, nor the fever which was throbbing in his temples, and therehe stood motionless, on the point of falling, like the statue ofdespair.
He remained a long time thus. One could remain for eternity in suchabysses. At last he turned round. He heard behind him a faint stiflednoise, which was sweet yet sad.
It was Cosette sobbing.
She had been weeping for more than two hours beside Marius as hemeditated.
He came to her, fell at her knees, and slowly prostrating himself, hetook the tip of her foot which peeped out from beneath her robe, andkissed it.
She let him have his way in silence. There are moments when a womanaccepts, like a sombre and resigned goddess, the religion of love.
“Do not weep,” he said.
She murmured:—
“Not when I may be going away, and you cannot come!”

He went on:—
“Do you love me?”

She replied, sobbing, by that word from paradise which is never morecharming than amid tears:—
“I adore you!”

He continued in a tone which was an indescribable caress:—
“Do not weep. Tell me, will you do this for me, and cease to weep?”

“Do you love me?” said she.
He took her hand.
“Cosette, I have never given my word of honor to any one, because myword of honor terrifies me. I feel that my father is by my side. Well,I give you my most sacred word of honor, that if you go away I shalldie.”

In the tone with which he uttered these words there lay a melancholy sosolemn and so tranquil, that Cosette trembled. She felt that chillwhich is produced by a true and gloomy thing as it passes by. The shockmade her cease weeping.
“Now, listen,” said he, “do not expect me to-morrow.”

“Why?”

“Do not expect me until the day after to-morrow.”

“Oh! Why?”

“You will see.”

“A day without seeing you! But that is impossible!”

“Let us sacrifice one day in order to gain our whole lives, perhaps.”

And Marius added in a low tone and in an aside:—
“He is a man who never changes his habits, and he has never receivedany one except in the evening.”

“Of what man are you speaking?” asked Cosette.
“I? I said nothing.”

“What do you hope, then?”

“Wait until the day after to-morrow.”

“You wish it?”

“Yes, Cosette.”

She took his head in both her hands, raising herself on tiptoe in orderto be on a level with him, and tried to read his hope in his eyes.
Marius resumed:—
“Now that I think of it, you ought to know my address: something mighthappen, one never knows; I live with that friend named Courfeyrac, Ruede la Verrerie, No. 16.”

He searched in his pocket, pulled out his penknife, and with the bladehe wrote on the plaster of the wall:—
_“16 Rue de la Verrerie.”_
In the meantime, Cosette had begun to gaze into his eyes once more.
“Tell me your thought, Marius; you have some idea. Tell it to me. Oh!tell me, so that I may pass a pleasant night.”

“This is my idea: that it is impossible that God should mean to partus. Wait; expect me the day after to-morrow.”

“What shall I do until then?” said Cosette. “You are outside, you go,and come! How happy men are! I shall remain entirely alone! Oh! How sadI shall be! What is it that you are going to do to-morrow evening? tellme.”

“I am going to try something.”

“Then I will pray to God and I will think of you here, so that you maybe successful. I will question you no further, since you do not wishit. You are my master. I shall pass the evening to-morrow in singingthat music from _Euryanthe_ that you love, and that you came oneevening to listen to, outside my shutters. But day after to-morrow youwill come early. I shall expect you at dusk, at nine o’clock precisely,I warn you. Mon Dieu! how sad it is that the days are so long! On thestroke of nine, do you understand, I shall be in the garden.”

“And I also.”

And without having uttered it, moved by the same thought, impelled bythose electric currents which place lovers in continual communication,both being intoxicated with delight even in their sorrow, they fellinto each other’s arms, without perceiving that their lips met whiletheir uplifted eyes, overflowing with rapture and full of tears, gazedupon the stars.
When Marius went forth, the street was deserted. This was the momentwhen Éponine was following the ruffians to the boulevard.
While Marius had been dreaming with his head pressed to the tree, anidea had crossed his mind; an idea, alas! that he himself judged to besenseless and impossible. He had come to a desperate decision.



CHAPTER VII—THE OLD HEART AND THE YOUNG HEART IN THE PRESENCE OF EACHOTHER

At that epoch, Father Gillenormand was well past his ninety-firstbirthday. He still lived with Mademoiselle Gillenormand in the Rue desFilles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the old house which he owned. He was, asthe reader will remember, one of those antique old men who await deathperfectly erect, whom age bears down without bending, and whom evensorrow cannot curve.
Still, his daughter had been saying for some time: “My father issinking.” He no longer boxed the maids’ ears; he no longer thumped thelanding-place so vigorously with his cane when Basque was slow inopening the door. The Revolution of July had exasperated him for thespace of barely six months. He had viewed, almost tranquilly, thatcoupling of words, in the _Moniteur:_ M. Humblot-Conté, peer of France.The fact is, that the old man was deeply dejected. He did not bend, hedid not yield; this was no more a characteristic of his physical thanof his moral nature, but he felt himself giving way internally. Forfour years he had been waiting for Marius, with his foot firmlyplanted, that is the exact word, in the conviction that thatgood-for-nothing young scamp would ring at his door some day or other;now he had reached the point, where, at certain gloomy hours, he saidto himself, that if Marius made him wait much longer—It was not deaththat was insupportable to him; it was the idea that perhaps he shouldnever see Marius again. The idea of never seeing Marius again had neverentered his brain until that day; now the thought began to recur tohim, and it chilled him. Absence, as is always the case in genuine andnatural sentiments, had only served to augment the grandfather’s lovefor the ungrateful child, who had gone off like a flash. It is duringDecember nights, when the cold stands at ten degrees, that one thinksoftenest of the son.
M. Gillenormand was, or thought himself, above all things, incapable oftaking a single step, he—the grandfather, towards his grandson; “Iwould die rather,” he said to himself. He did not consider himself asthe least to blame; but he thought of Marius only with profoundtenderness, and the mute despair of an elderly, kindly old man who isabout to vanish in the dark.
He began to lose his teeth, which added to his sadness.
M. Gillenormand, without however acknowledging it to himself, for itwould have rendered him furious and ashamed, had never loved a mistressas he loved Marius.
He had had placed in his chamber, opposite the head of his bed, so thatit should be the first thing on which his eyes fell on waking, an oldportrait of his other daughter, who was dead, Madame Pontmercy, aportrait which had been taken when she was eighteen. He gazedincessantly at that portrait. One day, he happened to say, as he gazedupon it:—
“I think the likeness is strong.”

“To my sister?” inquired Mademoiselle Gillenormand. “Yes, certainly.”

The old man added:—
“And to him also.”

Once as he sat with his knees pressed together, and his eyes almostclosed, in a despondent attitude, his daughter ventured to say to him:—
“Father, are you as angry with him as ever?”

She paused, not daring to proceed further.
“With whom?” he demanded.
“With that poor Marius.”

He raised his aged head, laid his withered and emaciated fist on thetable, and exclaimed in his most irritated and vibrating tone:—
“Poor Marius, do you say! That gentleman is a knave, a wretchedscoundrel, a vain little ingrate, a heartless, soulless, haughty, andwicked man!”

And he turned away so that his daughter might not see the tear thatstood in his eye.
Three days later he broke a silence which had lasted four hours, to sayto his daughter point-blank:—
“I had the honor to ask Mademoiselle Gillenormand never to mention himto me.”

Aunt Gillenormand renounced every effort, and pronounced this acutediagnosis: “My father never cared very much for my sister after herfolly. It is clear that he detests Marius.”

“After her folly” meant: “after she had married the colonel.”

However, as the reader has been able to conjecture, MademoiselleGillenormand had failed in her attempt to substitute her favorite, theofficer of lancers, for Marius. The substitute, Théodule, had not beena success. M. Gillenormand had not accepted the _quid pro quo_. Avacancy in the heart does not accommodate itself to a stop-gap.Théodule, on his side, though he scented the inheritance, was disgustedat the task of pleasing. The goodman bored the lancer; and the lancershocked the goodman. Lieutenant Théodule was gay, no doubt, but achatter-box, frivolous, but vulgar; a high liver, but a frequenter ofbad company; he had mistresses, it is true, and he had a great deal tosay about them, it is true also; but he talked badly. All his goodqualities had a defect. M. Gillenormand was worn out with hearing himtell about the love affairs that he had in the vicinity of the barracksin the Rue de Babylone. And then, Lieutenant Gillenormand sometimescame in his uniform, with the tricolored cockade. This rendered himdownright intolerable. Finally, Father Gillenormand had said to hisdaughter: “I’ve had enough of that Théodule. I haven’t much taste forwarriors in time of peace. Receive him if you choose. I don’t know butI prefer slashers to fellows that drag their swords. The clash ofblades in battle is less dismal, after all, than the clank of thescabbard on the pavement. And then, throwing out your chest like abully and lacing yourself like a girl, with stays under your cuirass,is doubly ridiculous. When one is a veritable man, one holds equallyaloof from swagger and from affected airs. He is neither a blusterernor a finnicky-hearted man. Keep your Théodule for yourself.”

It was in vain that his daughter said to him: “But he is yourgrandnephew, nevertheless,”—it turned out that M. Gillenormand, who wasa grandfather to the very finger-tips, was not in the least agrand-uncle.
In fact, as he had good sense, and as he had compared the two, Théodulehad only served to make him regret Marius all the more.
One evening,—it was the 24th of June, which did not prevent FatherGillenormand having a rousing fire on the hearth,—he had dismissed hisdaughter, who was sewing in a neighboring apartment. He was alone inhis chamber, amid its pastoral scenes, with his feet propped on theandirons, half enveloped in his huge screen of coromandel lacquer, withits nine leaves, with his elbow resting on a table where burned twocandles under a green shade, engulfed in his tapestry armchair, and inhis hand a book which he was not reading. He was dressed, according tohis wont, like an _incroyable_, and resembled an antique portrait byGarat. This would have made people run after him in the street, had nothis daughter covered him up, whenever he went out, in a vast bishop’swadded cloak, which concealed his attire. At home, he never wore adressing gown, except when he rose and retired. “It gives one a look ofage,” said he.
Father Gillenormand was thinking of Marius lovingly and bitterly; and,as usual, bitterness predominated. His tenderness once soured alwaysended by boiling and turning to indignation. He had reached the pointwhere a man tries to make up his mind and to accept that which rendshis heart. He was explaining to himself that there was no longer anyreason why Marius should return, that if he intended to return, heshould have done it long ago, that he must renounce the idea. He wastrying to accustom himself to the thought that all was over, and thathe should die without having beheld “that gentleman” again. But hiswhole nature revolted; his aged paternity would not consent to this.“Well!” said he,—this was his doleful refrain,—“he will not return!”His bald head had fallen upon his breast, and he fixed a melancholy andirritated gaze upon the ashes on his hearth.
In the very midst of his reverie, his old servant Basque entered, andinquired:—
“Can Monsieur receive M. Marius?”

The old man sat up erect, pallid, and like a corpse which rises underthe influence of a galvanic shock. All his blood had retreated to hisheart. He stammered:—
“M. Marius what?”

“I don’t know,” replied Basque, intimidated and put out of countenanceby his master’s air; “I have not seen him. Nicolette came in and saidto me: ‘There’s a young man here; say that it is M. Marius.’”

Father Gillenormand stammered in a low voice:—
“Show him in.”

And he remained in the same attitude, with shaking head, and his eyesfixed on the door. It opened once more. A young man entered. It wasMarius.
Marius halted at the door, as though waiting to be bidden to enter.
His almost squalid attire was not perceptible in the obscurity causedby the shade. Nothing could be seen but his calm, grave, but strangelysad face.
It was several minutes before Father Gillenormand, dulled withamazement and joy, could see anything except a brightness as when oneis in the presence of an apparition. He was on the point of swooning;he saw Marius through a dazzling light. It certainly was he, itcertainly was Marius.
At last! After the lapse of four years! He grasped him entire, so tospeak, in a single glance. He found him noble, handsome, distinguished,well-grown, a complete man, with a suitable mien and a charming air. Hefelt a desire to open his arms, to call him, to fling himself forward;his heart melted with rapture, affectionate words swelled andoverflowed his breast; at length all his tenderness came to the lightand reached his lips, and, by a contrast which constituted the veryfoundation of his nature, what came forth was harshness. He saidabruptly:—
“What have you come here for?”

Marius replied with embarrassment:—
“Monsieur—”

M. Gillenormand would have liked to have Marius throw himself into hisarms. He was displeased with Marius and with himself. He was consciousthat he was brusque, and that Marius was cold. It caused the goodmanunendurable and irritating anxiety to feel so tender and forlornwithin, and only to be able to be hard outside. Bitterness returned. Heinterrupted Marius in a peevish tone:—
“Then why did you come?”

That “then” signified: _If you do not come to embrace me_. Mariuslooked at his grandfather, whose pallor gave him a face of marble.
“Monsieur—”

“Have you come to beg my pardon? Do you acknowledge your faults?”

He thought he was putting Marius on the right road, and that “thechild” would yield. Marius shivered; it was the denial of his fatherthat was required of him; he dropped his eyes and replied:—
“No, sir.”

“Then,” exclaimed the old man impetuously, with a grief that waspoignant and full of wrath, “what do you want of me?”

Marius clasped his hands, advanced a step, and said in a feeble andtrembling voice:—
“Sir, have pity on me.”

These words touched M. Gillenormand; uttered a little sooner, theywould have rendered him tender, but they came too late. The grandfatherrose; he supported himself with both hands on his cane; his lips werewhite, his brow wavered, but his lofty form towered above Marius as hebowed.
“Pity on you, sir! It is youth demanding pity of the old man ofninety-one! You are entering into life, I am leaving it; you go to theplay, to balls, to the café, to the billiard-hall; you have wit, youplease the women, you are a handsome fellow; as for me, I spit on mybrands in the heart of summer; you are rich with the only riches thatare really such, I possess all the poverty of age; infirmity,isolation! You have your thirty-two teeth, a good digestion, brighteyes, strength, appetite, health, gayety, a forest of black hair; Ihave no longer even white hair, I have lost my teeth, I am losing mylegs, I am losing my memory; there are three names of streets that Iconfound incessantly, the Rue Charlot, the Rue du Chaume, and the RueSaint-Claude, that is what I have come to; you have before you thewhole future, full of sunshine, and I am beginning to lose my sight, sofar am I advancing into the night; you are in love, that is a matter ofcourse, I am beloved by no one in all the world; and you ask pity ofme! Parbleu! Molière forgot that. If that is the way you jest at thecourthouse, Messieurs the lawyers, I sincerely compliment you. You aredroll.”

And the octogenarian went on in a grave and angry voice:—
“Come, now, what do you want of me?”

“Sir,” said Marius, “I know that my presence is displeasing to you, butI have come merely to ask one thing of you, and then I shall go awayimmediately.”

“You are a fool!” said the old man. “Who said that you were to goaway?”

This was the translation of the tender words which lay at the bottom ofhis heart:—
“Ask my pardon! Throw yourself on my neck!”

M. Gillenormand felt that Marius would leave him in a few moments, thathis harsh reception had repelled the lad, that his hardness was drivinghim away; he said all this to himself, and it augmented his grief; andas his grief was straightway converted into wrath, it increased hisharshness. He would have liked to have Marius understand, and Mariusdid not understand, which made the goodman furious.
He began again:—
“What! you deserted me, your grandfather, you left my house to go noone knows whither, you drove your aunt to despair, you went off, it iseasily guessed, to lead a bachelor life; it’s more convenient, to playthe dandy, to come in at all hours, to amuse yourself; you have givenme no signs of life, you have contracted debts without even telling meto pay them, you have become a smasher of windows and a blusterer, and,at the end of four years, you come to me, and that is all you have tosay to me!”

This violent fashion of driving a grandson to tenderness was productiveonly of silence on the part of Marius. M. Gillenormand folded his arms;a gesture which with him was peculiarly imperious, and apostrophizedMarius bitterly:—
“Let us make an end of this. You have come to ask something of me, yousay? Well, what? What is it? Speak!”

“Sir,” said Marius, with the look of a man who feels that he is fallingover a precipice, “I have come to ask your permission to marry.”

M. Gillenormand rang the bell. Basque opened the door half-way.
“Call my daughter.”

A second later, the door was opened once more, MademoiselleGillenormand did not enter, but showed herself; Marius was standing,mute, with pendant arms and the face of a criminal; M. Gillenormand waspacing back and forth in the room. He turned to his daughter and saidto her:—
“Nothing. It is Monsieur Marius. Say good day to him. Monsieur wishesto marry. That’s all. Go away.”

The curt, hoarse sound of the old man’s voice announced a strangedegree of excitement. The aunt gazed at Marius with a frightened air,hardly appeared to recognize him, did not allow a gesture or a syllableto escape her, and disappeared at her father’s breath more swiftly thana straw before the hurricane.
In the meantime, Father Gillenormand had returned and placed his backagainst the chimney-piece once more.
“You marry! At one and twenty! You have arranged that! You have only apermission to ask! a formality. Sit down, sir. Well, you have had arevolution since I had the honor to see you last. The Jacobins got theupper hand. You must have been delighted. Are you not a Republicansince you are a Baron? You can make that agree. The Republic makes agood sauce for the barony. Are you one of those decorated by July? Haveyou taken the Louvre at all, sir? Quite near here, in the RueSaint-Antoine, opposite the Rue des Nonamdières, there is a cannon-ballincrusted in the wall of the third story of a house with thisinscription: ‘July 28th, 1830.’ Go take a look at that. It produces agood effect. Ah! those friends of yours do pretty things. By the way,aren’t they erecting a fountain in the place of the monument of M. leDuc de Berry? So you want to marry? Whom? Can one inquire withoutindiscretion?”

He paused, and, before Marius had time to answer, he added violently:—
“Come now, you have a profession? A fortune made? How much do you earnat your trade of lawyer?”

“Nothing,” said Marius, with a sort of firmness and resolution that wasalmost fierce.
“Nothing? Then all that you have to live upon is the twelve hundredlivres that I allow you?”

Marius did not reply. M. Gillenormand continued:—
“Then I understand the girl is rich?”

“As rich as I am.”

“What! No dowry?”

“No.”

“Expectations?”

“I think not.”

“Utterly naked! What’s the father?”

“I don’t know.”

“And what’s her name?”

“Mademoiselle Fauchelevent.”

“Fauchewhat?”

“Fauchelevent.”

“Pttt!” ejaculated the old gentleman.
“Sir!” exclaimed Marius.
M. Gillenormand interrupted him with the tone of a man who is speakingto himself:—
“That’s right, one and twenty years of age, no profession, twelvehundred livres a year, Madame la Baronne de Pontmercy will go andpurchase a couple of sous’ worth of parsley from the fruiterer.”

“Sir,” repeated Marius, in the despair at the last hope, which wasvanishing, “I entreat you! I conjure you in the name of Heaven, withclasped hands, sir, I throw myself at your feet, permit me to marryher!”

The old man burst into a shout of strident and mournful laughter,coughing and laughing at the same time.
“Ah! ah! ah! You said to yourself: ‘Pardine! I’ll go hunt up that oldblockhead, that absurd numskull! What a shame that I’m not twenty-five!How I’d treat him to a nice respectful summons! How nicely I’d getalong without him! It’s nothing to me, I’d say to him: “You’re only toohappy to see me, you old idiot, I want to marry, I desire to wedMamselle No-matter-whom, daughter of Monsieur No-matter-what, I have noshoes, she has no chemise, that just suits; I want to throw my career,my future, my youth, my life to the dogs; I wish to take a plunge intowretchedness with a woman around my neck, that’s an idea, and you mustconsent to it!” and the old fossil will consent.’ Go, my lad, do as youlike, attach your paving-stone, marry your Pousselevent, yourCoupelevent—Never, sir, never!”

“Father—”

“Never!”

At the tone in which that “never” was uttered, Marius lost all hope. Hetraversed the chamber with slow steps, with bowed head, tottering andmore like a dying man than like one merely taking his departure. M.Gillenormand followed him with his eyes, and at the moment when thedoor opened, and Marius was on the point of going out, he advanced fourpaces, with the senile vivacity of impetuous and spoiled old gentlemen,seized Marius by the collar, brought him back energetically into theroom, flung him into an armchair and said to him:—
“Tell me all about it!”

“It was that single word “father” which had effected this revolution.
Marius stared at him in bewilderment. M. Gillenormand’s mobile face wasno longer expressive of anything but rough and ineffable good-nature.The grandsire had given way before the grandfather.
“Come, see here, speak, tell me about your love affairs, jabber, tellme everything! Sapristi! how stupid young folks are!”

“Father—” repeated Marius.
The old man’s entire countenance lighted up with indescribableradiance.
“Yes, that’s right, call me father, and you’ll see!”

There was now something so kind, so gentle, so openhearted, and sopaternal in this brusqueness, that Marius, in the sudden transitionfrom discouragement to hope, was stunned and intoxicated by it, as itwere. He was seated near the table, the light from the candles broughtout the dilapidation of his costume, which Father Gillenormand regardedwith amazement.
“Well, father—” said Marius.
“Ah, by the way,” interrupted M. Gillenormand, “you really have not apenny then? You are dressed like a pickpocket.”

He rummaged in a drawer, drew forth a purse, which he laid on thetable: “Here are a hundred louis, buy yourself a hat.”

“Father,” pursued Marius, “my good father, if you only knew! I loveher. You cannot imagine it; the first time I saw her was at theLuxembourg, she came there; in the beginning, I did not pay much heedto her, and then, I don’t know how it came about, I fell in love withher. Oh! how unhappy that made me! Now, at last, I see her every day,at her own home, her father does not know it, just fancy, they aregoing away, it is in the garden that we meet, in the evening, herfather means to take her to England, then I said to myself: ‘I’ll goand see my grandfather and tell him all about the affair. I should gomad first, I should die, I should fall ill, I should throw myself intothe water. I absolutely must marry her, since I should go madotherwise.’ This is the whole truth, and I do not think that I haveomitted anything. She lives in a garden with an iron fence, in the RuePlumet. It is in the neighborhood of the Invalides.”

Father Gillenormand had seated himself, with a beaming countenance,beside Marius. As he listened to him and drank in the sound of hisvoice, he enjoyed at the same time a protracted pinch of snuff. At thewords “Rue Plumet” he interrupted his inhalation and allowed theremainder of his snuff to fall upon his knees.
“The Rue Plumet, the Rue Plumet, did you say?—Let us see!—Are there notbarracks in that vicinity?—Why, yes, that’s it. Your cousin Théodulehas spoken to me about it. The lancer, the officer. A gay girl, my goodfriend, a gay girl!—Pardieu, yes, the Rue Plumet. It is what used to becalled the Rue Blomet.—It all comes back to me now. I have heard ofthat little girl of the iron railing in the Rue Plumet. In a garden, aPamela. Your taste is not bad. She is said to be a very tidy creature.Between ourselves, I think that simpleton of a lancer has been courtingher a bit. I don’t know where he did it. However, that’s not to thepurpose. Besides, he is not to be believed. He brags, Marius! I thinkit quite proper that a young man like you should be in love. It’s theright thing at your age. I like you better as a lover than as aJacobin. I like you better in love with a petticoat, sapristi! withtwenty petticoats, than with M. de Robespierre. For my part, I will domyself the justice to say, that in the line of _sans-culottes_, I havenever loved any one but women. Pretty girls are pretty girls, thedeuce! There’s no objection to that. As for the little one, shereceives you without her father’s knowledge. That’s in the establishedorder of things. I have had adventures of that same sort myself. Morethan one. Do you know what is done then? One does not take the matterferociously; one does not precipitate himself into the tragic; one doesnot make one’s mind to marriage and M. le Maire with his scarf. Onesimply behaves like a fellow of spirit. One shows good sense. Slipalong, mortals; don’t marry. You come and look up your grandfather, whois a good-natured fellow at bottom, and who always has a few rolls oflouis in an old drawer; you say to him: ‘See here, grandfather.’ Andthe grandfather says: ‘That’s a simple matter. Youth must amuse itself,and old age must wear out. I have been young, you will be old. Come, myboy, you shall pass it on to your grandson. Here are two hundredpistoles. Amuse yourself, deuce take it!’ Nothing better! That’s theway the affair should be treated. You don’t marry, but that does noharm. You understand me?”

Marius, petrified and incapable of uttering a syllable, made a signwith his head that he did not.
The old man burst out laughing, winked his aged eye, gave him a slap onthe knee, stared him full in the face with a mysterious and beamingair, and said to him, with the tenderest of shrugs of the shoulder:—
“Booby! make her your mistress.”

Marius turned pale. He had understood nothing of what his grandfatherhad just said. This twaddle about the Rue Blomet, Pamela, the barracks,the lancer, had passed before Marius like a dissolving view. Nothing ofall that could bear any reference to Cosette, who was a lily. The goodman was wandering in his mind. But this wandering terminated in wordswhich Marius did understand, and which were a mortal insult to Cosette.Those words, “make her your mistress,” entered the heart of the strictyoung man like a sword.
He rose, picked up his hat which lay on the floor, and walked to thedoor with a firm, assured step. There he turned round, bowed deeply tohis grandfather, raised his head erect again, and said:—
“Five years ago you insulted my father; to-day you have insulted mywife. I ask nothing more of you, sir. Farewell.”

Father Gillenormand, utterly confounded, opened his mouth, extended hisarms, tried to rise, and before he could utter a word, the door closedonce more, and Marius had disappeared.
The old man remained for several minutes motionless and as thoughstruck by lightning, without the power to speak or breathe, as though aclenched fist grasped his throat. At last he tore himself from hisarmchair, ran, so far as a man can run at ninety-one, to the door,opened it, and cried:—
“Help! Help!”

His daughter made her appearance, then the domestics. He began again,with a pitiful rattle: “Run after him! Bring him back! What have I doneto him? He is mad! He is going away! Ah! my God! Ah! my God! This timehe will not come back!”

He went to the window which looked out on the street, threw it openwith his aged and palsied hands, leaned out more than half-way, whileBasque and Nicolette held him behind, and shouted:—
“Marius! Marius! Marius! Marius!”

But Marius could no longer hear him, for at that moment he was turningthe corner of the Rue Saint-Louis.
The octogenarian raised his hands to his temples two or three timeswith an expression of anguish, recoiled tottering, and fell back intoan armchair, pulseless, voiceless, tearless, with quivering head andlips which moved with a stupid air, with nothing in his eyes andnothing any longer in his heart except a gloomy and profound somethingwhich resembled night.



BOOK NINTH—WHITHER ARE THEY GOING?



CHAPTER I—JEAN VALJEAN

That same day, towards four o’clock in the afternoon, Jean Valjean wassitting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes inthe Champ-de-Mars. Either from prudence, or from a desire to meditate,or simply in consequence of one of those insensible changes of habitwhich gradually introduce themselves into the existence of every one,he now rarely went out with Cosette. He had on his workman’s waistcoat,and trousers of gray linen; and his long-visored cap concealed hiscountenance.
He was calm and happy now beside Cosette; that which had, for a time,alarmed and troubled him had been dissipated; but for the last week ortwo, anxieties of another nature had come up. One day, while walking onthe boulevard, he had caught sight of Thénardier; thanks to hisdisguise, Thénardier had not recognized him; but since that day, JeanValjean had seen him repeatedly, and he was now certain that Thénardierwas prowling about in their neighborhood.
This had been sufficient to make him come to a decision.
Moreover, Paris was not tranquil: political troubles presented thisinconvenient feature, for any one who had anything to conceal in hislife, that the police had grown very uneasy and very suspicious, andthat while seeking to ferret out a man like Pépin or Morey, they mightvery readily discover a man like Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean had made up his mind to quit Paris, and even France, andgo over to England.
He had warned Cosette. He wished to set out before the end of the week.
He had seated himself on the slope in the Champ-de-Mars, turning overall sorts of thoughts in his mind,—Thénardier, the police, the journey,and the difficulty of procuring a passport.
He was troubled from all these points of view.
Last of all, an inexplicable circumstance which had just attracted hisattention, and from which he had not yet recovered, had added to hisstate of alarm.
On the morning of that very day, when he alone of the household wasstirring, while strolling in the garden before Cosette’s shutters wereopen, he had suddenly perceived on the wall, the following line,engraved, probably with a nail:—
_16 Rue de la Verrerie_.
This was perfectly fresh, the grooves in the ancient black mortar werewhite, a tuft of nettles at the foot of the wall was powdered with thefine, fresh plaster.
This had probably been written on the preceding night.
What was this? A signal for others? A warning for himself?
In any case, it was evident that the garden had been violated, and thatstrangers had made their way into it.
He recalled the odd incidents which had already alarmed the household.
His mind was now filling in this canvas.
He took good care not to speak to Cosette of the line written on thewall, for fear of alarming her.
In the midst of his preoccupations, he perceived, from a shadow cast bythe sun, that some one had halted on the crest of the slope immediatelybehind him.
He was on the point of turning round, when a paper folded in four fellupon his knees as though a hand had dropped it over his head.
He took the paper, unfolded it, and read these words written in largecharacters, with a pencil:—
“MOVE AWAY FROM YOUR HOUSE.”

Jean Valjean sprang hastily to his feet; there was no one on the slope;he gazed all around him and perceived a creature larger than a child,not so large as a man, clad in a gray blouse and trousers ofdust-colored cotton velvet, who was jumping over the parapet and whoslipped into the moat of the Champ-de-Mars.
Jean Valjean returned home at once, in a very thoughtful mood.



CHAPTER II—MARIUS

Marius had left M. Gillenormand in despair. He had entered the housewith very little hope, and quitted it with immense despair.
However, and those who have observed the depths of the human heart willunderstand this, the officer, the lancer, the ninny, Cousin Théodule,had left no trace in his mind. Not the slightest. The dramatic poetmight, apparently, expect some complications from this revelation madepoint-blank by the grandfather to the grandson. But what the dramawould gain thereby, truth would lose. Marius was at an age when onebelieves nothing in the line of evil; later on comes the age when onebelieves everything. Suspicions are nothing else than wrinkles. Earlyyouth has none of them. That which overwhelmed Othello glides innocuousover Candide. Suspect Cosette! There are hosts of crimes which Mariuscould sooner have committed.
He began to wander about the streets, the resource of those who suffer.He thought of nothing, so far as he could afterwards remember. At twoo’clock in the morning he returned to Courfeyrac’s quarters and flunghimself, without undressing, on his mattress. The sun was shiningbrightly when he sank into that frightful leaden slumber which permitsideas to go and come in the brain. When he awoke, he saw Courfeyrac,Enjolras, Feuilly, and Combeferre standing in the room with their hatson and all ready to go out.
Courfeyrac said to him:—
“Are you coming to General Lamarque’s funeral?”

It seemed to him that Courfeyrac was speaking Chinese.
He went out some time after them. He put in his pocket the pistolswhich Javert had given him at the time of the adventure on the 3d ofFebruary, and which had remained in his hands. These pistols were stillloaded. It would be difficult to say what vague thought he had in hismind when he took them with him.
All day long he prowled about, without knowing where he was going; itrained at times, he did not perceive it; for his dinner, he purchased apenny roll at a baker’s, put it in his pocket and forgot it. It appearsthat he took a bath in the Seine without being aware of it. There aremoments when a man has a furnace within his skull. Marius was passingthrough one of those moments. He no longer hoped for anything; thisstep he had taken since the preceding evening. He waited for night withfeverish impatience, he had but one idea clearly before his mind;—thiswas, that at nine o’clock he should see Cosette. This last happinessnow constituted his whole future; after that, gloom. At intervals, ashe roamed through the most deserted boulevards, it seemed to him thathe heard strange noises in Paris. He thrust his head out of his reverieand said: “Is there fighting on hand?”

At nightfall, at nine o’clock precisely, as he had promised Cosette, hewas in the Rue Plumet. When he approached the grating he forgoteverything. It was forty-eight hours since he had seen Cosette; he wasabout to behold her once more; every other thought was effaced, and hefelt only a profound and unheard-of joy. Those minutes in which onelives centuries always have this sovereign and wonderful property, thatat the moment when they are passing they fill the heart completely.
Marius displaced the bar, and rushed headlong into the garden. Cosettewas not at the spot where she ordinarily waited for him. He traversedthe thicket, and approached the recess near the flight of steps: “Sheis waiting for me there,” said he. Cosette was not there. He raised hiseyes, and saw that the shutters of the house were closed. He made thetour of the garden, the garden was deserted. Then he returned to thehouse, and, rendered senseless by love, intoxicated, terrified,exasperated with grief and uneasiness, like a master who returns homeat an evil hour, he tapped on the shutters. He knocked and knockedagain, at the risk of seeing the window open, and her father’s gloomyface make its appearance, and demand: “What do you want?” This wasnothing in comparison with what he dimly caught a glimpse of. When hehad rapped, he lifted up his voice and called Cosette.—“Cosette!” hecried; “Cosette!” he repeated imperiously. There was no reply. All wasover. No one in the garden; no one in the house.
Marius fixed his despairing eyes on that dismal house, which was asblack and as silent as a tomb and far more empty. He gazed at the stoneseat on which he had passed so many adorable hours with Cosette. Thenhe seated himself on the flight of steps, his heart filled withsweetness and resolution, he blessed his love in the depths of histhought, and he said to himself that, since Cosette was gone, all thatthere was left for him was to die.
All at once he heard a voice which seemed to proceed from the street,and which was calling to him through the trees:—
“Mr. Marius!”

He started to his feet.
“Hey?” said he.
“Mr. Marius, are you there?”

“Yes.”

“Mr. Marius,” went on the voice, “your friends are waiting for you atthe barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie.”

This voice was not wholly unfamiliar to him. It resembled the hoarse,rough voice of Éponine. Marius hastened to the gate, thrust aside themovable bar, passed his head through the aperture, and saw some one whoappeared to him to be a young man, disappearing at a run into thegloom.



CHAPTER III—M. MABEUF

Jean Valjean’s purse was of no use to M. Mabeuf. M. Mabeuf, in hisvenerable, infantile austerity, had not accepted the gift of the stars;he had not admitted that a star could coin itself into louis d’or. Hehad not divined that what had fallen from heaven had come fromGavroche. He had taken the purse to the police commissioner of thequarter, as a lost article placed by the finder at the disposal ofclaimants. The purse was actually lost. It is unnecessary to say thatno one claimed it, and that it did not succor M. Mabeuf.
Moreover, M. Mabeuf had continued his downward course.
His experiments on indigo had been no more successful in the Jardin desPlantes than in his garden at Austerlitz. The year before he had owedhis housekeeper’s wages; now, as we have seen, he owed three quartersof his rent. The pawnshop had sold the plates of his _Flora_ after theexpiration of thirteen months. Some coppersmith had made stewpans ofthem. His copper plates gone, and being unable to complete even theincomplete copies of his _Flora_ which were in his possession, he haddisposed of the text, at a miserable price, as waste paper, to asecond-hand bookseller. Nothing now remained to him of his life’s work.He set to work to eat up the money for these copies. When he saw thatthis wretched resource was becoming exhausted, he gave up his gardenand allowed it to run to waste. Before this, a long time before, he hadgiven up his two eggs and the morsel of beef which he ate from time totime. He dined on bread and potatoes. He had sold the last of hisfurniture, then all duplicates of his bedding, his clothing and hisblankets, then his herbariums and prints; but he still retained hismost precious books, many of which were of the greatest rarity, amongothers, _Les Quadrins Historiques de la Bible_, edition of 1560; _LaConcordance des Bibles_, by Pierre de Besse; _Les Marguerites de laMarguerite_, of Jean de La Haye, with a dedication to the Queen ofNavarre; the book _de la Charge et Dignité de l’Ambassadeur_, by theSieur de Villiers Hotman; a _Florilegium Rabbinicum_ of 1644; a_Tibullus_ of 1567, with this magnificent inscription: _Venetiis, inædibus Manutianis_; and lastly, a Diogenes Laertius, printed at Lyonsin 1644, which contained the famous variant of the manuscript 411,thirteenth century, of the Vatican, and those of the two manuscripts ofVenice, 393 and 394, consulted with such fruitful results by HenriEstienne, and all the passages in Doric dialect which are only found inthe celebrated manuscript of the twelfth century belonging to theNaples Library. M. Mabeuf never had any fire in his chamber, and wentto bed at sundown, in order not to consume any candles. It seemed asthough he had no longer any neighbors: people avoided him when he wentout; he perceived the fact. The wretchedness of a child interests amother, the wretchedness of a young man interests a young girl, thewretchedness of an old man interests no one. It is, of all distresses,the coldest. Still, Father Mabeuf had not entirely lost his childlikeserenity. His eyes acquired some vivacity when they rested on hisbooks, and he smiled when he gazed at the Diogenes Laertius, which wasa unique copy. His bookcase with glass doors was the only piece offurniture which he had kept beyond what was strictly indispensable.
One day, Mother Plutarque said to him:—
“I have no money to buy any dinner.”

What she called dinner was a loaf of bread and four or five potatoes.
“On credit?” suggested M. Mabeuf.
“You know well that people refuse me.”

M. Mabeuf opened his bookcase, took a long look at all his books, oneafter another, as a father obliged to decimate his children would gazeupon them before making a choice, then seized one hastily, put it inunder his arm and went out. He returned two hours later, withoutanything under his arm, laid thirty sous on the table, and said:—
“You will get something for dinner.”

From that moment forth, Mother Plutarque saw a sombre veil, which wasnever more lifted, descend over the old man’s candid face.
On the following day, on the day after, and on the day after that, ithad to be done again.
M. Mabeuf went out with a book and returned with a coin. As thesecond-hand dealers perceived that he was forced to sell, theypurchased of him for twenty sous that for which he had paid twentyfrancs, sometimes at those very shops. Volume by volume, the wholelibrary went the same road. He said at times: “But I am eighty;” asthough he cherished some secret hope that he should arrive at the endof his days before reaching the end of his books. His melancholyincreased. Once, however, he had a pleasure. He had gone out with aRobert Estienne, which he had sold for thirty-five sous under the QuaiMalaquais, and he returned with an Aldus which he had bought for fortysous in the Rue des Grès.—“I owe five sous,” he said, beaming on MotherPlutarque. That day he had no dinner.
He belonged to the Horticultural Society. His destitution became knownthere. The president of the society came to see him, promised to speakto the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce about him, and didso.—“Why, what!” exclaimed the Minister, “I should think so! An oldsavant! a botanist! an inoffensive man! Something must be done forhim!” On the following day, M. Mabeuf received an invitation to dinewith the Minister. Trembling with joy, he showed the letter to MotherPlutarque. “We are saved!” said he. On the day appointed, he went tothe Minister’s house. He perceived that his ragged cravat, his long,square coat, and his waxed shoes astonished the ushers. No one spoke tohim, not even the Minister. About ten o’clock in the evening, while hewas still waiting for a word, he heard the Minister’s wife, a beautifulwoman in a low-necked gown whom he had not ventured to approach,inquire: “Who is that old gentleman?” He returned home on foot atmidnight, in a driving rain-storm. He had sold an Elzevir to pay for acarriage in which to go thither.
He had acquired the habit of reading a few pages in his DiogenesLaertius every night, before he went to bed. He knew enough Greek toenjoy the peculiarities of the text which he owned. He had now no otherenjoyment. Several weeks passed. All at once, Mother Plutarque fellill. There is one thing sadder than having no money with which to buybread at the baker’s and that is having no money to purchase drugs atthe apothecary’s. One evening, the doctor had ordered a very expensivepotion. And the malady was growing worse; a nurse was required. M.Mabeuf opened his bookcase; there was nothing there. The last volumehad taken its departure. All that was left to him was DiogenesLaertius. He put this unique copy under his arm, and went out. It wasthe 4th of June, 1832; he went to the Porte Saint-Jacques, to Royal’ssuccessor, and returned with one hundred francs. He laid the pile offive-franc pieces on the old serving-woman’s nightstand, and returnedto his chamber without saying a word.
On the following morning, at dawn, he seated himself on the overturnedpost in his garden, and he could be seen over the top of the hedge,sitting the whole morning motionless, with drooping head, his eyesvaguely fixed on the withered flower-beds. It rained at intervals; theold man did not seem to perceive the fact.
In the afternoon, extraordinary noises broke out in Paris. Theyresembled shots and the clamors of a multitude.
Father Mabeuf raised his head. He saw a gardener passing, andinquired:—
“What is it?”

The gardener, spade on back, replied in the most unconcerned tone:—
“It is the riots.”

“What riots?”

“Yes, they are fighting.”

“Why are they fighting?”

“Ah, good Heavens!” ejaculated the gardener.
“In what direction?” went on M. Mabeuf.
“In the neighborhood of the Arsenal.”

Father Mabeuf went to his room, took his hat, mechanically sought for abook to place under his arm, found none, said: “Ah! truly!” and wentoff with a bewildered air.



BOOK TENTH—THE 5TH OF JUNE, 1832



CHAPTER I—THE SURFACE OF THE QUESTION

Of what is revolt composed? Of nothing and of everything. Of anelectricity disengaged, little by little, of a flame suddenly dartingforth, of a wandering force, of a passing breath. This breathencounters heads which speak, brains which dream, souls which suffer,passions which burn, wretchedness which howls, and bears them away.
Whither?
At random. Athwart the state, the laws, athwart prosperity and theinsolence of others.
Irritated convictions, embittered enthusiasms, agitated indignations,instincts of war which have been repressed, youthful courage which hasbeen exalted, generous blindness; curiosity, the taste for change, thethirst for the unexpected, the sentiment which causes one to takepleasure in reading the posters for the new play, and love, theprompter’s whistle, at the theatre; the vague hatreds, rancors,disappointments, every vanity which thinks that destiny has bankruptedit; discomfort, empty dreams, ambitions that are hedged about, whoeverhopes for a downfall, some outcome, in short, at the very bottom, therabble, that mud which catches fire,—such are the elements of revolt.That which is grandest and that which is basest; the beings who prowloutside of all bounds, awaiting an occasion, bohemians, vagrants,vagabonds of the crossroads, those who sleep at night in a desert ofhouses with no other roof than the cold clouds of heaven, those who,each day, demand their bread from chance and not from toil, the unknownof poverty and nothingness, the bare-armed, the bare-footed, belong torevolt. Whoever cherishes in his soul a secret revolt against any deedwhatever on the part of the state, of life or of fate, is ripe forriot, and, as soon as it makes its appearance, he begins to quiver, andto feel himself borne away with the whirlwind.
Revolt is a sort of waterspout in the social atmosphere which formssuddenly in certain conditions of temperature, and which, as it eddiesabout, mounts, descends, thunders, tears, razes, crushes, demolishes,uproots, bearing with it great natures and small, the strong man andthe feeble mind, the tree trunk and the stalk of straw. Woe to him whomit bears away as well as to him whom it strikes! It breaks the oneagainst the other.
It communicates to those whom it seizes an indescribable andextraordinary power. It fills the firstcomer with the force of events;it converts everything into projectiles. It makes a cannon-ball of arough stone, and a general of a porter.
If we are to believe certain oracles of crafty political views, alittle revolt is desirable from the point of view of power. System:revolt strengthens those governments which it does not overthrow. Itputs the army to the test; it consecrates the bourgeoisie, it draws outthe muscles of the police; it demonstrates the force of the socialframework. It is an exercise in gymnastics; it is almost hygiene. Poweris in better health after a revolt, as a man is after a good rubbingdown.
Revolt, thirty years ago, was regarded from still other points of view.
There is for everything a theory, which proclaims itself “good sense”;Philintus against Alcestis; mediation offered between the false and thetrue; explanation, admonition, rather haughty extenuation which,because it is mingled with blame and excuse, thinks itself wisdom, andis often only pedantry. A whole political school called “the goldenmean” has been the outcome of this. As between cold water and hotwater, it is the lukewarm water party. This school with its falsedepth, all on the surface, which dissects effects without going back tofirst causes, chides from its height of a demi-science, the agitationof the public square.
If we listen to this school, “The riots which complicated the affair of1830 deprived that great event of a portion of its purity. TheRevolution of July had been a fine popular gale, abruptly followed byblue sky. They made the cloudy sky reappear. They caused thatrevolution, at first so remarkable for its unanimity, to degenerateinto a quarrel. In the Revolution of July, as in all progressaccomplished by fits and starts, there had been secret fractures; theseriots rendered them perceptible. It might have been said: ‘Ah! this isbroken.’ After the Revolution of July, one was sensible only ofdeliverance; after the riots, one was conscious of a catastrophe.
“All revolt closes the shops, depresses the funds, throws the Exchangeinto consternation, suspends commerce, clogs business, precipitatesfailures; no more money, private fortunes rendered uneasy, publiccredit shaken, industry disconcerted, capital withdrawing, work at adiscount, fear everywhere; counter-shocks in every town. Hence gulfs.It has been calculated that the first day of a riot costs France twentymillions, the second day forty, the third sixty, a three days’ uprisingcosts one hundred and twenty millions, that is to say, if only thefinancial result be taken into consideration, it is equivalent to adisaster, a shipwreck or a lost battle, which should annihilate a fleetof sixty ships of the line.
“No doubt, historically, uprisings have their beauty; the war of thepavements is no less grandiose, and no less pathetic, than the war ofthickets: in the one there is the soul of forests, in the other theheart of cities; the one has Jean Chouan, the other has a Jeanne.Revolts have illuminated with a red glare all the most original pointsof the Parisian character, generosity, devotion, stormy gayety,students proving that bravery forms part of intelligence, the NationalGuard invincible, bivouacs of shopkeepers, fortresses of streeturchins, contempt of death on the part of passers-by. Schools andlegions clashed together. After all, between the combatants, there wasonly a difference of age; the race is the same; it is the same stoicalmen who died at the age of twenty for their ideas, at forty for theirfamilies. The army, always a sad thing in civil wars, opposed prudenceto audacity. Uprisings, while proving popular intrepidity, alsoeducated the courage of the bourgeois.
“This is well. But is all this worth the bloodshed? And to thebloodshed add the future darkness, progress compromised, uneasinessamong the best men, honest liberals in despair, foreign absolutismhappy in these wounds dealt to revolution by its own hand, thevanquished of 1830 triumphing and saying: ‘We told you so!’ Add Parisenlarged, possibly, but France most assuredly diminished. Add, for allmust needs be told, the massacres which have too often dishonored thevictory of order grown ferocious over liberty gone mad. To sum up all,uprisings have been disastrous.”

Thus speaks that approximation to wisdom with which the bourgeoisie,that approximation to the people, so willingly contents itself.
For our parts, we reject this word _uprisings_ as too large, andconsequently as too convenient. We make a distinction between onepopular movement and another popular movement. We do not inquirewhether an uprising costs as much as a battle. Why a battle, in thefirst place? Here the question of war comes up. Is war less of ascourge than an uprising is of a calamity? And then, are all uprisingscalamities? And what if the revolt of July did cost a hundred andtwenty millions? The establishment of Philip V. in Spain cost Francetwo milliards. Even at the same price, we should prefer the 14th ofJuly. However, we reject these figures, which appear to be reasons andwhich are only words. An uprising being given, we examine it by itself.In all that is said by the doctrinarian objection above presented,there is no question of anything but effect, we seek the cause.
We will be explicit.



CHAPTER II—THE ROOT OF THE MATTER

There is such a thing as an uprising, and there is such a thing asinsurrection; these are two separate phases of wrath; one is in thewrong, the other is in the right. In democratic states, the only oneswhich are founded on justice, it sometimes happens that the fractionusurps; then the whole rises and the necessary claim of its rights mayproceed as far as resort to arms. In all questions which result fromcollective sovereignty, the war of the whole against the fraction isinsurrection; the attack of the fraction against the whole is revolt;according as the Tuileries contain a king or the Convention, they arejustly or unjustly attacked. The same cannon, pointed against thepopulace, is wrong on the 10th of August, and right on the 14th ofVendémiaire. Alike in appearance, fundamentally different in reality;the Swiss defend the false, Bonaparte defends the true. That whichuniversal suffrage has effected in its liberty and in its sovereigntycannot be undone by the street. It is the same in things pertainingpurely to civilization; the instinct of the masses, clear-sightedto-day, may be troubled to-morrow. The same fury legitimate whendirected against Terray and absurd when directed against Turgot. Thedestruction of machines, the pillage of warehouses, the breaking ofrails, the demolition of docks, the false routes of multitudes, therefusal by the people of justice to progress, Ramus assassinated bystudents, Rousseau driven out of Switzerland and stoned,—that isrevolt. Israel against Moses, Athens against Phocian, Rome againstCicero,—that is an uprising; Paris against the Bastille,—that isinsurrection. The soldiers against Alexander, the sailors againstChristopher Columbus,—this is the same revolt; impious revolt; why?Because Alexander is doing for Asia with the sword that whichChristopher Columbus is doing for America with the compass; Alexanderlike Columbus, is finding a world. These gifts of a world tocivilization are such augmentations of light, that all resistance inthat case is culpable. Sometimes the populace counterfeits fidelity toitself. The masses are traitors to the people. Is there, for example,anything stranger than that long and bloody protest of dealers incontraband salt, a legitimate chronic revolt, which, at the decisivemoment, on the day of salvation, at the very hour of popular victory,espouses the throne, turns into _chouannerie_, and, from having been aninsurrection against, becomes an uprising for, sombre masterpieces ofignorance! The contraband salt dealer escapes the royal gibbets, andwith a rope’s end round his neck, mounts the white cockade. “Death tothe salt duties,” brings forth, “Long live the King!” The assassins ofSaint-Barthélemy, the cut-throats of September, the manslaughterers ofAvignon, the assassins of Coligny, the assassins of Madam Lamballe, theassassins of Brune, Miquelets, Verdets, Cadenettes, the companions ofJéhu, the chevaliers of Brassard,—behold an uprising. La Vendée is agrand, catholic uprising. The sound of right in movement isrecognizable, it does not always proceed from the trembling of excitedmasses; there are mad rages, there are cracked bells, all tocsins donot give out the sound of bronze. The brawl of passions and ignorancesis quite another thing from the shock of progress. Show me in whatdirection you are going. Rise, if you will, but let it be that you maygrow great. There is no insurrection except in a forward direction. Anyother sort of rising is bad; every violent step towards the rear is arevolt; to retreat is to commit a deed of violence against the humanrace. Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth; the pavementswhich the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right. Thesepavements bequeath to the uprising only their mud. Danton against LouisXIV. is insurrection; Hébert against Danton is revolt.
Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be, asLafayette says, the most holy of duties, an uprising may be the mostfatal of crimes.
There is also a difference in the intensity of heat; insurrection isoften a volcano, revolt is often only a fire of straw.
Revolt, as we have said, is sometimes found among those in power.Polignac is a rioter; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governingpowers.
Insurrection is sometimes resurrection.
The solution of everything by universal suffrage being an absolutelymodern fact, and all history anterior to this fact being, for the spaceof four thousand years, filled with violated right, and the sufferingof peoples, each epoch of history brings with it that protest of whichit is capable. Under the Cæsars, there was no insurrection, but therewas Juvenal.
The _facit indignatio_ replaces the Gracchi.
Under the Cæsars, there is the exile to Syene; there is also the man ofthe _Annales_. We do not speak of the immense exile of Patmos who, onhis part also, overwhelms the real world with a protest in the name ofthe ideal world, who makes of his vision an enormous satire and castson Rome-Nineveh, on Rome-Babylon, on Rome-Sodom, the flaming reflectionof the Apocalypse. John on his rock is the sphinx on its pedestal; wemay understand him, he is a Jew, and it is Hebrew; but the man whowrites the _Annales_ is of the Latin race, let us rather say he is aRoman.
As the Neros reign in a black way, they should be painted to match. Thework of the graving-tool alone would be too pale; there must be pouredinto the channel a concentrated prose which bites.
Despots count for something in the question of philosophers. A wordthat is chained is a terrible word. The writer doubles and trebles hisstyle when silence is imposed on a nation by its master. From thissilence there arises a certain mysterious plenitude which filters intothought and there congeals into bronze. The compression of historyproduces conciseness in the historian. The granite solidity of such andsuch a celebrated prose is nothing but the accumulation effected by thetyrant.
Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which areaugmentations of force. The Ciceronian period, which hardly sufficedfor Verres, would be blunted on Caligula. The less spread of sail inthe phrase, the more intensity in the blow. Tacitus thinks with all hismight.
The honesty of a great heart, condensed in justice and truth,overwhelms as with lightning.
Be it remarked, in passing, that Tacitus is not historically superposedupon Cæsar. The Tiberii were reserved for him. Cæsar and Tacitus aretwo successive phenomena, a meeting between whom seems to bemysteriously avoided, by the One who, when He sets the centuries on thestage, regulates the entrances and the exits. Cæsar is great, Tacitusis great; God spares these two greatnesses by not allowing them toclash with one another. The guardian of justice, in striking Cæsar,might strike too hard and be unjust. God does not will it. The greatwars of Africa and Spain, the pirates of Sicily destroyed, civilizationintroduced into Gaul, into Britanny, into Germany,—all this glorycovers the Rubicon. There is here a sort of delicacy of the divinejustice, hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper theformidable historian, sparing Cæsar Tacitus, and according extenuatingcircumstances to genius.
Certainly, despotism remains despotism, even under the despot ofgenius. There is corruption under all illustrious tyrants, but themoral pest is still more hideous under infamous tyrants. In suchreigns, nothing veils the shame; and those who make examples, Tacitusas well as Juvenal, slap this ignominy which cannot reply, in the face,more usefully in the presence of all humanity.
Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sylla. Under Claudius andunder Domitian, there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to therepulsiveness of the tyrant. The villainy of slaves is a direct productof the despot; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences whereinthe master is reflected; public powers are unclean; hearts are small;consciences are dull, souls are like vermin; thus it is underCaracalla, thus it is under Commodus, thus it is under Heliogabalus,while, from the Roman Senate, under Cæsar, there comes nothing but theodor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles.
Hence the advent, apparently tardy, of the Tacituses and the Juvenals;it is in the hour for evidence, that the demonstrator makes hisappearance.
But Juvenal and Tacitus, like Isaiah in Biblical times, like Dante inthe Middle Ages, is man; riot and insurrection are the multitude, whichis sometimes right and sometimes wrong.
In the majority of cases, riot proceeds from a material fact;insurrection is always a moral phenomenon. Riot is Masaniello;insurrection, Spartacus. Insurrection borders on mind, riot on thestomach; Gaster grows irritated; but Gaster, assuredly, is not alwaysin the wrong. In questions of famine, riot, Buzançais, for example,holds a true, pathetic, and just point of departure. Nevertheless, itremains a riot. Why? It is because, right at bottom, it was wrong inform. Shy although in the right, violent although strong, it struck atrandom; it walked like a blind elephant; it left behind it the corpsesof old men, of women, and of children; it wished the blood ofinoffensive and innocent persons without knowing why. The nourishmentof the people is a good object; to massacre them is a bad means.
All armed protests, even the most legitimate, even that of the 10th ofAugust, even that of July 14th, begin with the same troubles. Beforethe right gets set free, there is foam and tumult. In the beginning,the insurrection is a riot, just as a river is a torrent. Ordinarily itends in that ocean: revolution. Sometimes, however, coming from thoselofty mountains which dominate the moral horizon, justice, wisdom,reason, right, formed of the pure snow of the ideal, after a long fallfrom rock to rock, after having reflected the sky in its transparencyand increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph,insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire, as the Rhine is in aswamp.
All this is of the past, the future is another thing. Universalsuffrage has this admirable property, that it dissolves riot in itsinception, and, by giving the vote to insurrection, it deprives it ofits arms. The disappearance of wars, of street wars as well as of warson the frontiers, such is the inevitable progression. Whatever To-daymay be, To-morrow will be peace.
However, insurrection, riot, and points of difference between theformer and the latter,—the bourgeois, properly speaking, knows nothingof such shades. In his mind, all is sedition, rebellion pure andsimple, the revolt of the dog against his master, an attempt to bitewhom must be punished by the chain and the kennel, barking, snapping,until such day as the head of the dog, suddenly enlarged, is outlinedvaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion.
Then the bourgeois shouts: “Long live the people!”

This explanation given, what does the movement of June, 1832, signify,so far as history is concerned? Is it a revolt? Is it an insurrection?
It may happen to us, in placing this formidable event on the stage, tosay revolt now and then, but merely to distinguish superficial facts,and always preserving the distinction between revolt, the form, andinsurrection, the foundation.
This movement of 1832 had, in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholyextinction, so much grandeur, that even those who see in it only anuprising, never refer to it otherwise than with respect. For them, itis like a relic of 1830. Excited imaginations, say they, are not to becalmed in a day. A revolution cannot be cut off short. It must needsundergo some undulations before it returns to a state of rest, like amountain sinking into the plain. There are no Alps without their Jura,nor Pyrenees without the Asturias.
This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory ofParisians calls “the epoch of the riots,” is certainly a characteristichour amid the stormy hours of this century. A last word, before weenter on the recital.
The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic andliving reality, which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of timeand space. There, nevertheless, we insist upon it, is life,palpitation, human tremor. Petty details, as we think we have alreadysaid, are, so to speak, the foliage of great events, and are lost inthe distance of history. The epoch, surnamed “of the riots,” abounds indetails of this nature. Judicial inquiries have not revealed, andperhaps have not sounded the depths, for another reason than history.We shall therefore bring to light, among the known and publishedpeculiarities, things which have not heretofore been known, about factsover which have passed the forgetfulness of some, and the death ofothers. The majority of the actors in these gigantic scenes havedisappeared; beginning with the very next day they held their peace;but of what we shall relate, we shall be able to say: “We have seenthis.” We alter a few names, for history relates and does not informagainst, but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine. Inaccordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing, weshall show only one side and one episode, and certainly, the leastknown at that, of the two days, the 5th and the 6th of June, 1832, butwe shall do it in such wise that the reader may catch a glimpse,beneath the gloomy veil which we are about to lift, of the real form ofthis frightful public adventure.



CHAPTER III—A BURIAL; AN OCCASION TO BE BORN AGAIN

In the spring of 1832, although the cholera had been chilling all mindsfor the last three months and had cast over their agitation anindescribable and gloomy pacification, Paris had already long been ripefor commotion. As we have said, the great city resembles a piece ofartillery; when it is loaded, it suffices for a spark to fall, and theshot is discharged. In June, 1832, the spark was the death of GeneralLamarque.
Lamarque was a man of renown and of action. He had had in succession,under the Empire and under the Restoration, the sorts of braveryrequisite for the two epochs, the bravery of the battle-field and thebravery of the tribune. He was as eloquent as he had been valiant; asword was discernible in his speech. Like Foy, his predecessor, afterupholding the command, he upheld liberty; he sat between the left andthe extreme left, beloved of the people because he accepted the chancesof the future, beloved of the populace because he had served theEmperor well; he was, in company with Comtes Gérard and Drouet, one ofNapoleon’s marshals _in petto_. The treaties of 1815 removed him as apersonal offence. He hated Wellington with a downright hatred whichpleased the multitude; and, for seventeen years, he majesticallypreserved the sadness of Waterloo, paying hardly any attention tointervening events. In his death agony, at his last hour, he clasped tohis breast a sword which had been presented to him by the officers ofthe Hundred Days. Napoleon had died uttering the word _army_, Lamarqueuttering the word _country_.
His death, which was expected, was dreaded by the people as a loss, andby the government as an occasion. This death was an affliction. Likeeverything that is bitter, affliction may turn to revolt. This is whattook place.
On the preceding evening, and on the morning of the 5th of June, theday appointed for Lamarque’s burial, the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, whichthe procession was to touch at, assumed a formidable aspect. Thistumultuous network of streets was filled with rumors. They armedthemselves as best they might. Joiners carried off door-weights oftheir establishment “to break down doors.” One of them had made himselfa dagger of a stocking-weaver’s hook by breaking off the hook andsharpening the stump. Another, who was in a fever “to attack,” sleptwholly dressed for three days. A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade,who asked him: “Whither are you going?” “Eh! well, I have no weapons.”“What then?” “I’m going to my timber-yard to get my compasses.” “Whatfor?” “I don’t know,” said Lombier. A certain Jacqueline, anexpeditious man, accosted some passing artisans: “Come here, you!” Hetreated them to ten sous’ worth of wine and said: “Have you work?”“No.” “Go to Filspierre, between the Barrière Charonne and the BarrièreMontreuil, and you will find work.” At Filspierre’s they foundcartridges and arms. Certain well-known leaders were going the rounds,that is to say, running from one house to another, to collect theirmen. At Barthélemy’s, near the Barrière du Trône, at Capel’s, near thePetit-Chapeau, the drinkers accosted each other with a grave air. Theywere heard to say: “Have you your pistol?” “Under my blouse.” “Andyou?” “Under my shirt.” In the Rue Traversière, in front of the Blandworkshop, and in the yard of the Maison-Brulée, in front of tool-makerBernier’s, groups whispered together. Among them was observed a certainMavot, who never remained more than a week in one shop, as the mastersalways discharged him “because they were obliged to dispute with himevery day.” Mavot was killed on the following day at the barricade ofthe Rue Ménilmontant. Pretot, who was destined to perish also in thestruggle, seconded Mavot, and to the question: “What is your object?”he replied: _“Insurrection.”_ Workmen assembled at the corner of theRue de Bercy, waited for a certain Lemarin, the revolutionary agent forthe Faubourg Saint-Marceau. Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly.
On the 5th of June, accordingly, a day of mingled rain and sun, GeneralLamarque’s funeral procession traversed Paris with official militarypomp, somewhat augmented through precaution. Two battalions, withdraped drums and reversed arms, ten thousand National Guards, withtheir swords at their sides, escorted the coffin. The hearse was drawnby young men. The officers of the Invalides came immediately behind it,bearing laurel branches. Then came an innumerable, strange, agitatedmultitude, the sectionaries of the Friends of the People, the LawSchool, the Medical School, refugees of all nationalities, and Spanish,Italian, German, and Polish flags, tricolored horizontal banners, everypossible sort of banner, children waving green boughs, stone-cuttersand carpenters who were on strike at the moment, printers who wererecognizable by their paper caps, marching two by two, three by three,uttering cries, nearly all of them brandishing sticks, some brandishingsabres, without order and yet with a single soul, now a tumultuousrout, again a column. Squads chose themselves leaders; a man armed witha pair of pistols in full view, seemed to pass the host in review, andthe files separated before him. On the side alleys of the boulevards,in the branches of the trees, on balconies, in windows, on the roofs,swarmed the heads of men, women, and children; all eyes were filledwith anxiety. An armed throng was passing, and a terrified thronglooked on.
The Government, on its side, was taking observations. It observed withits hand on its sword. Four squadrons of carabineers could be seen inthe Place Louis XV. in their saddles, with their trumpets at theirhead, cartridge-boxes filled and muskets loaded, all in readiness tomarch; in the Latin country and at the Jardin des Plantes, theMunicipal Guard echelonned from street to street; at theHalle-aux-Vins, a squadron of dragoons; at the Grève half of the 12thLight Infantry, the other half being at the Bastille; the 6th Dragoonsat the Célestins; and the courtyard of the Louvre full of artillery.The remainder of the troops were confined to their barracks, withoutreckoning the regiments of the environs of Paris. Power being uneasy,held suspended over the menacing multitude twenty-four thousandsoldiers in the city and thirty thousand in the banlieue.
Divers reports were in circulation in the cortège. Legitimist trickswere hinted at; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt, whom God hadmarked out for death at that very moment when the populace weredesignating him for the Empire. One personage, whose name has remainedunknown, announced that at a given hour two overseers who had been wonover, would throw open the doors of a factory of arms to the people.That which predominated on the uncovered brows of the majority of thosepresent was enthusiasm mingled with dejection. Here and there, also, inthat multitude given over to such violent but noble emotions, therewere visible genuine visages of criminals and ignoble mouths whichsaid: “Let us plunder!” There are certain agitations which stir up thebottoms of marshes and make clouds of mud rise through the water. Aphenomenon to which “well drilled” policemen are no strangers.
The procession proceeded, with feverish slowness, from the house of thedeceased, by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille. It rainedfrom time to time; the rain mattered nothing to that throng. Manyincidents, the coffin borne round the Vendome column, stones thrown atthe Duc de Fitz-James, who was seen on a balcony with his hat on hishead, the Gallic cock torn from a popular flag and dragged in the mire,a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at the Porte Saint-Martin,an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud: “I am aRepublican,” the Polytechnic School coming up unexpectedly againstorders to remain at home, the shouts of: “Long live the Polytechnique!Long live the Republic!” marked the passage of the funeral train. Atthe Bastille, long files of curious and formidable people who descendedfrom the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, effected a junction with theprocession, and a certain terrible seething began to agitate thethrong.
One man was heard to say to another: “Do you see that fellow with a redbeard, he’s the one who will give the word when we are to fire.” Itappears that this red beard was present, at another riot, the Quénissetaffair, entrusted with this same function.
The hearse passed the Bastille, traversed the small bridge, and reachedthe esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz. There it halted. The crowd,surveyed at that moment with a bird’s-eye view, would have presentedthe aspect of a comet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tailspread out over the Quai Bourdon, covered the Bastille, and wasprolonged on the boulevard as far as the Porte Saint-Martin. A circlewas traced around the hearse. The vast rout held their peace. Lafayettespoke and bade Lamarque farewell. This was a touching and augustinstant, all heads uncovered, all hearts beat high.
All at once, a man on horseback, clad in black, made his appearance inthe middle of the group with a red flag, others say, with a pikesurmounted with a red liberty-cap. Lafayette turned aside his head.Exelmans quitted the procession.
This red flag raised a storm, and disappeared in the midst of it. Fromthe Boulevard Bourdon to the bridge of Austerlitz one of those clamorswhich resemble billows stirred the multitude. Two prodigious shoutswent up: “Lamarque to the Pantheon!—Lafayette to the Town-hall!” Someyoung men, amid the declamations of the throng, harnessed themselvesand began to drag Lamarque in the hearse across the bridge ofAusterlitz and Lafayette in a hackney-coach along the Quai Morland.
In the crowd which surrounded and cheered Lafayette, it was noticedthat a German showed himself named Ludwig Snyder, who died acentenarian afterwards, who had also been in the war of 1776, and whohad fought at Trenton under Washington, and at Brandywine underLafayette.
In the meantime, the municipal cavalry on the left bank had been set inmotion, and came to bar the bridge, on the right bank the dragoonsemerged from the Célestins and deployed along the Quai Morland. The menwho were dragging Lafayette suddenly caught sight of them at the cornerof the quay and shouted: “The dragoons!” The dragoons advanced at awalk, in silence, with their pistols in their holsters, their swords intheir scabbards, their guns slung in their leather sockets, with an airof gloomy expectation.
They halted two hundred paces from the little bridge. The carriage inwhich sat Lafayette advanced to them, their ranks opened and allowed itto pass, and then closed behind it. At that moment the dragoons and thecrowd touched. The women fled in terror. What took place during thatfatal minute? No one can say. It is the dark moment when two cloudscome together. Some declare that a blast of trumpets sounding thecharge was heard in the direction of the Arsenal, others that a blowfrom a dagger was given by a child to a dragoon. The fact is, thatthree shots were suddenly discharged: the first killed Cholet, chief ofthe squadron, the second killed an old deaf woman who was in the act ofclosing her window, the third singed the shoulder of an officer; awoman screamed: “They are beginning too soon!” and all at once, asquadron of dragoons which had remained in the barracks up to thistime, was seen to debouch at a gallop with bared swords, through theRue Bassompierre and the Boulevard Bourdon, sweeping all before them.
Then all is said, the tempest is loosed, stones rain down, a fusilladebreaks forth, many precipitate themselves to the bottom of the bank,and pass the small arm of the Seine, now filled in, the timber-yards ofthe Isle Louviers, that vast citadel ready to hand, bristle withcombatants, stakes are torn up, pistol-shots fired, a barricade begun,the young men who are thrust back pass the Austerlitz bridge with thehearse at a run, and the municipal guard, the carabineers rush up, thedragoons ply their swords, the crowd disperses in all directions, arumor of war flies to all four quarters of Paris, men shout: “To arms!”they run, tumble down, flee, resist. Wrath spreads abroad the riot aswind spreads a fire.



CHAPTER IV—THE EBULLITIONS OF FORMER DAYS

Nothing is more extraordinary than the first breaking out of a riot.Everything bursts forth everywhere at once. Was it foreseen? Yes. Wasit prepared? No. Whence comes it? From the pavements. Whence falls it?From the clouds. Here insurrection assumes the character of a plot;there of an improvisation. The first comer seizes a current of thethrong and leads it whither he wills. A beginning full of terror, inwhich is mingled a sort of formidable gayety. First come clamors, theshops are closed, the displays of the merchants disappear; then comeisolated shots; people flee; blows from gun-stocks beat againstportes-cochères, servants can be heard laughing in the courtyards ofhouses and saying: “There’s going to be a row!”

A quarter of an hour had not elapsed when this is what was taking placeat twenty different spots in Paris at once.
In the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie, twenty young men, beardedand with long hair, entered a dram-shop and emerged a moment later,carrying a horizontal tricolored flag covered with crape, and having attheir head three men armed, one with a sword, one with a gun, and thethird with a pike.
In the Rue des Nonaindières, a very well-dressed bourgeois, who had aprominent belly, a sonorous voice, a bald head, a lofty brow, a blackbeard, and one of these stiff moustaches which will not lie flat,offered cartridges publicly to passers-by.
In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre, men with bare arms carried about ablack flag, on which could be read in white letters this inscription:“Republic or Death!” In the Rue des Jeûneurs, Rue du Cadran, RueMontorgueil, Rue Mandar, groups appeared waving flags on which could bedistinguished in gold letters, the word _section_ with a number. One ofthese flags was red and blue with an almost imperceptible stripe ofwhite between.
They pillaged a factory of small-arms on the Boulevard Saint-Martin,and three armorers’ shops, the first in the Rue Beaubourg, the secondin the Rue Michel-le-Comte, the other in the Rue du Temple. In a fewminutes, the thousand hands of the crowd had seized and carried off twohundred and thirty guns, nearly all double-barrelled, sixty-fourswords, and eighty-three pistols. In order to provide more arms, oneman took the gun, the other the bayonet.
Opposite the Quai de la Grève, young men armed with muskets installedthemselves in the houses of some women for the purpose of firing. Oneof them had a flint-lock. They rang, entered, and set about makingcartridges. One of these women relates: “I did not know what cartridgeswere; it was my husband who told me.”

One cluster broke into a curiosity shop in the Rue desVieilles-Haudriettes, and seized yataghans and Turkish arms.
The body of a mason who had been killed by a gun-shot lay in the Rue dela Perle.
And then on the right bank, the left bank, on the quays, on theboulevards, in the Latin country, in the quarter of the Halles, pantingmen, artisans, students, members of sections read proclamations andshouted: “To arms!” broke street lanterns, unharnessed carriages,unpaved the streets, broke in the doors of houses, uprooted trees,rummaged cellars, rolled out hogsheads, heaped up paving-stones, roughslabs, furniture and planks, and made barricades.
They forced the bourgeois to assist them in this. They entered thedwellings of women, they forced them to hand over the swords and gunsof their absent husbands, and they wrote on the door, with whiting:“The arms have been delivered”; some signed “their names” to receiptsfor the guns and swords and said: “Send for them to-morrow at theMayor’s office.” They disarmed isolated sentinels and NationalGuardsmen in the streets on their way to the Townhall. They tore theepaulets from officers. In the Rue du Cimitière-Saint-Nicholas, anofficer of the National Guard, on being pursued by a crowd armed withclubs and foils, took refuge with difficulty in a house, whence he wasonly able to emerge at nightfall and in disguise.
In the Quartier Saint-Jacques, the students swarmed out of their hotelsand ascended the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe to the Café du Progrèss, ordescended to the Café des Sept-Billards, in the Rue des Mathurins.There, in front of the door, young men mounted on the stonecorner-posts, distributed arms. They plundered the timber-yard in theRue Transnonain in order to obtain material for barricades. On a singlepoint the inhabitants resisted, at the corner of the Rue Sainte-Avoyeand the Rue Simon-Le-Franc, where they destroyed the barricade withtheir own hands. At a single point the insurgents yielded; theyabandoned a barricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired ona detachment of the National Guard, and fled through the Rue de laCorderie. The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag, apackage of cartridges, and three hundred pistol-balls. The NationalGuardsmen tore up the flag, and carried off its tattered remains on thepoints of their bayonets.
All that we are here relating slowly and successively took placesimultaneously at all points of the city in the midst of a vast tumult,like a mass of tongues of lightning in one clap of thunder. In lessthan an hour, twenty-seven barricades sprang out of the earth in thequarter of the Halles alone. In the centre was that famous house No.50, which was the fortress of Jeanne and her six hundred companions,and which, flanked on the one hand by a barricade at Saint-Merry, andon the other by a barricade of the Rue Maubuée, commanded threestreets, the Rue des Arcis, the Rue Saint-Martin, and the RueAubry-le-Boucher, which it faced. The barricades at right angles fellback, the one of the Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie, theother of the Rue Geoffroy-Langevin on the Rue Sainte-Avoye. Withoutreckoning innumerable barricades in twenty other quarters of Paris, inthe Marais, at Mont-Sainte-Geneviève; one in the Rue Ménilmontant,where was visible a porte-cochère torn from its hinges; another nearthe little bridge of the Hôtel-Dieu made with an “écossais,” which hadbeen unharnessed and overthrown, three hundred paces from thePrefecture of Police.
At the barricade of the Rue des Ménétriers, a well-dressed mandistributed money to the workmen. At the barricade of the Rue Grenetat,a horseman made his appearance and handed to the one who seemed to bethe commander of the barricade what had the appearance of a roll ofsilver. “Here,” said he, “this is to pay expenses, wine, et cætera.” Alight-haired young man, without a cravat, went from barricade tobarricade, carrying pass-words. Another, with a naked sword, a bluepolice cap on his head, placed sentinels. In the interior, beyond thebarricades, the wine-shops and porters’ lodges were converted intoguard-houses. Otherwise the riot was conducted after the mostscientific military tactics. The narrow, uneven, sinuous streets, fullof angles and turns, were admirably chosen; the neighborhood of theHalles, in particular, a network of streets more intricate than aforest. The Society of the Friends of the People had, it was said,undertaken to direct the insurrection in the Quartier Sainte-Avoye. Aman killed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person aplan of Paris.
That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was asort of strange impetuosity which was in the air. The insurrection hadabruptly built barricades with one hand, and with the other seizednearly all the posts of the garrison. In less than three hours, like atrain of powder catching fire, the insurgents had invaded and occupied,on the right bank, the Arsenal, the Mayoralty of the Place Royale, thewhole of the Marais, the Popincourt arms manufactory, la Galiote, theChâteau-d’Eau, and all the streets near the Halles; on the left bank,the barracks of the Veterans, Sainte-Pélagie, the Place Maubert, thepowder magazine of the Deux-Moulins, and all the barriers. At fiveo’clock in the evening, they were masters of the Bastille, of theLingerie, of the Blancs-Manteaux; their scouts had reached the Placedes Victoires, and menaced the Bank, the Petits-Pères barracks, and thePost-Office. A third of Paris was in the hands of the rioters.
The conflict had been begun on a gigantic scale at all points; and, asa result of the disarming domiciliary visits, and armorers’ shopshastily invaded, was, that the combat which had begun with the throwingof stones was continued with gun-shots.
About six o’clock in the evening, the Passage du Saumon became thefield of battle. The uprising was at one end, the troops were at theother. They fired from one gate to the other. An observer, a dreamer,the author of this book, who had gone to get a near view of thisvolcano, found himself in the passage between the two fires. All thathe had to protect him from the bullets was the swell of the twohalf-columns which separate the shops; he remained in this delicatesituation for nearly half an hour.
Meanwhile the call to arms was beaten, the National Guard armed inhaste, the legions emerged from the Mayoralities, the regiments fromtheir barracks. Opposite the passage de l’Ancre a drummer received ablow from a dagger. Another, in the Rue du Cygne, was assailed bythirty young men who broke his instrument, and took away his sword.Another was killed in the Rue Grenier-Saint-Lazare. In the RueMichel-le-Comte, three officers fell dead one after the other. Many ofthe Municipal Guards, on being wounded, in the Rue des Lombards,retreated.
In front of the Cour-Batave, a detachment of National Guards found ared flag bearing the following inscription: _Republican revolution, No.127_. Was this a revolution, in fact?
The insurrection had made of the centre of Paris a sort ofinextricable, tortuous, colossal citadel.
There was the hearth; there, evidently, was the question. All the restwas nothing but skirmishes. The proof that all would be decided therelay in the fact that there was no fighting going on there as yet.
In some regiments, the soldiers were uncertain, which added to thefearful uncertainty of the crisis. They recalled the popular ovationwhich had greeted the neutrality of the 53d of the Line in July, 1830.Two intrepid men, tried in great wars, the Marshal Lobau and GeneralBugeaud, were in command, Bugeaud under Lobau. Enormous patrols,composed of battalions of the Line, enclosed in entire companies of theNational Guard, and preceded by a commissary of police wearing hisscarf of office, went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion. Theinsurgents, on their side, placed videttes at the corners of all openspaces, and audaciously sent their patrols outside the barricades. Eachside was watching the other. The Government, with an army in its hand,hesitated; the night was almost upon them, and the Saint-Merry tocsinbegan to make itself heard. The Minister of War at that time, MarshalSoult, who had seen Austerlitz, regarded this with a gloomy air.
These old sailors, accustomed to correct manœuvres and having asresource and guide only tactics, that compass of battles, are utterlydisconcerted in the presence of that immense foam which is calledpublic wrath.
The National Guards of the suburbs rushed up in haste and disorder. Abattalion of the 12th Light came at a run from Saint-Denis, the 14th ofthe Line arrived from Courbevoie, the batteries of the Military Schoolhad taken up their position on the Carrousel; cannons were descendingfrom Vincennes.
Solitude was formed around the Tuileries. Louis Philippe was perfectlyserene.



CHAPTER V—ORIGINALITY OF PARIS

During the last two years, as we have said, Paris had witnessed morethan one insurrection. Nothing is, generally, more singularly calm thanthe physiognomy of Paris during an uprising beyond the bounds of therebellious quarters. Paris very speedily accustoms herself toanything,—it is only a riot,—and Paris has so many affairs on hand,that she does not put herself out for so small a matter. These colossalcities alone can offer such spectacles. These immense enclosures alonecan contain at the same time civil war and an odd and indescribabletranquillity. Ordinarily, when an insurrection commences, when theshop-keeper hears the drum, the call to arms, the general alarm, hecontents himself with the remark:—
“There appears to be a squabble in the Rue Saint-Martin.”

Or:—
“In the Faubourg Saint-Antoine.”

Often he adds carelessly:—
“Or somewhere in that direction.”

Later on, when the heart-rending and mournful hubbub of musketry andfiring by platoons becomes audible, the shopkeeper says:—
“It’s getting hot! Hullo, it’s getting hot!”

A moment later, the riot approaches and gains in force, he shuts up hisshop precipitately, hastily dons his uniform, that is to say, he placeshis merchandise in safety and risks his own person.
Men fire in a square, in a passage, in a blind alley; they take andre-take the barricade; blood flows, the grape-shot riddles the frontsof the houses, the balls kill people in their beds, corpses encumberthe streets. A few streets away, the shock of billiard-balls can beheard in the cafés.
The theatres open their doors and present vaudevilles; the curiouslaugh and chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled withwar. Hackney-carriages go their way; passers-by are going to a dinnersomewhere in town. Sometimes in the very quarter where the fighting isgoing on.
In 1831, a fusillade was stopped to allow a wedding party to pass.
At the time of the insurrection of 1839, in the Rue Saint-Martin alittle, infirm old man, pushing a hand-cart surmounted by a tricoloredrag, in which he had carafes filled with some sort of liquid, went andcame from barricade to troops and from troops to the barricade,offering his glasses of cocoa impartially,—now to the Government, nowto anarchy.
Nothing can be stranger; and this is the peculiar character ofuprisings in Paris, which cannot be found in any other capital. To thisend, two things are requisite, the size of Paris and its gayety. Thecity of Voltaire and Napoleon is necessary.
On this occasion, however, in the resort to arms of June 5th, 1832, thegreat city felt something which was, perhaps, stronger than itself. Itwas afraid.
Closed doors, windows, and shutters were to be seen everywhere, in themost distant and most “disinterested” quarters. The courageous took toarms, the poltroons hid. The busy and heedless passer-by disappeared.Many streets were empty at four o’clock in the morning.
Alarming details were hawked about, fatal news was disseminated,—that_they_ were masters of the Bank;—that there were six hundred of them inthe Cloister of Saint-Merry alone, entrenched and embattled in thechurch; that the line was not to be depended on; that Armand Carrel hadbeen to see Marshal Clausel and that the Marshal had said: “Get aregiment first”; that Lafayette was ill, but that he had said to them,nevertheless: “I am with you. I will follow you wherever there is roomfor a chair”; that one must be on one’s guard; that at night therewould be people pillaging isolated dwellings in the deserted corners ofParis (there the imagination of the police, that Anne Radcliffe mixedup with the Government was recognizable); that a battery had beenestablished in the Rue Aubry le Boucher; that Lobau and Bugeaud wereputting their heads together, and that, at midnight, or at daybreak atlatest, four columns would march simultaneously on the centre of theuprising, the first coming from the Bastille, the second from the PorteSaint-Martin, the third from the Grève, the fourth from the Halles;that perhaps, also, the troops would evacuate Paris and withdraw to theChamp-de-Mars; that no one knew what would happen, but that this time,it certainly was serious.
People busied themselves over Marshal Soult’s hesitations. Why did nothe attack at once? It is certain that he was profoundly absorbed. Theold lion seemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom.
Evening came, the theatres did not open; the patrols circulated with anair of irritation; passers-by were searched; suspicious persons werearrested. By nine o’clock, more than eight hundred persons had beenarrested, the Prefecture of Police was encumbered with them, so was theConciergerie, so was La Force.
At the Conciergerie in particular, the long vault which is called theRue de Paris was littered with trusses of straw upon which lay a heapof prisoners, whom the man of Lyons, Lagrange, harangued valiantly. Allthat straw rustled by all these men, produced the sound of a heavyshower. Elsewhere prisoners slept in the open air in the meadows, piledon top of each other.
Anxiety reigned everywhere, and a certain tremor which was not habitualwith Paris.
People barricaded themselves in their houses; wives and mothers wereuneasy; nothing was to be heard but this: “Ah! my God! He has not comehome!” There was hardly even the distant rumble of a vehicle to beheard.
People listened on their thresholds, to the rumors, the shouts, thetumult, the dull and indistinct sounds, to the things that were said:“It is cavalry,” or: “Those are the caissons galloping,” to thetrumpets, the drums, the firing, and, above all, to that lamentablealarm peal from Saint-Merry.
They waited for the first cannon-shot. Men sprang up at the corners ofthe streets and disappeared, shouting: “Go home!” And people made hasteto bolt their doors. They said: “How will all this end?” From moment tomoment, in proportion as the darkness descended, Paris seemed to takeon a more mournful hue from the formidable flaming of the revolt.



BOOK ELEVENTH—THE ATOM FRATERNIZES WITH THE HURRICANE



CHAPTER I—SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF GAVROCHE’SPOETRY. THE INFLUENCE OF AN ACADEMICIAN ON THIS POETRY

At the instant when the insurrection, arising from the shock of thepopulace and the military in front of the Arsenal, started a movementin advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was followingthe hearse and which, through the whole length of the boulevards,weighed, so to speak, on the head of the procession, there arose afrightful ebb. The rout was shaken, their ranks were broken, all ran,fled, made their escape, some with shouts of attack, others with thepallor of flight. The great river which covered the boulevards dividedin a twinkling, overflowed to right and left, and spread in torrentsover two hundred streets at once with the roar of a sewer that hasbroken loose.
At that moment, a ragged child who was coming down through the RueMénilmontant, holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum whichhe had just plucked on the heights of Belleville, caught sight of anold holster-pistol in the show-window of a bric-à-brac merchant’s shop.
“Mother What’s-your-name, I’m going to borrow your machine.”

And off he ran with the pistol.
Two minutes later, a flood of frightened bourgeois who were fleeingthrough the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse, encountered the ladbrandishing his pistol and singing:—
La nuit on ne voit rien,Le jour on voit très bien,D’un écrit apocrypheLe bourgeois s‘ébouriffe,Pratiquez la vertu,Tutu, chapeau pointu!44

It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars.
On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger.
Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march,and of all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion? Weknow not. Who does know? Himself, perhaps. However, Gavroche was wellup in all the popular tunes in circulation, and he mingled with themhis own chirpings. An observing urchin and a rogue, he made a potpourriof the voices of nature and the voices of Paris. He combined therepertory of the birds with the repertory of the workshops. He wasacquainted with thieves, a tribe contiguous to his own. He had, itappears, been for three months apprenticed to a printer. He had one dayexecuted a commission for M. Baour-Lormian, one of the Forty. Gavrochewas a gamin of letters.
Moreover, Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he hadoffered the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on thatvillainously rainy night, it was to his own brothers that he had playedthe part of Providence. His brothers in the evening, his father in themorning; that is what his night had been like. On quitting the Rue desBallets at daybreak, he had returned in haste to the elephant, hadartistically extracted from it the two brats, had shared with them somesort of breakfast which he had invented, and had then gone away,confiding them to that good mother, the street, who had brought him up,almost entirely. On leaving them, he had appointed to meet them at thesame spot in the evening, and had left them this discourse by way of afarewell: “I break a cane, otherwise expressed, I cut my stick, or, asthey say at the court, I file off. If you don’t find papa and mamma,young ‘uns, come back here this evening. I’ll scramble you up somesupper, and I’ll give you a shakedown.” The two children, picked up bysome policeman and placed in the refuge, or stolen by some mountebank,or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a Paris,did not return. The lowest depths of the actual social world are fullof these lost traces. Gavroche did not see them again. Ten or twelveweeks had elapsed since that night. More than once he had scratched theback of his head and said: “Where the devil are my two children?”

In the meantime, he had arrived, pistol in hand, in the Rue duPont-aux-Choux. He noticed that there was but one shop open in thatstreet, and, a matter worthy of reflection, that was a pastry-cook’sshop. This presented a providential occasion to eat anotherapple-turnover before entering the unknown. Gavroche halted, fumbled inhis fob, turned his pocket inside out, found nothing, not even a sou,and began to shout: “Help!”

It is hard to miss the last cake.
Nevertheless, Gavroche pursued his way.
Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint-Louis. While traversing theRue du Parc-Royal, he felt called upon to make good the loss of theapple-turnover which had been impossible, and he indulged himself inthe immense delight of tearing down the theatre posters in broaddaylight.
A little further on, on catching sight of a group ofcomfortable-looking persons, who seemed to be landed proprietors, heshrugged his shoulders and spit out at random before him this mouthfulof philosophical bile as they passed:
“How fat those moneyed men are! They’re drunk! They just wallow in gooddinners. Ask ‘em what they do with their money. They don’t know. Theyeat it, that’s what they do! As much as their bellies will hold.”




CHAPTER II—GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH

The brandishing of a triggerless pistol, grasped in one’s hand in theopen street, is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt hisfervor increasing with every moment. Amid the scraps of theMarseillaise which he was singing, he shouted:—
“All goes well. I suffer a great deal in my left paw, I’m all broken upwith rheumatism, but I’m satisfied, citizens. All that the bourgeoishave to do is to bear themselves well, I’ll sneeze them out subversivecouplets. What are the police spies? Dogs. And I’d just like to haveone of them at the end of my pistol. I’m just from the boulevard, myfriends. It’s getting hot there, it’s getting into a little boil, it’ssimmering. It’s time to skim the pot. Forward march, men! Let an impureblood inundate the furrows! I give my days to my country, I shall neversee my concubine more, Nini, finished, yes, Nini? But never mind! Longlive joy! Let’s fight, crebleu! I’ve had enough of despotism.”

At that moment, the horse of a lancer of the National Guard havingfallen, Gavroche laid his pistol on the pavement, and picked up theman, then he assisted in raising the horse. After which he picked uphis pistol and resumed his way. In the Rue de Thorigny, all was peaceand silence. This apathy, peculiar to the Marais, presented a contrastwith the vast surrounding uproar. Four gossips were chatting in adoorway.
Scotland has trios of witches, Paris has quartettes of old gossipinghags; and the “Thou shalt be King” could be quite as mournfully hurledat Bonaparte in the Carrefour Baudoyer as at Macbeth on the heath ofArmuyr. The croak would be almost identical.
The gossips of the Rue de Thorigny busied themselves only with theirown concerns. Three of them were portresses, and the fourth was arag-picker with her basket on her back.
All four of them seemed to be standing at the four corners of old age,which are decrepitude, decay, ruin, and sadness.
The rag-picker was humble. In this open-air society, it is therag-picker who salutes and the portress who patronizes. This is causedby the corner for refuse, which is fat or lean, according to the willof the portresses, and after the fancy of the one who makes the heap.There may be kindness in the broom.
This rag-picker was a grateful creature, and she smiled, with what asmile! on the three portresses. Things of this nature were said:—
“Ah, by the way, is your cat still cross?”

“Good gracious, cats are naturally the enemies of dogs, you know. It’sthe dogs who complain.”

“And people also.”

“But the fleas from a cat don’t go after people.”

“That’s not the trouble, dogs are dangerous. I remember one year whenthere were so many dogs that it was necessary to put it in thenewspapers. That was at the time when there were at the Tuileries greatsheep that drew the little carriage of the King of Rome. Do youremember the King of Rome?”

“I liked the Duc de Bordeau better.”

“I knew Louis XVIII. I prefer Louis XVIII.”

“Meat is awfully dear, isn’t it, Mother Patagon?”

“Ah! don’t mention it, the butcher’s shop is a horror. A horriblehorror—one can’t afford anything but the poor cuts nowadays.”

Here the rag-picker interposed:—
“Ladies, business is dull. The refuse heaps are miserable. No onethrows anything away any more. They eat everything.”

“There are poorer people than you, la Vargoulême.”

“Ah, that’s true,” replied the rag-picker, with deference, “I have aprofession.”

A pause succeeded, and the rag-picker, yielding to that necessity forboasting which lies at the bottom of man, added:—
“In the morning, on my return home, I pick over my basket, I sort mythings. This makes heaps in my room. I put the rags in a basket, thecores and stalks in a bucket, the linen in my cupboard, the woollenstuff in my commode, the old papers in the corner of the window, thethings that are good to eat in my bowl, the bits of glass in myfireplace, the old shoes behind my door, and the bones under my bed.”

Gavroche had stopped behind her and was listening.
“Old ladies,” said he, “what do you mean by talking politics?”

He was assailed by a broadside, composed of a quadruple howl.
“Here’s another rascal.”

“What’s that he’s got in his paddle? A pistol?”

“Well, I’d like to know what sort of a beggar’s brat this is?”

“That sort of animal is never easy unless he’s overturning theauthorities.”

Gavroche disdainfully contented himself, by way of reprisal, withelevating the tip of his nose with his thumb and opening his hand wide.
The rag-picker cried:—
“You malicious, bare-pawed little wretch!”

The one who answered to the name of Patagon clapped her hands togetherin horror.
“There’s going to be evil doings, that’s certain. The errand-boy nextdoor has a little pointed beard, I have seen him pass every day with ayoung person in a pink bonnet on his arm; to-day I saw him pass, and hehad a gun on his arm. Mame Bacheux says, that last week there was arevolution at—at—at—where’s the calf!—at Pontoise. And then, there yousee him, that horrid scamp, with his pistol! It seems that theCélestins are full of pistols. What do you suppose the Government cando with good-for-nothings who don’t know how to do anything butcontrive ways of upsetting the world, when we had just begun to get alittle quiet after all the misfortunes that have happened, good Lord!to that poor queen whom I saw pass in the tumbril! And all this isgoing to make tobacco dearer. It’s infamous! And I shall certainly goto see him beheaded on the guillotine, the wretch!”

“You’ve got the sniffles, old lady,” said Gavroche. “Blow yourpromontory.”

And he passed on. When he was in the Rue Pavée, the rag-picker occurredto his mind, and he indulged in this soliloquy:—
“You’re in the wrong to insult the revolutionists, MotherDust-Heap-Corner. This pistol is in your interests. It’s so that youmay have more good things to eat in your basket.”

All at once, he heard a shout behind him; it was the portress Patagonwho had followed him, and who was shaking her fist at him in thedistance and crying:—
“You’re nothing but a bastard.”

“Oh! Come now,” said Gavroche, “I don’t care a brass farthing forthat!”

Shortly afterwards, he passed the Hotel Lamoignon. There he utteredthis appeal:—
“Forward march to the battle!”

And he was seized with a fit of melancholy. He gazed at his pistol withan air of reproach which seemed an attempt to appease it:—
“I’m going off,” said he, “but you won’t go off!”

One dog may distract the attention from another dog.45 A very gauntpoodle came along at the moment. Gavroche felt compassion for him.
“My poor doggy,” said he, “you must have gone and swallowed a cask, forall the hoops are visible.”

Then he directed his course towards l’Orme-Saint-Gervais.



CHAPTER III—JUST INDIGNATION OF A HAIR-DRESSER

The worthy hair-dresser who had chased from his shop the two littlefellows to whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of theelephant was at that moment in his shop engaged in shaving an oldsoldier of the legion who had served under the Empire. They weretalking. The hair-dresser had, naturally, spoken to the veteran of theriot, then of General Lamarque, and from Lamarque they had passed tothe Emperor. Thence sprang up a conversation between barber and soldierwhich Prudhomme, had he been present, would have enriched witharabesques, and which he would have entitled: “Dialogue between therazor and the sword.”

“How did the Emperor ride, sir?” said the barber.
“Badly. He did not know how to fall—so he never fell.”

“Did he have fine horses? He must have had fine horses!”

“On the day when he gave me my cross, I noticed his beast. It was aracing mare, perfectly white. Her ears were very wide apart, her saddledeep, a fine head marked with a black star, a very long neck, stronglyarticulated knees, prominent ribs, oblique shoulders and a powerfulcrupper. A little more than fifteen hands in height.”

“A pretty horse,” remarked the hair-dresser.
“It was His Majesty’s beast.”

The hair-dresser felt, that after this observation, a short silencewould be fitting, so he conformed himself to it, and then went on:—
“The Emperor was never wounded but once, was he, sir?”

The old soldier replied with the calm and sovereign tone of a man whohad been there:—
“In the heel. At Ratisbon. I never saw him so well dressed as on thatday. He was as neat as a new sou.”

“And you, Mr. Veteran, you must have been often wounded?”

“I?” said the soldier, “ah! not to amount to anything. At Marengo, Ireceived two sabre-blows on the back of my neck, a bullet in the rightarm at Austerlitz, another in the left hip at Jena. At Friedland, athrust from a bayonet, there,—at the Moskowa seven or eightlance-thrusts, no matter where, at Lutzen a splinter of a shell crushedone of my fingers. Ah! and then at Waterloo, a ball from a biscaïen inthe thigh, that’s all.”

“How fine that is!” exclaimed the hair-dresser, in Pindaric accents,“to die on the field of battle! On my word of honor, rather than die inbed, of an illness, slowly, a bit by bit each day, with drugs,cataplasms, syringes, medicines, I should prefer to receive acannon-ball in my belly!”

“You’re not over fastidious,” said the soldier.
He had hardly spoken when a fearful crash shook the shop. Theshow-window had suddenly been fractured.
The wig-maker turned pale.
“Ah, good God!” he exclaimed, “it’s one of them!”

“What?”

“A cannon-ball.”

“Here it is,” said the soldier.
And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor. It was apebble.
The hair-dresser ran to the broken window and beheld Gavroche fleeingat the full speed, towards the Marché Saint-Jean. As he passed thehair-dresser’s shop Gavroche, who had the two brats still in his mind,had not been able to resist the impulse to say good day to him, and hadflung a stone through his panes.
“You see!” shrieked the hair-dresser, who from white had turned blue,“that fellow returns and does mischief for the pure pleasure of it.What has any one done to that gamin?”




CHAPTER IV—THE CHILD IS AMAZED AT THE OLD MAN

In the meantime, in the Marché Saint-Jean, where the post had alreadybeen disarmed, Gavroche had just “effected a junction” with a band ledby Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Combeferre, and Feuilly. They were armed aftera fashion. Bahorel and Jean Prouvaire had found them and swelled thegroup. Enjolras had a double-barrelled hunting-gun, Combeferre the gunof a National Guard bearing the number of his legion, and in his belt,two pistols which his unbuttoned coat allowed to be seen, JeanProuvaire an old cavalry musket, Bahorel a rifle; Courfeyrac wasbrandishing an unsheathed sword-cane. Feuilly, with a naked sword inhis hand, marched at their head shouting: “Long live Poland!”

They reached the Quai Morland. Cravatless, hatless, breathless, soakedby the rain, with lightning in their eyes. Gavroche accosted themcalmly:—
“Where are we going?”

“Come along,” said Courfeyrac.
Behind Feuilly marched, or rather bounded, Bahorel, who was like a fishin water in a riot. He wore a scarlet waistcoat, and indulged in thesort of words which break everything. His waistcoat astounded apasser-by, who cried in bewilderment:—
“Here are the reds!”

“The reds, the reds!” retorted Bahorel. “A queer kind of fear,bourgeois. For my part I don’t tremble before a poppy, the little redhat inspires me with no alarm. Take my advice, bourgeois, let’s leavefear of the red to horned cattle.”

He caught sight of a corner of the wall on which was placarded the mostpeaceable sheet of paper in the world, a permission to eat eggs, aLenten admonition addressed by the Archbishop of Paris to his “flock.”

Bahorel exclaimed:—
“‘Flock’; a polite way of saying geese.”

And he tore the charge from the nail. This conquered Gavroche. Fromthat instant Gavroche set himself to study Bahorel.
“Bahorel,” observed Enjolras, “you are wrong. You should have let thatcharge alone, he is not the person with whom we have to deal, you arewasting your wrath to no purpose. Take care of your supply. One doesnot fire out of the ranks with the soul any more than with a gun.”

“Each one in his own fashion, Enjolras,” retorted Bahorel. “Thisbishop’s prose shocks me; I want to eat eggs without being permitted.Your style is the hot and cold; I am amusing myself. Besides, I’m notwasting myself, I’m getting a start; and if I tore down that charge,Hercle! ‘twas only to whet my appetite.”

This word, _Hercle_, struck Gavroche. He sought all occasions forlearning, and that tearer-down of posters possessed his esteem. Heinquired of him:—
“What does _Hercle_ mean?”

Bahorel answered:—
“It means cursed name of a dog, in Latin.”

Here Bahorel recognized at a window a pale young man with a black beardwho was watching them as they passed, probably a Friend of the A B C.He shouted to him:—
“Quick, cartridges, _para bellum_.”

“A fine man! that’s true,” said Gavroche, who now understood Latin.
A tumultuous retinue accompanied them,—students, artists, young menaffiliated to the Cougourde of Aix, artisans, longshoremen, armed withclubs and bayonets; some, like Combeferre, with pistols thrust intotheir trousers.
An old man, who appeared to be extremely aged, was walking in the band.
He had no arms, and he made great haste, so that he might not be leftbehind, although he had a thoughtful air.
Gavroche caught sight of him:—
“Keksekça?” said he to Courfeyrac.
“He’s an old duffer.”

It was M. Mabeuf.



CHAPTER V—THE OLD MAN

Let us recount what had taken place.
Enjolras and his friends had been on the Boulevard Bourdon, near thepublic storehouses, at the moment when the dragoons had made theircharge. Enjolras, Courfeyrac, and Combeferre were among those who hadtaken to the Rue Bassompierre, shouting: “To the barricades!” In theRue Lesdiguières they had met an old man walking along. What hadattracted their attention was that the goodman was walking in azig-zag, as though he were intoxicated. Moreover, he had his hat in hishand, although it had been raining all the morning, and was rainingpretty briskly at the very time. Courfeyrac had recognized FatherMabeuf. He knew him through having many times accompanied Marius as faras his door. As he was acquainted with the peaceful and more than timidhabits of the old beadle-book-collector, and was amazed at the sight ofhim in the midst of that uproar, a couple of paces from the cavalrycharges, almost in the midst of a fusillade, hatless in the rain, andstrolling about among the bullets, he had accosted him, and thefollowing dialogue had been exchanged between the rioter of fire andthe octogenarian:—
“M. Mabeuf, go to your home.”

“Why?”

“There’s going to be a row.”

“That’s well.”

“Thrusts with the sword and firing, M. Mabeuf.”

“That is well.”

“Firing from cannon.”

“That is good. Where are the rest of you going?”

“We are going to fling the government to the earth.”

“That is good.”

And he had set out to follow them. From that moment forth he had notuttered a word. His step had suddenly become firm; artisans had offeredhim their arms; he had refused with a sign of the head. He advancednearly to the front rank of the column, with the movement of a man whois marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping.
“What a fierce old fellow!” muttered the students. The rumor spreadthrough the troop that he was a former member of the Convention,—an oldregicide. The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie.
Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made ofhim a sort of trumpet.
He sang:“Voici la lune qui paraît,Quand irons-nous dans la forêt?Demandait Charlot à Charlotte.
Tou tou touPour Chatou.Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et qu’une botte.
“Pour avoir bu de grand matinLa rosée à même le thym,Deux moineaux étaient en ribotte.
Zi zi ziPour Passy.Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et qu’une botte.
“Et ces deux pauvres petits loups,Comme deux grives étaient soûls;Un tigre en riait dans sa grotte.
Don don donPour Meudon.Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et qu’une botte.
“L’un jurait et l’autre sacrait.Quand irons nous dans la forêt?Demandait Charlot à Charlotte.
Tin tin tinPour Pantin.Je n’ai qu’un Dieu, qu’un roi, qu’un liard, et qu’une botte."46

They directed their course towards Saint-Merry.



CHAPTER VI—RECRUITS

The band augmented every moment. Near the Rue des Billettes, a man oflofty stature, whose hair was turning gray, and whose bold and daringmien was remarked by Courfeyrac, Enjolras, and Combeferre, but whomnone of them knew, joined them. Gavroche, who was occupied in singing,whistling, humming, running on ahead and pounding on the shutters ofthe shops with the butt of his triggerless pistol; paid no attention tothis man.
It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie, they passed in front ofCourfeyrac’s door.
“This happens just right,” said Courfeyrac, “I have forgotten my purse,and I have lost my hat.”

He quitted the mob and ran up to his quarters at full speed. He seizedan old hat and his purse.
He also seized a large square coffer, of the dimensions of a largevalise, which was concealed under his soiled linen.
As he descended again at a run, the portress hailed him:—
“Monsieur de Courfeyrac!”

“What’s your name, portress?”

The portress stood bewildered.
“Why, you know perfectly well, I’m the concierge; my name is MotherVeuvain.”

“Well, if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again, I shall call youMother de Veuvain. Now speak, what’s the matter? What do you want?”

“There is some one who wants to speak with you.”

“Who is it?”

“I don’t know.”

“Where is he?”

“In my lodge.”

“The devil!” ejaculated Courfeyrac.
“But the person has been waiting your return for over an hour,” saidthe portress.
At the same time, a sort of pale, thin, small, freckled, and youthfulartisan, clad in a tattered blouse and patched trousers of ribbedvelvet, and who had rather the air of a girl accoutred as a man than ofa man, emerged from the lodge and said to Courfeyrac in a voice whichwas not the least in the world like a woman’s voice:—
“Monsieur Marius, if you please.”

“He is not here.”

“Will he return this evening?”

“I know nothing about it.”

And Courfeyrac added:—
“For my part, I shall not return.”

The young man gazed steadily at him and said:—
“Why not?”

“Because.”

“Where are you going, then?”

“What business is that of yours?”

“Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you?”

“I am going to the barricades.”

“Would you like to have me go with you?”

“If you like!” replied Courfeyrac. “The street is free, the pavementsbelong to every one.”

And he made his escape at a run to join his friends. When he hadrejoined them, he gave the coffer to one of them to carry. It was onlya quarter of an hour after this that he saw the young man, who hadactually followed them.
A mob does not go precisely where it intends. We have explained that agust of wind carries it away. They overshot Saint-Merry and foundthemselves, without precisely knowing how, in the Rue Saint-Denis.



BOOK TWELFTH—CORINTHE



CHAPTER I—HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION

The Parisians who nowadays on entering on the Rue Rambuteau at the endnear the Halles, notice on their right, opposite the Rue Mondétour, abasket-maker’s shop having for its sign a basket in the form ofNapoleon the Great with this inscription:—
NAPOLEON IS MADEWHOLLY OF WILLOW,

have no suspicion of the terrible scenes which this very spot witnessedhardly thirty years ago.
It was there that lay the Rue de la Chanvrerie, which ancient deedsspell Chanverrerie, and the celebrated public-house called _Corinthe_.
The reader will remember all that has been said about the barricadeeffected at this point, and eclipsed, by the way, by the barricadeSaint-Merry. It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de laChanvrerie, now fallen into profound obscurity, that we are about toshed a little light.
May we be permitted to recur, for the sake of clearness in the recital,to the simple means which we have already employed in the case ofWaterloo. Persons who wish to picture to themselves in a tolerablyexact manner the constitution of the houses which stood at that epochnear the Pointe Saint-Eustache, at the northeast angle of the Halles ofParis, where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau, have onlyto imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its summit and theHalles with its base, and whose two vertical bars should form the Ruede la Grande-Truanderie, and the Rue de la Chanvrerie, and whosetransverse bar should be formed by the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie. Theold Rue Mondétour cut the three strokes of the N at the most crookedangles. So that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streetssufficed to form, on a space three fathoms square, between the Hallesand the Rue Saint-Denis on the one hand, and between the Rue du Cygneand the Rue des Prêcheurs on the other, seven islands of houses, oddlycut up, of varying sizes, placed crosswise and hap-hazard, and barelyseparated, like the blocks of stone in a dock, by narrow crannies.
We say narrow crannies, and we can give no more just idea of thosedark, contracted, many-angled alleys, lined with eight-story buildings.These buildings were so decrepit that, in the Rue de la Chanvrerie andthe Rue de la Petite-Truanderie, the fronts were shored up with beamsrunning from one house to another. The street was narrow and the gutterbroad, the pedestrian there walked on a pavement that was always wet,skirting little stalls resembling cellars, big posts encircled withiron hoops, excessive heaps of refuse, and gates armed with enormous,century-old gratings. The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that.
The name of Mondétour paints marvellously well the sinuosities of thatwhole set of streets. A little further on, they are found still betterexpressed by the _Rue Pirouette_, which ran into the Rue Mondétour.
The passer-by who got entangled from the Rue Saint-Denis in the Rue dela Chanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he hadentered an elongated funnel. At the end of this street, which was veryshort, he found further passage barred in the direction of the Hallesby a tall row of houses, and he would have thought himself in a blindalley, had he not perceived on the right and left two dark cuts throughwhich he could make his escape. This was the Rue Mondétour, which onone side ran into the Rue de Prêcheurs, and on the other into the Ruedu Cygne and the Petite-Truanderie. At the bottom of this sort ofcul-de-sac, at the angle of the cutting on the right, there was to beseen a house which was not so tall as the rest, and which formed a sortof cape in the street. It is in this house, of two stories only, thatan illustrious wine-shop had been merrily installed three hundred yearsbefore. This tavern created a joyous noise in the very spot which oldTheophilus described in the following couplet:—
Là branle le squelette horribleD’un pauvre amant qui se pendit.47

The situation was good, and tavern-keepers succeeded each other there,from father to son.
In the time of Mathurin Regnier, this cabaret was called the_Pot-aux-Roses_, and as the rebus was then in fashion, it had for itssign-board, a post (_poteau_) painted rose-color. In the last century,the worthy Natoire, one of the fantastic masters nowadays despised bythe stiff school, having got drunk many times in this wine-shop at thevery table where Regnier had drunk his fill, had painted, by way ofgratitude, a bunch of Corinth grapes on the pink post. The keeper ofthe cabaret, in his joy, had changed his device and had caused to beplaced in gilt letters beneath the bunch these words: “At the Bunch ofCorinth Grapes” (_“Au Raisin de Corinthe”_). Hence the name ofCorinthe. Nothing is more natural to drunken men than ellipses. Theellipsis is the zig-zag of the phrase. Corinthe gradually dethroned thePot-aux-Roses. The last proprietor of the dynasty, Father Hucheloup, nolonger acquainted even with the tradition, had the post painted blue.
A room on the ground floor, where the bar was situated, one on thefirst floor containing a billiard-table, a wooden spiral staircasepiercing the ceiling, wine on the tables, smoke on the walls, candlesin broad daylight,—this was the style of this cabaret. A staircase witha trap-door in the lower room led to the cellar. On the second floorwere the lodgings of the Hucheloup family. They were reached by astaircase which was a ladder rather than a staircase, and had for theirentrance only a private door in the large room on the first floor.Under the roof, in two mansard attics, were the nests for the servants.The kitchen shared the ground floor with the tap-room.
Father Hucheloup had, possibly, been born a chemist, but the fact isthat he was a cook; people did not confine themselves to drinking alonein his wine-shop, they also ate there. Hucheloup had invented a capitalthing which could be eaten nowhere but in his house, stuffed carps,which he called _carpes au gras_. These were eaten by the light of atallow candle or of a lamp of the time of Louis XVI., on tables towhich were nailed waxed cloths in lieu of table-cloths. People camethither from a distance. Hucheloup, one fine morning, had seen fit tonotify passers-by of this “specialty”; he had dipped a brush in a potof black paint, and as he was an orthographer on his own account, aswell as a cook after his own fashion, he had improvised on his wallthis remarkable inscription:—
CARPES HO GRAS.
One winter, the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy toobliterate the S which terminated the first word, and the G which beganthe third; this is what remained:—
CARPE HO RAS.
Time and rain assisting, a humble gastronomical announcement had becomea profound piece of advice.
In this way it came about, that though he knew no French, FatherHucheloup understood Latin, that he had evoked philosophy from hiskitchen, and that, desirous simply of effacing Lent, he had equalledHorace. And the striking thing about it was, that that also meant:“Enter my wine-shop.”

Nothing of all this is in existence now. The Mondétour labyrinth wasdisembowelled and widely opened in 1847, and probably no longer existsat the present moment. The Rue de la Chanvrerie and Corinthe havedisappeared beneath the pavement of the Rue Rambuteau.
As we have already said, Corinthe was the meeting-place if not therallying-point, of Courfeyrac and his friends. It was Grantaire who haddiscovered Corinthe. He had entered it on account of the _Carpe horas_,and had returned thither on account of the _Carpes au gras_. There theydrank, there they ate, there they shouted; they did not pay much, theypaid badly, they did not pay at all, but they were always welcome.Father Hucheloup was a jovial host.
Hucheloup, that amiable man, as was just said, was a wine-shop-keeperwith a moustache; an amusing variety. He always had an ill-temperedair, seemed to wish to intimidate his customers, grumbled at the peoplewho entered his establishment, and had rather the mien of seeking aquarrel with them than of serving them with soup. And yet, we insistupon the word, people were always welcome there. This oddity hadattracted customers to his shop, and brought him young men, who said toeach other: “Come hear Father Hucheloup growl.” He had been afencing-master. All of a sudden, he would burst out laughing. A bigvoice, a good fellow. He had a comic foundation under a tragicexterior, he asked nothing better than to frighten you, very much likethose snuff-boxes which are in the shape of a pistol. The detonationmakes one sneeze.
Mother Hucheloup, his wife, was a bearded and a very homely creature.
About 1830, Father Hucheloup died. With him disappeared the secret ofstuffed carps. His inconsolable widow continued to keep the wine-shop.But the cooking deteriorated, and became execrable; the wine, which hadalways been bad, became fearfully bad. Nevertheless, Courfeyrac and hisfriends continued to go to Corinthe,—out of pity, as Bossuet said.
The Widow Hucheloup was breathless and misshapen and given to rusticrecollections. She deprived them of their flatness by herpronunciation. She had a way of her own of saying things, which spicedher reminiscences of the village and of her springtime. It had formerlybeen her delight, so she affirmed, to hear the _loups-de-gorge_(_rouges-gorges_) _chanter dans les ogrepines_ (_aubépines_)—to hearthe redbreasts sing in the hawthorn-trees.
The hall on the first floor, where “the restaurant” was situated, was alarge and long apartment encumbered with stools, chairs, benches, andtables, and with a crippled, lame, old billiard-table. It was reachedby a spiral staircase which terminated in the corner of the room at asquare hole like the hatchway of a ship.
This room, lighted by a single narrow window, and by a lamp that wasalways burning, had the air of a garret. All the four-footed furniturecomported itself as though it had but three legs—the whitewashed wallshad for their only ornament the following quatrain in honor of MameHucheloup:—
Elle étonne à dix pas, elle épouvente à deux,Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux;On tremble à chaque instant qu’elle ne vous la moucheEt qu’un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche.48

This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall.
Mame Hucheloup, a good likeness, went and came from morning till nightbefore this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity. Twoserving-maids, named Matelote and Gibelotte,49 and who had never beenknown by any other names, helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tablesthe jugs of poor wine, and the various broths which were served to thehungry patrons in earthenware bowls. Matelote, large, plump, redhaired,and noisy, the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup, washomelier than any mythological monster, be it what it may; still, as itbecomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress, she wasless homely than Mame Hucheloup. Gibelotte, tall, delicate, white witha lymphatic pallor, with circles round her eyes, and drooping lids,always languid and weary, afflicted with what may be called chroniclassitude, the first up in the house and the last in bed, waited onevery one, even the other maid, silently and gently, smiling throughher fatigue with a vague and sleepy smile.
Before entering the restaurant room, the visitor read on the door thefollowing line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac:—
Régale si tu peux et mange si tu l’oses.50


CHAPTER II—PRELIMINARY GAYETIES

Laigle de Meaux, as the reader knows, lived more with Joly thanelsewhere. He had a lodging, as a bird has one on a branch. The twofriends lived together, ate together, slept together. They hadeverything in common, even Musichetta, to some extent. They were, whatthe subordinate monks who accompany monks are called, _bini_. On themorning of the 5th of June, they went to Corinthe to breakfast. Joly,who was all stuffed up, had a catarrh which Laigle was beginning toshare. Laigle’s coat was threadbare, but Joly was well dressed.
It was about nine o’clock in the morning, when they opened the door ofCorinthe.
They ascended to the first floor.
Matelote and Gibelotte received them.
“Oysters, cheese, and ham,” said Laigle.
And they seated themselves at a table.
The wine-shop was empty; there was no one there but themselves.
Gibelotte, knowing Joly and Laigle, set a bottle of wine on the table.
While they were busy with their first oysters, a head appeared at thehatchway of the staircase, and a voice said:—
“I am passing by. I smell from the street a delicious odor of Briecheese. I enter.” It was Grantaire.
Grantaire took a stool and drew up to the table.
At the sight of Grantaire, Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on thetable.
That made three.
“Are you going to drink those two bottles?” Laigle inquired ofGrantaire.
Grantaire replied:—
“All are ingenious, thou alone art ingenuous. Two bottles never yetastonished a man.”

The others had begun by eating, Grantaire began by drinking. Half abottle was rapidly gulped down.
“So you have a hole in your stomach?” began Laigle again.
“You have one in your elbow,” said Grantaire.
And after having emptied his glass, he added:—
“Ah, by the way, Laigle of the funeral oration, your coat is old.”

“I should hope so,” retorted Laigle. “That’s why we get on welltogether, my coat and I. It has acquired all my folds, it does not bindme anywhere, it is moulded on my deformities, it falls in with all mymovements, I am only conscious of it because it keeps me warm. Oldcoats are just like old friends.”

“That’s true,” ejaculated Joly, striking into the dialogue, “an oldgoat is an old abi” (_ami_, friend).
“Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up,” saidGrantaire.
“Grantaire,” demanded Laigle, “have you just come from the boulevard?”

“No.”

“We have just seen the head of the procession pass, Joly and I.”

“It’s a marvellous sight,” said Joly.
“How quiet this street is!” exclaimed Laigle. “Who would suspect thatParis was turned upside down? How plainly it is to be seen that informer days there were nothing but convents here! In this neighborhood!Du Breul and Sauval give a list of them, and so does the Abbé Lebeuf.They were all round here, they fairly swarmed, booted and barefooted,shaven, bearded, gray, black, white, Franciscans, Minims, Capuchins,Carmelites, Little Augustines, Great Augustines, old Augustines—therewas no end of them.”

“Don’t let’s talk of monks,” interrupted Grantaire, “it makes one wantto scratch one’s self.”

Then he exclaimed:—
“Bouh! I’ve just swallowed a bad oyster. Now hypochondria is takingpossession of me again. The oysters are spoiled, the servants are ugly.I hate the human race. I just passed through the Rue Richelieu, infront of the big public library. That pile of oyster-shells which iscalled a library is disgusting even to think of. What paper! What ink!What scrawling! And all that has been written! What rascal was it whosaid that man was a featherless biped?51 And then, I met a pretty girlof my acquaintance, who is as beautiful as the spring, worthy to becalled Floréal, and who is delighted, enraptured, as happy as theangels, because a wretch yesterday, a frightful banker all spotted withsmall-pox, deigned to take a fancy to her! Alas! woman keeps on thewatch for a protector as much as for a lover; cats chase mice as wellas birds. Two months ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic, sheadjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets, what do youcall it? She sewed, she had a camp bed, she dwelt beside a pot offlowers, she was contented. Now here she is a bankeress. Thistransformation took place last night. I met the victim this morning inhigh spirits. The hideous point about it is, that the jade is as prettyto-day as she was yesterday. Her financier did not show in her face.Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women, that the tracesleft upon them by caterpillars are visible. Ah! there is no morality onearth. I call to witness the myrtle, the symbol of love, the laurel,the symbol of air, the olive, that ninny, the symbol of peace, theapple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips, and thefig-tree, the grandfather of petticoats. As for right, do you know whatright is? The Gauls covet Clusium, Rome protects Clusium, and demandswhat wrong Clusium has done to them. Brennus answers: ‘The wrong thatAlba did to you, the wrong that Fidenæ did to you, the wrong that theEques, the Volsci, and the Sabines have done to you. They were yourneighbors. The Clusians are ours. We understand neighborliness just asyou do. You have stolen Alba, we shall take Clusium.’ Rome said: ‘Youshall not take Clusium.’ Brennus took Rome. Then he cried: ‘Væ victis!’That is what right is. Ah! what beasts of prey there are in this world!What eagles! It makes my flesh creep.”

He held out his glass to Joly, who filled it, then he drank and wenton, having hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine, of which noone, not even himself, had taken any notice:—
“Brennus, who takes Rome, is an eagle; the banker who takes thegrisette is an eagle. There is no more modesty in the one case than inthe other. So we believe in nothing. There is but one reality: drink.Whatever your opinion may be in favor of the lean cock, like the Cantonof Uri, or in favor of the fat cock, like the Canton of Glaris, itmatters little, drink. You talk to me of the boulevard, of thatprocession, _et cætera, et cætera_. Come now, is there going to beanother revolution? This poverty of means on the part of the good Godastounds me. He has to keep greasing the groove of events every moment.There is a hitch, it won’t work. Quick, a revolution! The good God hashis hands perpetually black with that cart-grease. If I were in hisplace, I’d be perfectly simple about it, I would not wind up mymechanism every minute, I’d lead the human race in a straightforwardway, I’d weave matters mesh by mesh, without breaking the thread, Iwould have no provisional arrangements, I would have no extraordinaryrepertory. What the rest of you call progress advances by means of twomotors, men and events. But, sad to say, from time to time, theexceptional becomes necessary. The ordinary troupe suffices neither forevent nor for men: among men geniuses are required, among eventsrevolutions. Great accidents are the law; the order of things cannot dowithout them; and, judging from the apparition of comets, one would betempted to think that Heaven itself finds actors needed for itsperformance. At the moment when one expects it the least, God placardsa meteor on the wall of the firmament. Some queer star turns up,underlined by an enormous tail. And that causes the death of Cæsar.Brutus deals him a blow with a knife, and God a blow with a comet._Crac_, and behold an aurora borealis, behold a revolution, behold agreat man; ’93 in big letters, Napoleon on guard, the comet of 1811 atthe head of the poster. Ah! what a beautiful blue theatre all studdedwith unexpected flashes! Boum! Boum! extraordinary show! Raise youreyes, boobies. Everything is in disorder, the star as well as thedrama. Good God, it is too much and not enough. These resources,gathered from exception, seem magnificence and poverty. My friends,Providence has come down to expedients. What does a revolution prove?That God is in a quandry. He effects a _coup d‘état_ because he, God,has not been able to make both ends meet. In fact, this confirms me inmy conjectures as to Jehovah’s fortune; and when I see so much distressin heaven and on earth, from the bird who has not a grain of millet tomyself without a hundred thousand livres of income, when I see humandestiny, which is very badly worn, and even royal destiny, which isthreadbare, witness the Prince de Condé hung, when I see winter, whichis nothing but a rent in the zenith through which the wind blows, whenI see so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning onthe crests of hills, when I see the drops of dew, those mock pearls,when I see the frost, that paste, when I see humanity ripped apart andevents patched up, and so many spots on the sun and so many holes inthe moon, when I see so much misery everywhere, I suspect that God isnot rich. The appearance exists, it is true, but I feel that he is hardup. He gives a revolution as a tradesman whose money-box is empty givesa ball. God must not be judged from appearances. Beneath the gilding ofheaven I perceive a poverty-stricken universe. Creation is bankrupt.That is why I am discontented. Here it is the 4th of June, it is almostnight; ever since this morning I have been waiting for daylight tocome; it has not come, and I bet that it won’t come all day. This isthe inexactness of an ill-paid clerk. Yes, everything is badlyarranged, nothing fits anything else, this old world is all warped, Itake my stand on the opposition, everything goes awry; the universe isa tease. It’s like children, those who want them have none, and thosewho don’t want them have them. Total: I’m vexed. Besides, Laigle deMeaux, that bald-head, offends my sight. It humiliates me to think thatI am of the same age as that baldy. However, I criticise, but I do notinsult. The universe is what it is. I speak here without evil intentand to ease my conscience. Receive, Eternal Father, the assurance of mydistinguished consideration. Ah! by all the saints of Olympus and byall the gods of paradise, I was not intended to be a Parisian, that isto say, to rebound forever, like a shuttlecock between two battledores,from the group of the loungers to the group of the roysterers. I wasmade to be a Turk, watching oriental houris all day long, executingthose exquisite Egyptian dances, as sensuous as the dream of a chasteman, or a Beauceron peasant, or a Venetian gentleman surrounded bygentlewoman, or a petty German prince, furnishing the half of afoot-soldier to the Germanic confederation, and occupying his leisurewith drying his breeches on his hedge, that is to say, his frontier.Those are the positions for which I was born! Yes, I have said a Turk,and I will not retract. I do not understand how people can habituallytake Turks in bad part; Mohammed had his good points; respect for theinventor of seraglios with houris and paradises with odalisques! Let usnot insult Mohammedanism, the only religion which is ornamented with ahen-roost! Now, I insist on a drink. The earth is a great piece ofstupidity. And it appears that they are going to fight, all thoseimbeciles, and to break each other’s profiles and to massacre eachother in the heart of summer, in the month of June, when they might gooff with a creature on their arm, to breathe the immense heaps ofnew-mown hay in the meadows! Really, people do commit altogether toomany follies. An old broken lantern which I have just seen at abric-à-brac merchant’s suggests a reflection to my mind; it is time toenlighten the human race. Yes, behold me sad again. That’s what comesof swallowing an oyster and a revolution the wrong way! I am growingmelancholy once more. Oh! frightful old world. People strive, turn eachother out, prostitute themselves, kill each other, and get used to it!”

And Grantaire, after this fit of eloquence, had a fit of coughing,which was well earned.
“À propos of revolution,” said Joly, “it is decidedly abberent thatBarius is in lub.”

“Does any one know with whom?” demanded Laigle.
“Do.”

“No?”

“Do! I tell you.”

“Marius’ love affairs!” exclaimed Grantaire. “I can imagine it. Mariusis a fog, and he must have found a vapor. Marius is of the race ofpoets. He who says poet, says fool, madman, _Tymbræus Apollo_. Mariusand his Marie, or his Marion, or his Maria, or his Mariette. They mustmake a queer pair of lovers. I know just what it is like. Ecstasies inwhich they forget to kiss. Pure on earth, but joined in heaven. Theyare souls possessed of senses. They lie among the stars.”

Grantaire was attacking his second bottle and, possibly, his secondharangue, when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of thestairs. It was a boy less than ten years of age, ragged, very small,yellow, with an odd phiz, a vivacious eye, an enormous amount of hairdrenched with rain, and wearing a contented air.
The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three, addressedhimself to Laigle de Meaux.
“Are you Monsieur Bossuet?”

“That is my nickname,” replied Laigle. “What do you want with me?”

“This. A tall blonde fellow on the boulevard said to me: ‘Do you knowMother Hucheloup?’ I said: ‘Yes, Rue Chanvrerie, the old man’s widow;’he said to me: ‘Go there. There you will find M. Bossuet. Tell him fromme: “A B C”.’ It’s a joke that they’re playing on you, isn’t it. Hegave me ten sous.”

“Joly, lend me ten sous,” said Laigle; and, turning to Grantaire:“Grantaire, lend me ten sous.”

This made twenty sous, which Laigle handed to the lad.
“Thank you, sir,” said the urchin.
“What is your name?” inquired Laigle.
“Navet, Gavroche’s friend.”

“Stay with us,” said Laigle.
“Breakfast with us,” said Grantaire.
The child replied:—
“I can’t, I belong in the procession, I’m the one to shout ‘Down withPolignac!’”

And executing a prolonged scrape of his foot behind him, which is themost respectful of all possible salutes, he took his departure.
The child gone, Grantaire took the word:—
“That is the pure-bred gamin. There are a great many varieties of thegamin species. The notary’s gamin is called Skip-the-Gutter, the cook’sgamin is called a scullion, the baker’s gamin is called a _mitron_, thelackey’s gamin is called a groom, the marine gamin is called thecabin-boy, the soldier’s gamin is called the drummer-boy, the painter’sgamin is called paint-grinder, the tradesman’s gamin is called anerrand-boy, the courtesan gamin is called the minion, the kingly gaminis called the dauphin, the god gamin is called the bambino.”

In the meantime, Laigle was engaged in reflection; he said half aloud:—
“A B C, that is to say: the burial of Lamarque.”

“The tall blonde,” remarked Grantaire, “is Enjolras, who is sending youa warning.”

“Shall we go?” ejaculated Bossuet.
“It’s raiding,” said Joly. “I have sworn to go through fire, but notthrough water. I don’t wand to ged a gold.”

“I shall stay here,” said Grantaire. “I prefer a breakfast to ahearse.”

“Conclusion: we remain,” said Laigle. “Well, then, let us drink.Besides, we might miss the funeral without missing the riot.”

“Ah! the riot, I am with you!” cried Joly.
Laigle rubbed his hands.
“Now we’re going to touch up the revolution of 1830. As a matter offact, it does hurt the people along the seams.”

“I don’t think much of your revolution,” said Grantaire. “I don’texecrate this Government. It is the crown tempered by the cottonnight-cap. It is a sceptre ending in an umbrella. In fact, I think thatto-day, with the present weather, Louis Philippe might utilize hisroyalty in two directions, he might extend the tip of the sceptre endagainst the people, and open the umbrella end against heaven.”

The room was dark, large clouds had just finished the extinction ofdaylight. There was no one in the wine-shop, or in the street, everyone having gone off “to watch events.”

“Is it midday or midnight?” cried Bossuet. “You can’t see your handbefore your face. Gibelotte, fetch a light.”

Grantaire was drinking in a melancholy way.
“Enjolras disdains me,” he muttered. “Enjolras said: ‘Joly is ill,Grantaire is drunk.’ It was to Bossuet that he sent Navet. If he hadcome for me, I would have followed him. So much the worse for Enjolras!I won’t go to his funeral.”

This resolution once arrived at, Bossuet, Joly, and Grantaire did notstir from the wine-shop. By two o’clock in the afternoon, the table atwhich they sat was covered with empty bottles. Two candles were burningon it, one in a flat copper candlestick which was perfectly green, theother in the neck of a cracked carafe. Grantaire had seduced Joly andBossuet to wine; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towardscheerfulness.
As for Grantaire, he had got beyond wine, that merely moderate inspirerof dreams, ever since midday. Wine enjoys only a conventionalpopularity with serious drinkers. There is, in fact, in the matter ofinebriety, white magic and black magic; wine is only white magic.Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams. The blackness of a terriblefit of drunkenness yawning before him, far from arresting him,attracted him. He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass.The beer-glass is the abyss. Having neither opium nor hashish on hand,and being desirous of filling his brain with twilight, he had hadrecourse to that fearful mixture of brandy, stout, absinthe, whichproduces the most terrible of lethargies. It is of these three vapors,beer, brandy, and absinthe, that the lead of the soul is composed. Theyare three grooms; the celestial butterfly is drowned in them; and thereare formed there in a membranous smoke, vaguely condensed into the wingof the bat, three mute furies, Nightmare, Night, and Death, which hoverabout the slumbering Psyche.
Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase; far from it. Hewas tremendously gay, and Bossuet and Joly retorted. They clinkedglasses. Grantaire added to the eccentric accentuation of words andideas, a peculiarity of gesture; he rested his left fist on his kneewith dignity, his arm forming a right angle, and, with cravat untied,seated astride a stool, his full glass in his right hand, he hurledsolemn words at the big maid-servant Matelote:—
“Let the doors of the palace be thrown open! Let every one be a memberof the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup.Let us drink.”

And turning to Madame Hucheloup, he added:—
“Woman ancient and consecrated by use, draw near that I may contemplatethee!”

And Joly exclaimed:—
“Matelote and Gibelotte, dod’t gib Grantaire anything more to drink. Hehas already devoured, since this bording, in wild prodigality, twofrancs and ninety-five centibes.”

And Grantaire began again:—
“Who has been unhooking the stars without my permission, and puttingthem on the table in the guise of candles?”

Bossuet, though very drunk, preserved his equanimity.
He was seated on the sill of the open window, wetting his back in thefalling rain, and gazing at his two friends.
All at once, he heard a tumult behind him, hurried footsteps, cries of“To arms!” He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis, at the endof the Rue de la Chanvrerie, Enjolras passing, gun in hand, andGavroche with his pistol, Feuilly with his sword, Courfeyrac with hissword, and Jean Prouvaire with his blunderbuss, Combeferre with hisgun, Bahorel with his gun, and the whole armed and stormy rabble whichwas following them.
The Rue de la Chanvrerie was not more than a gunshot long. Bossuetimprovised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around hismouth, and shouted:—
“Courfeyrac! Courfeyrac! Hohée!”

Courfeyrac heard the shout, caught sight of Bossuet, and advanced a fewpaces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie, shouting: “What do you want?”which crossed a “Where are you going?”

“To make a barricade,” replied Courfeyrac.
“Well, here! This is a good place! Make it here!”

“That’s true, Aigle,” said Courfeyrac.
And at a signal from Courfeyrac, the mob flung themselves into the Ruede la Chanvrerie.



CHAPTER III—NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE

The spot was, in fact, admirably adapted, the entrance to the streetwidened out, the other extremity narrowed together into a pocketwithout exit. Corinthe created an obstacle, the Rue Mondétour waseasily barricaded on the right and the left, no attack was possibleexcept from the Rue Saint-Denis, that is to say, in front, and in fullsight. Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal.
Terror had seized on the whole street at the irruption of the mob.There was not a passer-by who did not get out of sight. In the space ofa flash of lightning, in the rear, to right and left, shops, stables,area-doors, windows, blinds, attic skylights, shutters of everydescription were closed, from the ground floor to the roof. A terrifiedold woman fixed a mattress in front of her window on two clothes-polesfor drying linen, in order to deaden the effect of musketry. Thewine-shop alone remained open; and that for a very good reason, thatthe mob had rushed into it.—“Ah my God! Ah my God!” sighed MameHucheloup.
Bossuet had gone down to meet Courfeyrac.
Joly, who had placed himself at the window, exclaimed:—
“Courfeyrac, you ought to have brought an umbrella. You will gatchgold.”

In the meantime, in the space of a few minutes, twenty iron bars hadbeen wrenched from the grated front of the wine-shop, ten fathoms ofstreet had been unpaved; Gavroche and Bahorel had seized in itspassage, and overturned, the dray of a lime-dealer named Anceau; thisdray contained three barrels of lime, which they placed beneath thepiles of paving-stones: Enjolras raised the cellar trap, and all thewidow Hucheloup’s empty casks were used to flank the barrels of lime;Feuilly, with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks offans, had backed up the barrels and the dray with two massive heaps ofblocks of rough stone. Blocks which were improvised like the rest andprocured no one knows where. The beams which served as props were tornfrom the neighboring house-fronts and laid on the casks. When Bossuetand Courfeyrac turned round, half the street was already barred with arampart higher than a man. There is nothing like the hand of thepopulace for building everything that is built by demolishing.
Matelote and Gibelotte had mingled with the workers. Gibelotte went andcame loaded with rubbish. Her lassitude helped on the barricade. Sheserved the barricade as she would have served wine, with a sleepy air.
An omnibus with two white horses passed the end of the street.
Bossuet strode over the paving-stones, ran to it, stopped the driver,made the passengers alight, offered his hand to “the ladies,” dismissedthe conductor, and returned, leading the vehicle and the horses by thebridle.
“Omnibuses,” said he, “do not pass the Corinthe. _Non licet omnibusadire Corinthum_.”

An instant later, the horses were unharnessed and went off at theirwill, through the Rue Mondétour, and the omnibus lying on its sidecompleted the bar across the street.
Mame Hucheloup, quite upset, had taken refuge in the first story.
Her eyes were vague, and stared without seeing anything, and she criedin a low tone. Her terrified shrieks did not dare to emerge from herthroat.
“The end of the world has come,” she muttered.
Joly deposited a kiss on Mame Hucheloup’s fat, red, wrinkled neck, andsaid to Grantaire: “My dear fellow, I have always regarded a woman’sneck as an infinitely delicate thing.”

But Grantaire attained to the highest regions of dithryamb. Matelotehad mounted to the first floor once more, Grantaire seized her roundher waist, and gave vent to long bursts of laughter at the window.
“Matelote is homely!” he cried: “Matelote is of a dream of ugliness!Matelote is a chimæra. This is the secret of her birth: a GothicPygmalion, who was making gargoyles for cathedrals, fell in love withone of them, the most horrible, one fine morning. He besought Love togive it life, and this produced Matelote. Look at her, citizens! Shehas chromate-of-lead-colored hair, like Titian’s mistress, and she is agood girl. I guarantee that she will fight well. Every good girlcontains a hero. As for Mother Hucheloup, she’s an old warrior. Look ather moustaches! She inherited them from her husband. A hussar indeed!She will fight too. These two alone will strike terror to the heart ofthe banlieue. Comrades, we shall overthrow the government as true asthere are fifteen intermediary acids between margaric acid and formicacid; however, that is a matter of perfect indifference to me.Gentlemen, my father always detested me because I could not understandmathematics. I understand only love and liberty. I am Grantaire, thegood fellow. Having never had any money, I never acquired the habit ofit, and the result is that I have never lacked it; but, if I had beenrich, there would have been no more poor people! You would have seen!Oh, if the kind hearts only had fat purses, how much better thingswould go! I picture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild’s fortune! Howmuch good he would do! Matelote, embrace me! You are voluptuous andtimid! You have cheeks which invite the kiss of a sister, and lipswhich claim the kiss of a lover.”

“Hold your tongue, you cask!” said Courfeyrac.
Grantaire retorted:—
“I am the capitoul52 and the master of the floral games!”

Enjolras, who was standing on the crest of the barricade, gun in hand,raised his beautiful, austere face. Enjolras, as the reader knows, hadsomething of the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition. Hewould have perished at Thermopylæ with Leonidas, and burned at Droghedawith Cromwell.
“Grantaire,” he shouted, “go get rid of the fumes of your winesomewhere else than here. This is the place for enthusiasm, not fordrunkenness. Don’t disgrace the barricade!”

This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire. One wouldhave said that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face. Heseemed to be rendered suddenly sober.
He sat down, put his elbows on a table near the window, looked atEnjolras with indescribable gentleness, and said to him:—
“Let me sleep here.”

“Go and sleep somewhere else,” cried Enjolras.
But Grantaire, still keeping his tender and troubled eyes fixed on him,replied:—
“Let me sleep here,—until I die.”

Enjolras regarded him with disdainful eyes:—
“Grantaire, you are incapable of believing, of thinking, of willing, ofliving, and of dying.”

Grantaire replied in a grave tone:—
“You will see.”

He stammered a few more unintelligible words, then his head fellheavily on the table, and, as is the usual effect of the second periodof inebriety, into which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him,an instant later he had fallen asleep.



CHAPTER IV—AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP

Bahorel, in ecstasies over the barricade, shouted:—
“Here’s the street in its low-necked dress! How well it looks!”

Courfeyrac, as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent, sought toconsole the widowed proprietress.
“Mother Hucheloup, weren’t you complaining the other day because youhad had a notice served on you for infringing the law, becauseGibelotte shook a counterpane out of your window?”

“Yes, my good Monsieur Courfeyrac. Ah! good Heavens, are you going toput that table of mine in your horror, too? And it was for thecounterpane, and also for a pot of flowers which fell from the atticwindow into the street, that the government collected a fine of ahundred francs. If that isn’t an abomination, what is!”

“Well, Mother Hucheloup, we are avenging you.”

Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefitwhich she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account. Shewas satisfied after the manner of that Arab woman, who, having receiveda box on the ear from her husband, went to complain to her father, andcried for vengeance, saying: “Father, you owe my husband affront foraffront.” The father asked: “On which cheek did you receive the blow?”“On the left cheek.” The father slapped her right cheek and said: “Nowyou are satisfied. Go tell your husband that he boxed my daughter’sears, and that I have accordingly boxed his wife’s.”

The rain had ceased. Recruits had arrived. Workmen had brought undertheir blouses a barrel of powder, a basket containing bottles ofvitriol, two or three carnival torches, and a basket filled withfire-pots, “left over from the King’s festival.” This festival was veryrecent, having taken place on the 1st of May. It was said that thesemunitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pépin.They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, thelantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis, and all thelanterns in the surrounding streets, de Mondétour, du Cygne, desPrêcheurs, and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie.
Enjolras, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac directed everything. Twobarricades were now in process of construction at once, both of themresting on the Corinthe house and forming a right angle; the largershut off the Rue de la Chanvrerie, the other closed the Rue Mondétour,on the side of the Rue de Cygne. This last barricade, which was verynarrow, was constructed only of casks and paving-stones. There wereabout fifty workers on it; thirty were armed with guns; for, on theirway, they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer’s shop.
Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley thanthis troop. One had a round-jacket, a cavalry sabre, and twoholster-pistols, another was in his shirt-sleeves, with a round hat,and a powder-horn slung at his side, a third wore a plastron of ninesheets of gray paper and was armed with a saddler’s awl. There was onewho was shouting: “Let us exterminate them to the last man and die atthe point of our bayonet.” This man had no bayonet. Another spread outover his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National Guardsman,the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscriptionin red worsted: _Public Order_. There were a great many guns bearingthe numbers of the legions, few hats, no cravats, many bare arms, somepikes. Add to this, all ages, all sorts of faces, small, pale youngmen, and bronzed longshoremen. All were in haste; and as they helpedeach other, they discussed the possible chances. That they wouldreceive succor about three o’clock in the morning—that they were sureof one regiment, that Paris would rise. Terrible sayings with which wasmingled a sort of cordial joviality. One would have pronounced thembrothers, but they did not know each other’s names. Great perils havethis fine characteristic, that they bring to light the fraternity ofstrangers. A fire had been lighted in the kitchen, and there they wereengaged in moulding into bullets, pewter mugs, spoons, forks, and allthe brass table-ware of the establishment. In the midst of it all, theydrank. Caps and buckshot were mixed pell-mell on the tables withglasses of wine. In the billiard-hall, Mame Hucheloup, Matelote, andGibelotte, variously modified by terror, which had stupefied one,rendered another breathless, and roused the third, were tearing up olddish-cloths and making lint; three insurgents were assisting them,three bushy-haired, jolly blades with beards and moustaches, whoplucked away at the linen with the fingers of seamstresses and who madethem tremble.
The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac, Combeferre, and Enjolras hadobserved at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Ruedes Billettes, was at work on the smaller barricade and was makinghimself useful there. Gavroche was working on the larger one. As forthe young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings, andwho had inquired for M. Marius, he had disappeared at about the timewhen the omnibus had been overturned.
Gavroche, completely carried away and radiant, had undertaken to geteverything in readiness. He went, came, mounted, descended, re-mounted,whistled, and sparkled. He seemed to be there for the encouragement ofall. Had he any incentive? Yes, certainly, his poverty; had he wings?yes, certainly, his joy. Gavroche was a whirlwind. He was constantlyvisible, he was incessantly audible. He filled the air, as he waseverywhere at once. He was a sort of almost irritating ubiquity; nohalt was possible with him. The enormous barricade felt him on itshaunches. He troubled the loungers, he excited the idle, he reanimatedthe weary, he grew impatient over the thoughtful, he inspired gayety insome, and breath in others, wrath in others, movement in all, nowpricking a student, now biting an artisan; he alighted, paused, flewoff again, hovered over the tumult, and the effort, sprang from oneparty to another, murmuring and humming, and harassed the wholecompany; a fly on the immense revolutionary coach.
Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in hislittle lungs.
“Courage! more paving-stones! more casks! more machines! Where are younow? A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with! Your barricade isvery small. It must be carried up. Put everything on it, flingeverything there, stick it all in. Break down the house. A barricade isMother Gibou’s tea. Hullo, here’s a glass door.”

This elicited an exclamation from the workers.
“A glass door? what do you expect us to do with a glass door,tubercle?”

“Hercules yourselves!” retorted Gavroche. “A glass door is an excellentthing in a barricade. It does not prevent an attack, but it preventsthe enemy taking it. So you’ve never prigged apples over a wall wherethere were broken bottles? A glass door cuts the corns of the NationalGuard when they try to mount on the barricade. Pardi! glass is atreacherous thing. Well, you haven’t a very wildly lively imagination,comrades.”

However, he was furious over his triggerless pistol. He went from oneto another, demanding: “A gun, I want a gun! Why don’t you give me agun?”

“Give you a gun!” said Combeferre.
“Come now!” said Gavroche, “why not? I had one in 1830 when we had adispute with Charles X.”

Enjolras shrugged his shoulders.
“When there are enough for the men, we will give some to the children.”

Gavroche wheeled round haughtily, and answered:—
“If you are killed before me, I shall take yours.”

“Gamin!” said Enjolras.
“Greenhorn!” said Gavroche.
A dandy who had lost his way and who lounged past the end of the streetcreated a diversion! Gavroche shouted to him:—
“Come with us, young fellow! well now, don’t we do anything for thisold country of ours?”

The dandy fled.



CHAPTER V—PREPARATIONS

The journals of the day which said that that _nearly impregnablestructure_, of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, as they callit, reached to the level of the first floor, were mistaken. The factis, that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet. Itwas built in such a manner that the combatants could, at their will,either disappear behind it or dominate the barrier and even scale itscrest by means of a quadruple row of paving-stones placed on top ofeach other and arranged as steps in the interior. On the outside, thefront of the barricade, composed of piles of paving-stones and casksbound together by beams and planks, which were entangled in the wheelsof Anceau’s dray and of the overturned omnibus, had a bristling andinextricable aspect.
An aperture large enough to allow a man to pass through had been madebetween the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade whichwas furthest from the wine-shop, so that an exit was possible at thispoint. The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up withropes, and a red flag, fastened to this pole, floated over thebarricade.
The little Mondétour barricade, hidden behind the wine-shop building,was not visible. The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt.Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the otherfragment of the Rue Mondétour which opens through the Rue des Prêcheursan issue into the Halles, wishing, no doubt, to preserve a possiblecommunication with the outside, and not entertaining much fear of anattack through the dangerous and difficult street of the Rue desPrêcheurs.
With the exception of this issue which was left free, and whichconstituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed abranch and taking into account, also, the narrow cutting arranged onthe Rue de la Chanvrerie, the interior of the barricade, where thewine-shop formed a salient angle, presented an irregular square, closedon all sides. There existed an interval of twenty paces between thegrand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background of thestreet, so that one might say that the barricade rested on thesehouses, all inhabited, but closed from top to bottom.
All this work was performed without any hindrance, in less than anhour, and without this handful of bold men seeing a single bear-skincap or a single bayonet make their appearance. The very bourgeois whostill ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast aglance at the Rue de la Chanvrerie, caught sight of the barricade, andredoubled their pace.
The two barricades being finished, and the flag run up, a table wasdragged out of the wine-shop; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table.Enjolras brought the square coffer, and Courfeyrac opened it. Thiscoffer was filled with cartridges. When the mob saw the cartridges, atremor ran through the bravest, and a momentary silence ensued.
Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile.
Each one received thirty cartridges. Many had powder, and set aboutmaking others with the bullets which they had run. As for the barrel ofpowder, it stood on a table on one side, near the door, and was held inreserve.
The alarm beat which ran through all Paris, did not cease, but it hadfinally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which theyno longer paid any attention. This noise retreated at times, and againdrew near, with melancholy undulations.
They loaded the guns and carbines, all together, without haste, withsolemn gravity. Enjolras went and stationed three sentinels outside thebarricades, one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, the second in the Rue desPrêcheurs, the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie.
Then, the barricades having been built, the posts assigned, the gunsloaded, the sentinels stationed, they waited, alone in thoseredoubtable streets through which no one passed any longer, surroundedby those dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movementpalpitated, enveloped in the deepening shades of twilight which wasdrawing on, in the midst of that silence through which something couldbe felt advancing, and which had about it something tragic andterrifying, isolated, armed, determined, and tranquil.



CHAPTER VI—WAITING

During those hours of waiting, what did they do?
We must needs tell, since this is a matter of history.
While the men made bullets and the women lint, while a large saucepanof melted brass and lead, destined to the bullet-mould smoked over aglowing brazier, while the sentinels watched, weapon in hand, on thebarricade, while Enjolras, whom it was impossible to divert, kept aneye on the sentinels, Combeferre, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, Feuilly,Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and some others, sought each other out andunited as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in theirstudent life, and, in one corner of this wine-shop which had beenconverted into a casement, a couple of paces distant from the redoubtwhich they had built, with their carbines loaded and primed restingagainst the backs of their chairs, these fine young fellows, so closeto a supreme hour, began to recite love verses.
What verses? These:—
Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie,Lorsque nous étions si jeunes tous deux,Et que nous n’avions au cœur d’autre envieQue d‘être bien mis et d‘être amoureux,
Lorsqu’en ajoutant votre âge à mon âge,Nous ne comptions pas à deux quarante ans,Et que, dans notre humble et petit ménage,Tout, même l’hiver, nous était printemps?
Beaux jours! Manuel était fier et sage,Paris s’asseyait à de saints banquets,Foy lançait la foudre, et votre corsageAvait une épingle où je me piquais.
Tout vous contemplait. Avocat sans causes,Quand je vous menais au Prado dîner,Vous étiez jolie au point que les rosesMe faisaient l’effet de se retourner.
Je les entendais dire: Est elle belle!Comme elle sent bon!  Quels cheveux à flots!Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile,Son bonnet charmant est à peine éclos.
J’errais avec toi, pressant ton bras souple.Les passants croyaient que l’amour charméAvait marié, dans notre heureux couple,Le doux mois d’avril au beau mois de mai.
Nous vivions cachés, contents, porte close,Dévorant l’amour, bon fruit défendu,Ma bouche n’avait pas dit une choseQue déjà ton cœur avait répondu.
La Sorbonne était l’endroit bucoliqueOù je t’adorais du soir au matin.C’est ainsi qu’une âme amoureuse appliqueLa carte du Tendre au pays Latin.
O place Maubert! O place Dauphine!Quand, dans le taudis frais et printanier,Tu tirais ton bas sur ta jambe fine,Je voyais un astre au fond du grenier.
J’ai fort lu Platon, mais rien ne m’en reste;Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais,Tu me démontrais la bonté célesteAvec une fleur que tu me donnais.
Je t’obéissais, tu m‘étais soumise;O grenier doré! te lacer! te voirAller et venir dès l’aube en chemise,Mirant ton jeune front à ton vieux miroir.
Et qui donc pourrait perdre la mémoireDe ces temps d’aurore et de firmament,De rubans, de fleurs, de gaze et de moire,Où l’amour bégaye un argot charmant?
Nos jardins étaient un pot de tulipe;Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon;Je prenais le bol de terre de pipe,Et je te donnais le tasse en japon.
Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire!Ton manchon brûlé, ton boa perdu!Et ce cher portrait du divin ShakespeareQu’un soir pour souper nons avons vendu!
J‘étais mendiant et toi charitable.Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et ronds.Dante in folio nous servait de tablePour manger gaîment un cent de marrons.
La première fois qu’en mon joyeux bougeJe pris un baiser à ta lèvre en feu,Quand tu t’en allais décoiffée et rouge,Je restai tout pâle et je crus en Dieu!
Te rappelles-tu nos bonheurs sans nombre,Et tous ces fichus changés en chiffons?Oh que de soupirs, de nos cœurs pleins d’ombre,Se sont envolés dans les cieux profonds!53

The hour, the spot, these souvenirs of youth recalled, a few starswhich began to twinkle in the sky, the funeral repose of those desertedstreets, the imminence of the inexorable adventure, which was inpreparation, gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a lowtone in the dusk by Jean Prouvaire, who, as we have said, was a gentlepoet.
In the meantime, a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade, and inthe large one, one of those wax torches such as are to be met with onShrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks, on their way tola Courtille. These torches, as the reader has seen, came from theFaubourg Saint-Antoine.
The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving-stones closed onthree sides to shelter it from the wind, and disposed in such a fashionthat all the light fell on the flag. The street and the barricaderemained sunk in gloom, and nothing was to be seen except the red flagformidably illuminated as by an enormous dark-lantern.
This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag, with an indescribable andterrible purple.



CHAPTER VII—THE MAN RECRUITED IN THE RUE DES BILLETTES

Night was fully come, nothing made its appearance. All that they heardwas confused noises, and at intervals, fusillades; but these were rare,badly sustained and distant. This respite, which was thus prolonged,was a sign that the Government was taking its time, and collecting itsforces. These fifty men were waiting for sixty thousand.
Enjolras felt attacked by that impatience which seizes on strong soulson the threshold of redoubtable events. He went in search of Gavroche,who had set to making cartridges in the tap-room, by the dubious lightof two candles placed on the counter by way of precaution, on accountof the powder which was scattered on the tables. These two candles castno gleam outside. The insurgents had, moreover, taken pains not to haveany light in the upper stories.
Gavroche was deeply preoccupied at that moment, but not precisely withhis cartridges. The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered thetap-room and had seated himself at the table which was the leastlighted. A musket of large model had fallen to his share, and he heldit between his legs. Gavroche, who had been, up to that moment,distracted by a hundred “amusing” things, had not even seen this man.
When he entered, Gavroche followed him mechanically with his eyes,admiring his gun; then, all at once, when the man was seated, thestreet urchin sprang to his feet. Any one who had spied upon that manup to that moment, would have seen that he was observing everything inthe barricade and in the band of insurgents, with singular attention;but, from the moment when he had entered this room, he had fallen intoa sort of brown study, and no longer seemed to see anything that wasgoing on. The gamin approached this pensive personage, and began tostep around him on tiptoe, as one walks in the vicinity of a personwhom one is afraid of waking. At the same time, over his childishcountenance which was, at once so impudent and so serious, so giddy andso profound, so gay and so heart-breaking, passed all those grimaces ofan old man which signify: Ah bah! impossible! My sight is bad! I amdreaming! can this be? no, it is not! but yes! why, no! etc. Gavrochebalanced on his heels, clenched both fists in his pockets, moved hisneck around like a bird, expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacityof his lower lip. He was astounded, uncertain, incredulous, convinced,dazzled. He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart,discovering a Venus among the blowsy females, and the air of an amateurrecognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs. His whole being was at work,the instinct which scents out, and the intelligence which combines. Itwas evident that a great event had happened in Gavroche’s life.
It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolrasaccosted him.
“You are small,” said Enjolras, “you will not be seen. Go out of thebarricade, slip along close to the houses, skirmish about a bit in thestreets, and come back and tell me what is going on.”

Gavroche raised himself on his haunches.
“So the little chaps are good for something! that’s very lucky! I’llgo! In the meanwhile, trust to the little fellows, and distrust the bigones.” And Gavroche, raising his head and lowering his voice, added, ashe indicated the man of the Rue des Billettes: “Do you see that bigfellow there?”

“Well?”

“He’s a police spy.”

“Are you sure of it?”

“It isn’t two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the PortRoyal, where I was taking the air, by my ear.”

Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a verylow tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be athand. The man left the room, and returned almost immediately,accompanied by three others. The four men, four porters with broadshoulders, went and placed themselves without doing anything to attracthis attention, behind the table on which the man of the Rue desBillettes was leaning with his elbows. They were evidently ready tohurl themselves upon him.
Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him:—
“Who are you?”

At this abrupt query, the man started. He plunged his gaze deep intoEnjolras’ clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter’s meaning. Hesmiled with a smile than which nothing more disdainful, more energetic,and more resolute could be seen in the world, and replied with haughtygravity:—
“I see what it is. Well, yes!”

“You are a police spy?”

“I am an agent of the authorities.”

“And your name?”

“Javert.”

Enjolras made a sign to the four men. In the twinkling of an eye,before Javert had time to turn round, he was collared, thrown down,pinioned and searched.
They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces ofglass, and bearing on one side the arms of France, engraved, and withthis motto: _Supervision and vigilance_, and on the other this note:“JAVERT, inspector of police, aged fifty-two,” and the signature of thePrefect of Police of that day, M. Gisquet.
Besides this, he had his watch and his purse, which contained severalgold pieces. They left him his purse and his watch. Under the watch, atthe bottom of his fob, they felt and seized a paper in an envelope,which Enjolras unfolded, and on which he read these five lines, writtenin the very hand of the Prefect of Police:—
“As soon as his political mission is accomplished, Inspector Javertwill make sure, by special supervision, whether it is true that themalefactors have instituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine,near the Jena bridge.”

The search ended, they lifted Javert to his feet, bound his arms behindhis back, and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of theroom which had formerly given the wine-shop its name.
Gavroche, who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approvedof everything with a silent toss of his head, stepped up to Javert andsaid to him:—
“It’s the mouse who has caught the cat.”

All this was so rapidly executed, that it was all over when those aboutthe wine-shop noticed it.
Javert had not uttered a single cry.
At the sight of Javert bound to the post, Courfeyrac, Bossuet, Joly,Combeferre, and the men scattered over the two barricades came runningup.
Javert, with his back to the post, and so surrounded with ropes that hecould not make a movement, raised his head with the intrepid serenityof the man who has never lied.
“He is a police spy,” said Enjolras.
And turning to Javert: “You will be shot ten minutes before thebarricade is taken.”

Javert replied in his most imperious tone:—
“Why not at once?”

“We are saving our powder.”

“Then finish the business with a blow from a knife.”

“Spy,” said the handsome Enjolras, “we are judges and not assassins.”

Then he called Gavroche:—
“Here you! go about your business! Do what I told you!”

“I’m going!” cried Gavroche.
And halting as he was on the point of setting out:—
“By the way, you will give me his gun!” and he added: “I leave you themusician, but I want the clarinet.”

The gamin made the military salute and passed gayly through the openingin the large barricade.



CHAPTER VIII—MANY INTERROGATION POINTS WITH REGARD TO A CERTAIN LECABUC WHOSE NAME MAY NOT HAVE BEEN LE CABUC

The tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete, thereader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in arevolutionary birth, which contain convulsion mingled with effort, intheir exact and real relief, were we to omit, in the sketch hereoutlined, an incident full of epic and savage horror which occurredalmost immediately after Gavroche’s departure.
Mobs, as the reader knows, are like a snowball, and collect as theyroll along, a throng of tumultuous men. These men do not ask each otherwhence they come. Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led byEnjolras, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac, there had been a person wearingthe jacket of a street porter, which was very threadbare on theshoulders, who gesticulated and vociferated, and who had the look of adrunken savage. This man, whose name or nickname was Le Cabuc, and whowas, moreover, an utter stranger to those who pretended to know him,was very drunk, or assumed the appearance of being so, and had seatedhimself with several others at a table which they had dragged outsideof the wine-shop. This Cabuc, while making those who vied with himdrunk seemed to be examining with a thoughtful air the large house atthe extremity of the barricade, whose five stories commanded the wholestreet and faced the Rue Saint-Denis. All at once he exclaimed:—
“Do you know, comrades, it is from that house yonder that we must fire.When we are at the windows, the deuce is in it if any one can advanceinto the street!”

“Yes, but the house is closed,” said one of the drinkers.
“Let us knock!”

“They will not open.”

“Let us break in the door!”

Le Cabuc runs to the door, which had a very massive knocker, andknocks. The door opens not. He strikes a second blow. No one answers. Athird stroke. The same silence.
“Is there any one here?” shouts Cabuc.
Nothing stirs.
Then he seizes a gun and begins to batter the door with the butt end.
It was an ancient alley door, low, vaulted, narrow, solid, entirely ofoak, lined on the inside with a sheet of iron and iron stays, a genuineprison postern. The blows from the butt end of the gun made the housetremble, but did not shake the door.
Nevertheless, it is probable that the inhabitants were disturbed, for atiny, square window was finally seen to open on the third story, and atthis aperture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-hairedold man, who was the porter, and who held a candle.
The man who was knocking paused.
“Gentlemen,” said the porter, “what do you want?”

“Open!” said Cabuc.
“That cannot be, gentlemen.”

“Open, nevertheless.”

“Impossible, gentlemen.”

Le Cabuc took his gun and aimed at the porter; but as he was below, andas it was very dark, the porter did not see him.
“Will you open, yes or no?”

“No, gentlemen.”

“Do you say no?”

“I say no, my goo—”

The porter did not finish. The shot was fired; the ball entered underhis chin and came out at the nape of his neck, after traversing thejugular vein.
The old man fell back without a sigh. The candle fell and wasextinguished, and nothing more was to be seen except a motionless headlying on the sill of the small window, and a little whitish smoke whichfloated off towards the roof.
“There!” said Le Cabuc, dropping the butt end of his gun to thepavement.
He had hardly uttered this word, when he felt a hand laid on hisshoulder with the weight of an eagle’s talon, and he heard a voicesaying to him:—
“On your knees.”

The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras’ cold, whiteface.
Enjolras held a pistol in his hand.
He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge.
He had seized Cabuc’s collar, blouse, shirt, and suspender with hisleft hand.
“On your knees!” he repeated.
And, with an imperious motion, the frail young man of twenty years bentthe thickset and sturdy porter like a reed, and brought him to hisknees in the mire.
Le Cabuc attempted to resist, but he seemed to have been seized by asuperhuman hand.
Enjolras, pale, with bare neck and dishevelled hair, and his woman’sface, had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis. Hisdilated nostrils, his downcast eyes, gave to his implacable Greekprofile that expression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which,as the ancient world viewed the matter, befit Justice.
The whole barricade hastened up, then all ranged themselves in a circleat a distance, feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in thepresence of the thing which they were about to behold.
Le Cabuc, vanquished, no longer tried to struggle, and trembled inevery limb.
Enjolras released him and drew out his watch.
“Collect yourself,” said he. “Think or pray. You have one minute.”

“Mercy!” murmured the murderer; then he dropped his head and stammereda few inarticulate oaths.
Enjolras never took his eyes off of him: he allowed a minute to pass,then he replaced his watch in his fob. That done, he grasped Le Cabucby the hair, as the latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees andshrieked, and placed the muzzle of the pistol to his ear. Many of thoseintrepid men, who had so tranquilly entered upon the most terrible ofadventures, turned aside their heads.
An explosion was heard, the assassin fell to the pavement facedownwards.
Enjolras straightened himself up, and cast a convinced and severeglance around him. Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said:—
“Throw that outside.”

Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch, which was stillagitated by the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled,and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondétour.
Enjolras was thoughtful. It is impossible to say what grandiose shadowsslowly spread over his redoubtable serenity. All at once he raised hisvoice.
A silence fell upon them.
“Citizens,” said Enjolras, “what that man did is frightful, what I havedone is horrible. He killed, therefore I killed him. I had to do it,because insurrection must have its discipline. Assassination is evenmore of a crime here than elsewhere; we are under the eyes of theRevolution, we are the priests of the Republic, we are the victims ofduty, and must not be possible to slander our combat. I have,therefore, tried that man, and condemned him to death. As for myself,constrained as I am to do what I have done, and yet abhorring it, Ihave judged myself also, and you shall soon see to what I havecondemned myself.”

Those who listened to him shuddered.
“We will share thy fate,” cried Combeferre.
“So be it,” replied Enjolras. “One word more. In executing this man, Ihave obeyed necessity; but necessity is a monster of the old world,necessity’s name is Fatality. Now, the law of progress is, thatmonsters shall disappear before the angels, and that Fatality shallvanish before Fraternity. It is a bad moment to pronounce the wordlove. No matter, I do pronounce it. And I glorify it. Love, the futureis thine. Death, I make use of thee, but I hate thee. Citizens, in thefuture there will be neither darkness nor thunderbolts; neitherferocious ignorance, nor bloody retaliation. As there will be no moreSatan, there will be no more Michael. In the future no one will killany one else, the earth will beam with radiance, the human race willlove. The day will come, citizens, when all will be concord, harmony,light, joy and life; it will come, and it is in order that it may comethat we are about to die.”

Enjolras ceased. His virgin lips closed; and he remained for some timestanding on the spot where he had shed blood, in marble immobility. Hisstaring eye caused those about him to speak in low tones.
Jean Prouvaire and Combeferre pressed each other’s hands silently, and,leaning against each other in an angle of the barricade, they watchedwith an admiration in which there was some compassion, that grave youngman, executioner and priest, composed of light, like crystal, and alsoof rock.
Let us say at once that later on, after the action, when the bodieswere taken to the morgue and searched, a police agent’s card was foundon Le Cabuc. The author of this book had in his hands, in 1848, thespecial report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832.
We will add, that if we are to believe a tradition of the police, whichis strange but probably well founded, Le Cabuc was Claquesous. The factis, that dating from the death of Le Cabuc, there was no longer anyquestion of Claquesous. Claquesous had nowhere left any trace of hisdisappearance; he would seem to have amalgamated himself with theinvisible. His life had been all shadows, his end was night.
The whole insurgent group was still under the influence of the emotionof that tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quicklyterminated, when Courfeyrac again beheld on the barricade, the smallyoung man who had inquired of him that morning for Marius.
This lad, who had a bold and reckless air, had come by night to jointhe insurgents.



BOOK THIRTEENTH—MARIUS ENTERS THE SHADOW



CHAPTER I—FROM THE RUE PLUMET TO THE QUARTIER SAINT-DENIS

The voice which had summoned Marius through the twilight to thebarricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, had produced on him the effectof the voice of destiny. He wished to die; the opportunity presenteditself; he knocked at the door of the tomb, a hand in the darknessoffered him the key. These melancholy openings which take place in thegloom before despair, are tempting. Marius thrust aside the bar whichhad so often allowed him to pass, emerged from the garden, and said: “Iwill go.”

Mad with grief, no longer conscious of anything fixed or solid in hisbrain, incapable of accepting anything thenceforth of fate after thosetwo months passed in the intoxication of youth and love, overwhelmed atonce by all the reveries of despair, he had but one desire remaining,to make a speedy end of all.
He set out at rapid pace. He found himself most opportunely armed, ashe had Javert’s pistols with him.
The young man of whom he thought that he had caught a glimpse, hadvanished from his sight in the street.
Marius, who had emerged from the Rue Plumet by the boulevard, traversedthe Esplanade and the bridge of the Invalides, the Champs-Élysées, thePlace Louis XV., and reached the Rue de Rivoli. The shops were openthere, the gas was burning under the arcades, women were making theirpurchases in the stalls, people were eating ices in the Café Laiter,and nibbling small cakes at the English pastry-cook’s shop. Only a fewposting-chaises were setting out at a gallop from the Hôtel des Princesand the Hôtel Meurice.
Marius entered the Rue Saint-Honoré through the Passage Delorme. Therethe shops were closed, the merchants were chatting in front of theirhalf-open doors, people were walking about, the street lanterns werelighted, beginning with the first floor, all the windows were lightedas usual. There was cavalry on the Place du Palais-Royal.
Marius followed the Rue Saint-Honoré. In proportion as he left thePalais-Royal behind him, there were fewer lighted windows, the shopswere fast shut, no one was chatting on the thresholds, the street grewsombre, and, at the same time, the crowd increased in density. For thepassers-by now amounted to a crowd. No one could be seen to speak inthis throng, and yet there arose from it a dull, deep murmur.
Near the fountain of the Arbre-Sec, there were “assemblages”,motionless and gloomy groups which were to those who went and came asstones in the midst of running water.
At the entrance to the Rue des Prouvaires, the crowd no longer walked.It formed a resisting, massive, solid, compact, almost impenetrableblock of people who were huddled together, and conversing in low tones.There were hardly any black coats or round hats now, but smock frocks,blouses, caps, and bristling and cadaverous heads. This multitudeundulated confusedly in the nocturnal gloom. Its whisperings had thehoarse accent of a vibration. Although not one of them was walking, adull trampling was audible in the mire. Beyond this dense portion ofthe throng, in the Rue du Roule, in the Rue des Prouvaires, and in theextension of the Rue Saint-Honoré, there was no longer a single windowin which a candle was burning. Only the solitary and diminishing rowsof lanterns could be seen vanishing into the street in the distance.The lanterns of that date resembled large red stars, hanging to ropes,and shed upon the pavement a shadow which had the form of a hugespider. These streets were not deserted. There could be descried pilesof guns, moving bayonets, and troops bivouacking. No curious observerpassed that limit. There circulation ceased. There the rabble ended andthe army began.
Marius willed with the will of a man who hopes no more. He had beensummoned, he must go. He found a means to traverse the throng and topass the bivouac of the troops, he shunned the patrols, he avoided thesentinels. He made a circuit, reached the Rue de Béthisy, and directedhis course towards the Halles. At the corner of the Rue desBourdonnais, there were no longer any lanterns.
After having passed the zone of the crowd, he had passed the limits ofthe troops; he found himself in something startling. There was nolonger a passer-by, no longer a soldier, no longer a light, there wasno one; solitude, silence, night, I know not what chill which seizedhold upon one. Entering a street was like entering a cellar.
He continued to advance.
He took a few steps. Some one passed close to him at a run. Was it aman? Or a woman? Were there many of them? he could not have told. Ithad passed and vanished.
Proceeding from circuit to circuit, he reached a lane which he judgedto be the Rue de la Poterie; near the middle of this street, he came incontact with an obstacle. He extended his hands. It was an overturnedwagon; his foot recognized pools of water, gullies, and paving-stonesscattered and piled up. A barricade had been begun there and abandoned.He climbed over the stones and found himself on the other side of thebarrier. He walked very near the street-posts, and guided himself alongthe walls of the houses. A little beyond the barricade, it seemed tohim that he could make out something white in front of him. Heapproached, it took on a form. It was two white horses; the horses ofthe omnibus harnessed by Bossuet in the morning, who had been strayingat random all day from street to street, and had finally halted there,with the weary patience of brutes who no more understand the actions ofmen, than man understands the actions of Providence.
Marius left the horses behind him. As he was approaching a street whichseemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social, a shot coming no oneknows whence, and traversing the darkness at random, whistled close byhim, and the bullet pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended above hishead over a hairdresser’s shop. This pierced shaving-dish was still tobe seen in 1848, in the Rue du Contrat-Social, at the corner of thepillars of the market.
This shot still betokened life. From that instant forth he encounterednothing more.
The whole of this itinerary resembled a descent of black steps.
Nevertheless, Marius pressed forward.



CHAPTER II—AN OWL’S VIEW OF PARIS

A being who could have hovered over Paris that night with the wing ofthe bat or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle.
All that old quarter of the Halles, which is like a city within a city,through which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin, where athousand lanes cross, and of which the insurgents had made theirredoubt and their stronghold, would have appeared to him like a darkand enormous cavity hollowed out in the centre of Paris. There theglance fell into an abyss. Thanks to the broken lanterns, thanks to theclosed windows, there all radiance, all life, all sound, all movementceased. The invisible police of the insurrection were on the watcheverywhere, and maintained order, that is to say, night. The necessarytactics of insurrection are to drown small numbers in a vast obscurity,to multiply every combatant by the possibilities which that obscuritycontains. At dusk, every window where a candle was burning received ashot. The light was extinguished, sometimes the inhabitant was killed.Hence nothing was stirring. There was nothing but fright, mourning,stupor in the houses; and in the streets, a sort of sacred horror. Noteven the long rows of windows and stores, the indentations of thechimneys, and the roofs, and the vague reflections which are cast backby the wet and muddy pavements, were visible. An eye cast upward atthat mass of shadows might, perhaps, have caught a glimpse here andthere, at intervals, of indistinct gleams which brought out broken andeccentric lines, and profiles of singular buildings, something like thelights which go and come in ruins; it was at such points that thebarricades were situated. The rest was a lake of obscurity, foggy,heavy, and funereal, above which, in motionless and melancholyoutlines, rose the tower of Saint-Jacques, the church of Saint-Merry,and two or three more of those grand edifices of which man makes giantsand the night makes phantoms.
All around this deserted and disquieting labyrinth, in the quarterswhere the Parisian circulation had not been annihilated, and where afew street lanterns still burned, the aerial observer might havedistinguished the metallic gleam of swords and bayonets, the dullrumble of artillery, and the swarming of silent battalions whose rankswere swelling from minute to minute; a formidable girdle which wasslowly drawing in and around the insurrection.
The invested quarter was no longer anything more than a monstrouscavern; everything there appeared to be asleep or motionless, and, aswe have just seen, any street which one might come to offered nothingbut darkness.
A wild darkness, full of traps, full of unseen and formidable shocks,into which it was alarming to penetrate, and in which it was terribleto remain, where those who entered shivered before those whom theyawaited, where those who waited shuddered before those who were coming.Invisible combatants were entrenched at every corner of the street;snares of the sepulchre concealed in the density of night. All wasover. No more light was to be hoped for, henceforth, except thelightning of guns, no further encounter except the abrupt and rapidapparition of death. Where? How? When? No one knew, but it was certainand inevitable. In this place which had been marked out for thestruggle, the Government and the insurrection, the National Guard, andpopular societies, the bourgeois and the uprising, groping their way,were about to come into contact. The necessity was the same for both.The only possible issue thenceforth was to emerge thence killed orconquerors. A situation so extreme, an obscurity so powerful, that themost timid felt themselves seized with resolution, and the most daringwith terror.
Moreover, on both sides, the fury, the rage, and the determination wereequal. For the one party, to advance meant death, and no one dreamed ofretreating; for the other, to remain meant death, and no one dreamed offlight.
It was indispensable that all should be ended on the following day,that triumph should rest either here or there, that the insurrectionshould prove itself a revolution or a skirmish. The Governmentunderstood this as well as the parties; the most insignificantbourgeois felt it. Hence a thought of anguish which mingled with theimpenetrable gloom of this quarter where all was at the point of beingdecided; hence a redoubled anxiety around that silence whence acatastrophe was on the point of emerging. Here only one sound wasaudible, a sound as heart-rending as the death rattle, as menacing as amalediction, the tocsin of Saint-Merry. Nothing could be moreblood-curdling than the clamor of that wild and desperate bell, wailingamid the shadows.
As it often happens, nature seemed to have fallen into accord with whatmen were about to do. Nothing disturbed the harmony of the wholeeffect. The stars had disappeared, heavy clouds filled the horizon withtheir melancholy folds. A black sky rested on these dead streets, asthough an immense winding-sheet were being outspread over this immensetomb.
While a battle that was still wholly political was in preparation inthe same locality which had already witnessed so many revolutionaryevents, while youth, the secret associations, the schools, in the nameof principles, and the middle classes, in the name of interests, wereapproaching preparatory to dashing themselves together, clasping andthrowing each other, while each one hastened and invited the last anddecisive hour of the crisis, far away and quite outside of this fatalquarter, in the most profound depths of the unfathomable cavities ofthat wretched old Paris which disappears under the splendor of happyand opulent Paris, the sombre voice of the people could be heard givingutterance to a dull roar.
A fearful and sacred voice which is composed of the roar of the bruteand of the word of God, which terrifies the weak and which warns thewise, which comes both from below like the voice of the lion, and fromon high like the voice of the thunder.



CHAPTER III—THE EXTREME EDGE

Marius had reached the Halles.
There everything was still calmer, more obscure and more motionlessthan in the neighboring streets. One would have said that the glacialpeace of the sepulchre had sprung forth from the earth and had spreadover the heavens.
Nevertheless, a red glow brought out against this black background thelofty roofs of the houses which barred the Rue de la Chanvrerie on theSaint-Eustache side. It was the reflection of the torch which wasburning in the Corinthe barricade. Marius directed his steps towardsthat red light. It had drawn him to the Marché-aux-Poirées, and hecaught a glimpse of the dark mouth of the Rue des Prêcheurs. He enteredit. The insurgents’ sentinel, who was guarding the other end, did notsee him. He felt that he was very close to that which he had come insearch of, and he walked on tiptoe. In this manner he reached the elbowof that short section of the Rue Mondétour which was, as the readerwill remember, the only communication which Enjolras had preserved withthe outside world. At the corner of the last house, on his left, hethrust his head forward, and looked into the fragment of the RueMondétour.
A little beyond the angle of the lane and the Rue de la Chanvreriewhich cast a broad curtain of shadow, in which he was himself engulfed,he perceived some light on the pavement, a bit of the wine-shop, andbeyond, a flickering lamp within a sort of shapeless wall, and mencrouching down with guns on their knees. All this was ten fathomsdistant from him. It was the interior of the barricade.
The houses which bordered the lane on the right concealed the rest ofthe wine-shop, the large barricade, and the flag from him.
Marius had but a step more to take.
Then the unhappy young man seated himself on a post, folded his arms,and fell to thinking about his father.
He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy, who had been so proud asoldier, who had guarded the frontier of France under the Republic, andhad touched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon, who had beheld Genoa,Alexandria, Milan, Turin, Madrid, Vienna, Dresden, Berlin, Moscow, whohad left on all the victorious battle-fields of Europe drops of thatsame blood, which he, Marius, had in his veins, who had grown graybefore his time in discipline and command, who had lived with hissword-belt buckled, his epaulets falling on his breast, his cockadeblackened with powder, his brow furrowed with his helmet, in barracks,in camp, in the bivouac, in ambulances, and who, at the expiration oftwenty years, had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek, asmiling countenance, tranquil, admirable, pure as a child, having doneeverything for France and nothing against her.
He said to himself that his day had also come now, that his hour hadstruck, that following his father, he too was about to show himselfbrave, intrepid, bold, to run to meet the bullets, to offer his breastto bayonets, to shed his blood, to seek the enemy, to seek death, thathe was about to wage war in his turn and descend to the field ofbattle, and that the field of battle upon which he was to descend wasthe street, and that the war in which he was about to engage was civilwar!
He beheld civil war laid open like a gulf before him, and into this hewas about to fall. Then he shuddered.
He thought of his father’s sword, which his grandfather had sold to asecond-hand dealer, and which he had so mournfully regretted. He saidto himself that that chaste and valiant sword had done well to escapefrom him, and to depart in wrath into the gloom; that if it had thusfled, it was because it was intelligent and because it had foreseen thefuture; that it had had a presentiment of this rebellion, the war ofthe gutters, the war of the pavements, fusillades throughcellar-windows, blows given and received in the rear; it was because,coming from Marengo and Friedland, it did not wish to go to the Rue dela Chanvrerie; it was because, after what it had done with the father,it did not wish to do this for the son! He told himself that if thatsword were there, if after taking possession of it at his father’spillow, he had dared to take it and carry it off for this combat ofdarkness between Frenchmen in the streets, it would assuredly havescorched his hands and burst out aflame before his eyes, like the swordof the angel! He told himself that it was fortunate that it was notthere and that it had disappeared, that that was well, that that wasjust, that his grandfather had been the true guardian of his father’sglory, and that it was far better that the colonel’s sword should besold at auction, sold to the old-clothes man, thrown among the oldjunk, than that it should, to-day, wound the side of his country.
And then he fell to weeping bitterly.
This was horrible. But what was he to do? Live without Cosette he couldnot. Since she was gone, he must needs die. Had he not given her hisword of honor that he would die? She had gone knowing that; this meantthat it pleased her that Marius should die. And then, it was clear thatshe no longer loved him, since she had departed thus without warning,without a word, without a letter, although she knew his address! Whatwas the good of living, and why should he live now? And then, what!should he retreat after going so far? should he flee from danger afterhaving approached it? should he slip away after having come and peepedinto the barricade? slip away, all in a tremble, saying: “After all, Ihave had enough of it as it is. I have seen it, that suffices, this iscivil war, and I shall take my leave!” Should he abandon his friendswho were expecting him? Who were in need of him possibly! who were amere handful against an army! Should he be untrue at once to his love,to country, to his word? Should he give to his cowardice the pretext ofpatriotism? But this was impossible, and if the phantom of his fatherwas there in the gloom, and beheld him retreating, he would beat him onthe loins with the flat of his sword, and shout to him: “March on, youpoltroon!”

Thus a prey to the conflicting movements of his thoughts, he droppedhis head.
All at once he raised it. A sort of splendid rectification had justbeen effected in his mind. There is a widening of the sphere of thoughtwhich is peculiar to the vicinity of the grave; it makes one seeclearly to be near death. The vision of the action into which he feltthat he was, perhaps, on the point of entering, appeared to him no moreas lamentable, but as superb. The war of the street was suddenlytransfigured by some unfathomable inward working of his soul, beforethe eye of his thought. All the tumultuous interrogation points ofreverie recurred to him in throngs, but without troubling him. He leftnone of them unanswered.
Let us see, why should his father be indignant? Are there not caseswhere insurrection rises to the dignity of duty? What was there thatwas degrading for the son of Colonel Pontmercy in the combat which wasabout to begin? It is no longer Montmirail nor Champaubert; it issomething quite different. The question is no longer one of sacredterritory,—but of a holy idea. The country wails, that may be, buthumanity applauds. But is it true that the country does wail? Francebleeds, but liberty smiles; and in the presence of liberty’s smile,France forgets her wound. And then if we look at things from a stillmore lofty point of view, why do we speak of civil war?
Civil war—what does that mean? Is there a foreign war? Is not all warbetween men, war between brothers? War is qualified only by its object.There is no such thing as foreign or civil war; there is only just andunjust war. Until that day when the grand human agreement is concluded,war, that at least which is the effort of the future, which ishastening on against the past, which is lagging in the rear, may benecessary. What have we to reproach that war with? War does not becomea disgrace, the sword does not become a disgrace, except when it isused for assassinating the right, progress, reason, civilization,truth. Then war, whether foreign or civil, is iniquitous; it is calledcrime. Outside the pale of that holy thing, justice, by what right doesone form of man despise another? By what right should the sword ofWashington disown the pike of Camille Desmoulins? Leonidas against thestranger, Timoleon against the tyrant, which is the greater? the one isthe defender, the other the liberator. Shall we brand every appeal toarms within a city’s limits without taking the object into aconsideration? Then note the infamy of Brutus, Marcel, Arnould vonBlankenheim, Coligny, Hedgerow war? War of the streets? Why not? Thatwas the war of Ambiorix, of Artevelde, of Marnix, of Pelagius. ButAmbiorix fought against Rome, Artevelde against France, Marnix againstSpain, Pelagius against the Moors; all against the foreigner. Well, themonarchy is a foreigner; oppression is a stranger; the right divine isa stranger. Despotism violates the moral frontier, an invasion violatesthe geographical frontier. Driving out the tyrant or driving out theEnglish, in both cases, regaining possession of one’s own territory.There comes an hour when protestation no longer suffices; afterphilosophy, action is required; live force finishes what the idea hassketched out; Prometheus chained begins, Arostogeiton ends; theencyclopedia enlightens souls, the 10th of August electrifies them.After Æschylus, Thrasybulus; after Diderot, Danton. Multitudes have atendency to accept the master. Their mass bears witness to apathy. Acrowd is easily led as a whole to obedience. Men must be stirred up,pushed on, treated roughly by the very benefit of their deliverance,their eyes must be wounded by the true, light must be hurled at them interrible handfuls. They must be a little thunderstruck themselves attheir own well-being; this dazzling awakens them. Hence the necessityof tocsins and wars. Great combatants must rise, must enlighten nationswith audacity, and shake up that sad humanity which is covered withgloom by the right divine, Cæsarian glory, force, fanaticism,irresponsible power, and absolute majesty; a rabble stupidly occupiedin the contemplation, in their twilight splendor, of these sombretriumphs of the night. Down with the tyrant! Of whom are you speaking?Do you call Louis Philippe the tyrant? No; no more than Louis XVI. Bothof them are what history is in the habit of calling good kings; butprinciples are not to be parcelled out, the logic of the true isrectilinear, the peculiarity of truth is that it lacks complaisance; noconcessions, then; all encroachments on man should be repressed. Thereis a divine right in Louis XVI., there is _because a Bourbon_ in LouisPhilippe; both represent in a certain measure the confiscation ofright, and, in order to clear away universal insurrection, they must becombated; it must be done, France being always the one to begin. Whenthe master falls in France, he falls everywhere. In short, what causeis more just, and consequently, what war is greater, than that whichre-establishes social truth, restores her throne to liberty, restoresthe people to the people, restores sovereignty to man, replaces thepurple on the head of France, restores equity and reason in theirplenitude, suppresses every germ of antagonism by restoring each one tohimself, annihilates the obstacle which royalty presents to the wholeimmense universal concord, and places the human race once more on alevel with the right? These wars build up peace. An enormous fortressof prejudices, privileges, superstitions, lies, exactions, abuses,violences, iniquities, and darkness still stands erect in this world,with its towers of hatred. It must be cast down. This monstrous massmust be made to crumble. To conquer at Austerlitz is grand; to take theBastille is immense.
There is no one who has not noticed it in his own case—the soul,—andtherein lies the marvel of its unity complicated with ubiquity, has astrange aptitude for reasoning almost coldly in the most violentextremities, and it often happens that heartbroken passion and profounddespair in the very agony of their blackest monologues, treat subjectsand discuss theses. Logic is mingled with convulsion, and the thread ofthe syllogism floats, without breaking, in the mournful storm ofthought. This was the situation of Marius’ mind.
As he meditated thus, dejected but resolute, hesitating in everydirection, and, in short, shuddering at what he was about to do, hisglance strayed to the interior of the barricade. The insurgents werehere conversing in a low voice, without moving, and there wasperceptible that quasi-silence which marks the last stage ofexpectation. Overhead, at the small window in the third story Mariusdescried a sort of spectator who appeared to him to be singularlyattentive. This was the porter who had been killed by Le Cabuc. Below,by the lights of the torch, which was thrust between the paving-stones,this head could be vaguely distinguished. Nothing could be stranger, inthat sombre and uncertain gleam, than that livid, motionless,astonished face, with its bristling hair, its eyes fixed and staring,and its yawning mouth, bent over the street in an attitude ofcuriosity. One would have said that the man who was dead was surveyingthose who were about to die. A long trail of blood which had flowedfrom that head, descended in reddish threads from the window to theheight of the first floor, where it stopped.



BOOK FOURTEENTH—THE GRANDEURS OF DESPAIR


  Enlarge
The Grandeurs of Despair 4b-14-1-despair



CHAPTER I—THE FLAG: ACT FIRST

As yet, nothing had come. Ten o’clock had sounded from Saint-Merry.Enjolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves, carbines inhand, near the outlet of the grand barricade. They no longer addressedeach other, they listened, seeking to catch even the faintest and mostdistant sound of marching.
Suddenly, in the midst of the dismal calm, a clear, gay, young voice,which seemed to come from the Rue Saint-Denis, rose and began to singdistinctly, to the old popular air of “By the Light of the Moon,” thisbit of poetry, terminated by a cry like the crow of a cock:—
Mon nez est en larmes,Mon ami Bugeaud,Prête moi tes gendarmesPour leur dire un mot.
En capote bleue,La poule au shako,Voici la banlieue!Co-cocorico!54

They pressed each other’s hands.
“That is Gavroche,” said Enjolras.
“He is warning us,” said Combeferre.
A hasty rush troubled the deserted street; they beheld a being moreagile than a clown climb over the omnibus, and Gavroche bounded intothe barricade, all breathless, saying:—
“My gun! Here they are!”

An electric quiver shot through the whole barricade, and the sound ofhands seeking their guns became audible.
“Would you like my carbine?” said Enjolras to the lad.
“I want a big gun,” replied Gavroche.
And he seized Javert’s gun.
Two sentinels had fallen back, and had come in almost at the samemoment as Gavroche. They were the sentinels from the end of the street,and the vidette of the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie. The vidette of theLane des Prêcheurs had remained at his post, which indicated thatnothing was approaching from the direction of the bridges and Halles.
The Rue de la Chanvrerie, of which a few paving-stones alone were dimlyvisible in the reflection of the light projected on the flag, offeredto the insurgents the aspect of a vast black door vaguely opened into asmoke.
Each man had taken up his position for the conflict.
Forty-three insurgents, among whom were Enjolras, Combeferre,Courfeyrac, Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and Gavroche, were kneeling insidethe large barricade, with their heads on a level with the crest of thebarrier, the barrels of their guns and carbines aimed on the stones asthough at loop-holes, attentive, mute, ready to fire. Six, commanded byFeuilly, had installed themselves, with their guns levelled at theirshoulders, at the windows of the two stories of Corinthe.
Several minutes passed thus, then a sound of footsteps, measured,heavy, and numerous, became distinctly audible in the direction ofSaint-Leu. This sound, faint at first, then precise, then heavy andsonorous, approached slowly, without halt, without intermission, with atranquil and terrible continuity. Nothing was to be heard but this. Itwas that combined silence and sound, of the statue of the commander,but this stony step had something indescribably enormous and multipleabout it which awakened the idea of a throng, and, at the same time,the idea of a spectre. One thought one heard the terrible statue Legionmarching onward. This tread drew near; it drew still nearer, andstopped. It seemed as though the breathing of many men could be heardat the end of the street. Nothing was to be seen, however, but at thebottom of that dense obscurity there could be distinguished a multitudeof metallic threads, as fine as needles and almost imperceptible, whichmoved about like those indescribable phosphoric networks which one seesbeneath one’s closed eyelids, in the first mists of slumber at themoment when one is dropping off to sleep. These were bayonets andgun-barrels confusedly illuminated by the distant reflection of thetorch.
A pause ensued, as though both sides were waiting. All at once, fromthe depths of this darkness, a voice, which was all the more sinister,since no one was visible, and which appeared to be the gloom itselfspeaking, shouted:—
“Who goes there?”

At the same time, the click of guns, as they were lowered intoposition, was heard.
Enjolras replied in a haughty and vibrating tone:—
“The French Revolution!”

“Fire!” shouted the voice.
A flash empurpled all the façades in the street as though the door of afurnace had been flung open, and hastily closed again.
A fearful detonation burst forth on the barricade. The red flag fell.The discharge had been so violent and so dense that it had cut thestaff, that is to say, the very tip of the omnibus pole.
Bullets which had rebounded from the cornices of the houses penetratedthe barricade and wounded several men.
The impression produced by this first discharge was freezing. Theattack had been rough, and of a nature to inspire reflection in theboldest. It was evident that they had to deal with an entire regimentat the very least.
“Comrades!” shouted Courfeyrac, “let us not waste our powder. Let uswait until they are in the street before replying.”

“And, above all,” said Enjolras, “let us raise the flag again.”

He picked up the flag, which had fallen precisely at his feet.
Outside, the clatter of the ramrods in the guns could be heard; thetroops were re-loading their arms.
Enjolras went on:—
“Who is there here with a bold heart? Who will plant the flag on thebarricade again?”

Not a man responded. To mount on the barricade at the very moment when,without any doubt, it was again the object of their aim, was simplydeath. The bravest hesitated to pronounce his own condemnation.Enjolras himself felt a thrill. He repeated:—
“Does no one volunteer?”




CHAPTER II—THE FLAG: ACT SECOND

Since they had arrived at Corinthe, and had begun the construction ofthe barricade, no attention had been paid to Father Mabeuf. M. Mabeufhad not quitted the mob, however; he had entered the ground floor ofthe wine-shop and had seated himself behind the counter. There he had,so to speak, retreated into himself. He no longer seemed to look or tothink. Courfeyrac and others had accosted him two or three times,warning him of his peril, beseeching him to withdraw, but he did nothear them. When they were not speaking to him, his mouth moved asthough he were replying to some one, and as soon as he was addressed,his lips became motionless and his eyes no longer had the appearance ofbeing alive.
Several hours before the barricade was attacked, he had assumed anattitude which he did not afterwards abandon, with both fists plantedon his knees and his head thrust forward as though he were gazing overa precipice. Nothing had been able to move him from this attitude; itdid not seem as though his mind were in the barricade. When each hadgone to take up his position for the combat, there remained in thetap-room where Javert was bound to the post, only a single insurgentwith a naked sword, watching over Javert, and himself, Mabeuf. At themoment of the attack, at the detonation, the physical shock had reachedhim and had, as it were, awakened him; he started up abruptly, crossedthe room, and at the instant when Enjolras repeated his appeal: “Doesno one volunteer?” the old man was seen to make his appearance on thethreshold of the wine-shop. His presence produced a sort of commotionin the different groups. A shout went up:—
“It is the voter! It is the member of the Convention! It is therepresentative of the people!”

It is probable that he did not hear them.
He strode straight up to Enjolras, the insurgents withdrawing beforehim with a religious fear; he tore the flag from Enjolras, who recoiledin amazement and then, since no one dared to stop or to assist him,this old man of eighty, with shaking head but firm foot, began slowlyto ascend the staircase of paving-stones arranged in the barricade.This was so melancholy and so grand that all around him cried: “Offwith your hats!” At every step that he mounted, it was a frightfulspectacle; his white locks, his decrepit face, his lofty, bald, andwrinkled brow, his amazed and open mouth, his aged arm upholding thered banner, rose through the gloom and were enlarged in the bloodylight of the torch, and the bystanders thought that they beheld thespectre of ’93 emerging from the earth, with the flag of terror in hishand.
When he had reached the last step, when this trembling and terriblephantom, erect on that pile of rubbish in the presence of twelvehundred invisible guns, drew himself up in the face of death and asthough he were more powerful than it, the whole barricade assumed amidthe darkness, a supernatural and colossal form.
There ensued one of those silences which occur only in the presence ofprodigies. In the midst of this silence, the old man waved the red flagand shouted:—
“Long live the Revolution! Long live the Republic! Fraternity!Equality! and Death!”

Those in the barricade heard a low and rapid whisper, like the murmurof a priest who is despatching a prayer in haste. It was probably thecommissary of police who was making the legal summons at the other endof the street.
Then the same piercing voice which had shouted: “Who goes there?”shouted:—
“Retire!”

M. Mabeuf, pale, haggard, his eyes lighted up with the mournful flameof aberration, raised the flag above his head and repeated:—
“Long live the Republic!”

“Fire!” said the voice.
A second discharge, similar to the first, rained down upon thebarricade.
The old man fell on his knees, then rose again, dropped the flag andfell backwards on the pavement, like a log, at full length, withoutstretched arms.
Rivulets of blood flowed beneath him. His aged head, pale and sad,seemed to be gazing at the sky.
One of those emotions which are superior to man, which make him forgeteven to defend himself, seized upon the insurgents, and they approachedthe body with respectful awe.
“What men these regicides were!” said Enjolras.
Courfeyrac bent down to Enjolras’ ear:—
“This is for yourself alone, I do not wish to dampen the enthusiasm.But this man was anything rather than a regicide. I knew him. His namewas Father Mabeuf. I do not know what was the matter with him to-day.But he was a brave blockhead. Just look at his head.”

“The head of a blockhead and the heart of a Brutus,” replied Enjolras.
Then he raised his voice:—
“Citizens! This is the example which the old give to the young. Wehesitated, he came! We were drawing back, he advanced! This is whatthose who are trembling with age teach to those who tremble with fear!This aged man is august in the eyes of his country. He has had a longlife and a magnificent death! Now, let us place the body under cover,that each one of us may defend this old man dead as he would his fatherliving, and may his presence in our midst render the barricadeimpregnable!”

A murmur of gloomy and energetic assent followed these words.
Enjolras bent down, raised the old man’s head, and fierce as he was, hekissed him on the brow, then, throwing wide his arms, and handling thisdead man with tender precaution, as though he feared to hurt it, heremoved his coat, showed the bloody holes in it to all, and said:—
“This is our flag now.”




CHAPTER III—GAVROCHE WOULD HAVE DONE BETTER TO ACCEPT ENJOLRAS’ CARBINE

They threw a long black shawl of Widow Hucheloup’s over Father Mabeuf.Six men made a litter of their guns; on this they laid the body, andbore it, with bared heads, with solemn slowness, to the large table inthe tap-room.
These men, wholly absorbed in the grave and sacred task in which theywere engaged, thought no more of the perilous situation in which theystood.
When the corpse passed near Javert, who was still impassive, Enjolrassaid to the spy:—
“It will be your turn presently!”

During all this time, Little Gavroche, who alone had not quitted hispost, but had remained on guard, thought he espied some men stealthilyapproaching the barricade. All at once he shouted:—
“Look out!”

Courfeyrac, Enjolras, Jean Prouvaire, Combeferre, Joly, Bahorel,Bossuet, and all the rest ran tumultuously from the wine-shop. It wasalmost too late. They saw a glistening density of bayonets undulatingabove the barricade. Municipal guards of lofty stature were makingtheir way in, some striding over the omnibus, others through the cut,thrusting before them the urchin, who retreated, but did not flee.
The moment was critical. It was that first, redoubtable moment ofinundation, when the stream rises to the level of the levee and whenthe water begins to filter through the fissures of dike. A second moreand the barricade would have been taken.
Bahorel dashed upon the first municipal guard who was entering, andkilled him on the spot with a blow from his gun; the second killedBahorel with a blow from his bayonet. Another had already overthrownCourfeyrac, who was shouting: “Follow me!” The largest of all, a sortof colossus, marched on Gavroche with his bayonet fixed. The urchintook in his arms Javert’s immense gun, levelled it resolutely at thegiant, and fired. No discharge followed. Javert’s gun was not loaded.The municipal guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at thechild.
Before the bayonet had touched Gavroche, the gun slipped from thesoldier’s grasp, a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in thecentre of the forehead, and he fell over on his back. A second bulletstruck the other guard, who had assaulted Courfeyrac in the breast, andlaid him low on the pavement.
This was the work of Marius, who had just entered the barricade.



CHAPTER IV—THE BARREL OF POWDER

Marius, still concealed in the turn of the Rue Mondétour, hadwitnessed, shuddering and irresolute, the first phase of the combat.But he had not long been able to resist that mysterious and sovereignvertigo which may be designated as the call of the abyss. In thepresence of the imminence of the peril, in the presence of the death ofM. Mabeuf, that melancholy enigma, in the presence of Bahorel killed,and Courfeyrac shouting: “Follow me!” of that child threatened, of hisfriends to succor or to avenge, all hesitation had vanished, and he hadflung himself into the conflict, his two pistols in hand. With hisfirst shot he had saved Gavroche, and with the second deliveredCourfeyrac.
Amid the sound of the shots, amid the cries of the assaulted guards,the assailants had climbed the entrenchment, on whose summit MunicipalGuards, soldiers of the line and National Guards from the suburbs couldnow be seen, gun in hand, rearing themselves to more than half theheight of their bodies.
They already covered more than two-thirds of the barrier, but they didnot leap into the enclosure, as though wavering in the fear of sometrap. They gazed into the dark barricade as one would gaze into alion’s den. The light of the torch illuminated only their bayonets,their bear-skin caps, and the upper part of their uneasy and angryfaces.
Marius had no longer any weapons; he had flung away his dischargedpistols after firing them; but he had caught sight of the barrel ofpowder in the tap-room, near the door.
As he turned half round, gazing in that direction, a soldier took aimat him. At the moment when the soldier was sighting Marius, a hand waslaid on the muzzle of the gun and obstructed it. This was done by someone who had darted forward,—the young workman in velvet trousers. Theshot sped, traversed the hand and possibly, also, the workman, since hefell, but the ball did not strike Marius. All this, which was rather tobe apprehended than seen through the smoke, Marius, who was enteringthe tap-room, hardly noticed. Still, he had, in a confused way,perceived that gun-barrel aimed at him, and the hand which had blockedit, and he had heard the discharge. But in moments like this, thethings which one sees vacillate and are precipitated, and one pausesfor nothing. One feels obscurely impelled towards more darkness still,and all is cloud.
The insurgents, surprised but not terrified, had rallied. Enjolras hadshouted: “Wait! Don’t fire at random!” In the first confusion, theymight, in fact, wound each other. The majority of them had ascended tothe window on the first story and to the attic windows, whence theycommanded the assailants.
The most determined, with Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, andCombeferre, had proudly placed themselves with their backs against thehouses at the rear, unsheltered and facing the ranks of soldiers andguards who crowned the barricade.
All this was accomplished without haste, with that strange andthreatening gravity which precedes engagements. They took aim, pointblank, on both sides: they were so close that they could talk togetherwithout raising their voices.
When they had reached this point where the spark is on the brink ofdarting forth, an officer in a gorget extended his sword and said:—
“Lay down your arms!”

“Fire!” replied Enjolras.
The two discharges took place at the same moment, and all disappearedin smoke.
An acrid and stifling smoke in which dying and wounded lay with weak,dull groans. When the smoke cleared away, the combatants on both sidescould be seen to be thinned out, but still in the same positions,reloading in silence. All at once, a thundering voice was heard,shouting:—
“Be off with you, or I’ll blow up the barricade!”

All turned in the direction whence the voice proceeded.
Marius had entered the tap-room, and had seized the barrel of powder,then he had taken advantage of the smoke, and the sort of obscure mistwhich filled the entrenched enclosure, to glide along the barricade asfar as that cage of paving-stones where the torch was fixed. To tear itfrom the torch, to replace it by the barrel of powder, to thrust thepile of stones under the barrel, which was instantly staved in, with asort of horrible obedience,—all this had cost Marius but the timenecessary to stoop and rise again; and now all, National Guards,Municipal Guards, officers, soldiers, huddled at the other extremity ofthe barricade, gazed stupidly at him, as he stood with his foot on thestones, his torch in his hand, his haughty face illuminated by a fatalresolution, drooping the flame of the torch towards that redoubtablepile where they could make out the broken barrel of powder, and givingvent to that startling cry:—
“Be off with you, or I’ll blow up the barricade!”

Marius on that barricade after the octogenarian was the vision of theyoung revolution after the apparition of the old.
“Blow up the barricade!” said a sergeant, “and yourself with it!”

Marius retorted: “And myself also.”

And he dropped the torch towards the barrel of powder.
But there was no longer any one on the barrier. The assailants,abandoning their dead and wounded, flowed back pell-mell and indisorder towards the extremity of the street, and there were again lostin the night. It was a headlong flight.
The barricade was free.



CHAPTER V—END OF THE VERSES OF JEAN PROUVAIRE

All flocked around Marius. Courfeyrac flung himself on his neck.
“Here you are!”

“What luck!” said Combeferre.
“You came in opportunely!” ejaculated Bossuet.
“If it had not been for you, I should have been dead!” began Courfeyracagain.
“If it had not been for you, I should have been gobbled up!” addedGavroche.
Marius asked:—
“Where is the chief?”

“You are he!” said Enjolras.
Marius had had a furnace in his brain all day long; now it was awhirlwind. This whirlwind which was within him, produced on him theeffect of being outside of him and of bearing him away. It seemed tohim that he was already at an immense distance from life. His twoluminous months of joy and love, ending abruptly at that frightfulprecipice, Cosette lost to him, that barricade, M. Mabeuf gettinghimself killed for the Republic, himself the leader of theinsurgents,—all these things appeared to him like a tremendousnightmare. He was obliged to make a mental effort to recall the factthat all that surrounded him was real. Marius had already seen too muchof life not to know that nothing is more imminent than the impossible,and that what it is always necessary to foresee is the unforeseen. Hehad looked on at his own drama as a piece which one does notunderstand.
In the mists which enveloped his thoughts, he did not recognize Javert,who, bound to his post, had not so much as moved his head during thewhole of the attack on the barricade, and who had gazed on the revoltseething around him with the resignation of a martyr and the majesty ofa judge. Marius had not even seen him.
In the meanwhile, the assailants did not stir, they could be heardmarching and swarming through at the end of the street but they did notventure into it, either because they were awaiting orders or becausethey were awaiting reinforcements before hurling themselves afresh onthis impregnable redoubt. The insurgents had posted sentinels, and someof them, who were medical students, set about caring for the wounded.
They had thrown the tables out of the wine-shop, with the exception ofthe two tables reserved for lint and cartridges, and of the one onwhich lay Father Mabeuf; they had added them to the barricade, and hadreplaced them in the tap-room with mattresses from the bed of the widowHucheloup and her servants. On these mattresses they had laid thewounded. As for the three poor creatures who inhabited Corinthe, no oneknew what had become of them. They were finally found, however, hiddenin the cellar.
A poignant emotion clouded the joy of the disencumbered barricade.
The roll was called. One of the insurgents was missing. And who was it?One of the dearest. One of the most valiant. Jean Prouvaire. He wassought among the wounded, he was not there. He was sought among thedead, he was not there. He was evidently a prisoner. Combeferre said toEnjolras:—
“They have our friend; we have their agent. Are you set on the death ofthat spy?”

“Yes,” replied Enjolras; “but less so than on the life of JeanProuvaire.”

This took place in the tap-room near Javert’s post.
“Well,” resumed Combeferre, “I am going to fasten my handkerchief to mycane, and go as a flag of truce, to offer to exchange our man fortheirs.”

“Listen,” said Enjolras, laying his hand on Combeferre’s arm.
At the end of the street there was a significant clash of arms.
They heard a manly voice shout:—
“Vive la France! Long live France! Long live the future!”

They recognized the voice of Prouvaire.
A flash passed, a report rang out.
Silence fell again.
“They have killed him,” exclaimed Combeferre.
Enjolras glanced at Javert, and said to him:—
“Your friends have just shot you.”




CHAPTER VI—THE AGONY OF DEATH AFTER THE AGONY OF LIFE

A peculiarity of this species of war is, that the attack of thebarricades is almost always made from the front, and that theassailants generally abstain from turning the position, either becausethey fear ambushes, or because they are afraid of getting entangled inthe tortuous streets. The insurgents’ whole attention had beendirected, therefore, to the grand barricade, which was, evidently, thespot always menaced, and there the struggle would infalliblyrecommence. But Marius thought of the little barricade, and wentthither. It was deserted and guarded only by the fire-pot whichtrembled between the paving-stones. Moreover, the Mondétour alley, andthe branches of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie and the Rue du Cygnewere profoundly calm.
As Marius was withdrawing, after concluding his inspection, he heardhis name pronounced feebly in the darkness.
“Monsieur Marius!”

He started, for he recognized the voice which had called to him twohours before through the gate in the Rue Plumet.
Only, the voice now seemed to be nothing more than a breath.
He looked about him, but saw no one.
Marius thought he had been mistaken, that it was an illusion added byhis mind to the extraordinary realities which were clashing around him.He advanced a step, in order to quit the distant recess where thebarricade lay.
“Monsieur Marius!” repeated the voice.
This time he could not doubt that he had heard it distinctly; he lookedand saw nothing.
“At your feet,” said the voice.
He bent down, and saw in the darkness a form which was dragging itselftowards him.
It was crawling along the pavement. It was this that had spoken to him.
The fire-pot allowed him to distinguish a blouse, torn trousers ofcoarse velvet, bare feet, and something which resembled a pool ofblood. Marius indistinctly made out a pale head which was liftedtowards him and which was saying to him:—
“You do not recognize me?”

“No.”

“Éponine.”

Marius bent hastily down. It was, in fact, that unhappy child. She wasdressed in men’s clothes.
“How come you here? What are you doing here?”

“I am dying,” said she.
There are words and incidents which arouse dejected beings. Mariuscried out with a start:—
“You are wounded! Wait, I will carry you into the room! They willattend to you there. Is it serious? How must I take hold of you inorder not to hurt you? Where do you suffer? Help! My God! But why didyou come hither?”

And he tried to pass his arm under her, in order to raise her.
She uttered a feeble cry.
“Have I hurt you?” asked Marius.
“A little.”

“But I only touched your hand.”

She raised her hand to Marius, and in the middle of that hand Mariussaw a black hole.
“What is the matter with your hand?” said he.
“It is pierced.”

“Pierced?”

“Yes.”

“What with?”

“A bullet.”

“How?”

“Did you see a gun aimed at you?”

“Yes, and a hand stopping it.”

“It was mine.”

Marius was seized with a shudder.
“What madness! Poor child! But so much the better, if that is all, itis nothing, let me carry you to a bed. They will dress your wound; onedoes not die of a pierced hand.”

She murmured:—
“The bullet traversed my hand, but it came out through my back. It isuseless to remove me from this spot. I will tell you how you can carefor me better than any surgeon. Sit down near me on this stone.”

He obeyed; she laid her head on Marius’ knees, and, without looking athim, she said:—
“Oh! How good this is! How comfortable this is! There; I no longersuffer.”

She remained silent for a moment, then she turned her face with aneffort, and looked at Marius.
“Do you know what, Monsieur Marius? It puzzled me because you enteredthat garden; it was stupid, because it was I who showed you that house;and then, I ought to have said to myself that a young man like you—”

She paused, and overstepping the sombre transitions that undoubtedlyexisted in her mind, she resumed with a heartrending smile:—
“You thought me ugly, didn’t you?”

She continued:—
“You see, you are lost! Now, no one can get out of the barricade. Itwas I who led you here, by the way! You are going to die, I count uponthat. And yet, when I saw them taking aim at you, I put my hand on themuzzle of the gun. How queer it is! But it was because I wanted to diebefore you. When I received that bullet, I dragged myself here, no onesaw me, no one picked me up, I was waiting for you, I said: ‘So he isnot coming!’ Oh, if you only knew. I bit my blouse, I suffered so! NowI am well. Do you remember the day I entered your chamber and when Ilooked at myself in your mirror, and the day when I came to you on theboulevard near the washerwomen? How the birds sang! That was a longtime ago. You gave me a hundred sous, and I said to you: ‘I don’t wantyour money.’ I hope you picked up your coin? You are not rich. I didnot think to tell you to pick it up. The sun was shining bright, and itwas not cold. Do you remember, Monsieur Marius? Oh! How happy I am!Every one is going to die.”

She had a mad, grave, and heart-breaking air. Her torn blouse disclosedher bare throat.
As she talked, she pressed her pierced hand to her breast, where therewas another hole, and whence there spurted from moment to moment astream of blood, like a jet of wine from an open bung-hole.
Marius gazed at this unfortunate creature with profound compassion.
“Oh!” she resumed, “it is coming again, I am stifling!”

She caught up her blouse and bit it, and her limbs stiffened on thepavement.
At that moment the young cock’s crow executed by little Gavrocheresounded through the barricade.
The child had mounted a table to load his gun, and was singing gaylythe song then so popular:—
“En voyant Lafayette,             “On beholding Lafayette,Le gendarme répète:—             The gendarme repeats:—Sauvons nous! sauvons nous!       Let us flee! let us flee!sauvons nous!”                     let us flee!

Éponine raised herself and listened; then she murmured:—
“It is he.”

And turning to Marius:—
“My brother is here. He must not see me. He would scold me.”

“Your brother?” inquired Marius, who was meditating in the most bitterand sorrowful depths of his heart on the duties to the Thénardierswhich his father had bequeathed to him; “who is your brother?”

“That little fellow.”

“The one who is singing?”

“Yes.”

Marius made a movement.
“Oh! don’t go away,” said she, “it will not be long now.”

She was sitting almost upright, but her voice was very low and brokenby hiccoughs.
At intervals, the death rattle interrupted her. She put her face asnear that of Marius as possible. She added with a strange expression:—
“Listen, I do not wish to play you a trick. I have a letter in mypocket for you. I was told to put it in the post. I kept it. I did notwant to have it reach you. But perhaps you will be angry with me for itwhen we meet again presently? Take your letter.”

She grasped Marius’ hand convulsively with her pierced hand, but she nolonger seemed to feel her sufferings. She put Marius’ hand in thepocket of her blouse. There, in fact, Marius felt a paper.
“Take it,” said she.
Marius took the letter.
She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment.
“Now, for my trouble, promise me—”

And she stopped.
“What?” asked Marius.
“Promise me!”

“I promise.”

“Promise to give me a kiss on my brow when I am dead.—I shall feel it.”

She dropped her head again on Marius’ knees, and her eyelids closed. Hethought the poor soul had departed. Éponine remained motionless. All atonce, at the very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever, sheslowly opened her eyes in which appeared the sombre profundity ofdeath, and said to him in a tone whose sweetness seemed already toproceed from another world:—
“And by the way, Monsieur Marius, I believe that I was a little bit inlove with you.”

She tried to smile once more and expired.



CHAPTER VII—GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES

Marius kept his promise. He dropped a kiss on that livid brow, wherethe icy perspiration stood in beads.
This was no infidelity to Cosette; it was a gentle and pensive farewellto an unhappy soul.
It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Époninehad given him. He had immediately felt that it was an event of weight.He was impatient to read it. The heart of man is so constituted thatthe unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to thinkof unfolding this paper.
He laid her gently on the ground, and went away. Something told himthat he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body.
He drew near to a candle in the tap-room. It was a small note, foldedand sealed with a woman’s elegant care. The address was in a woman’shand and ran:—
“To Monsieur, Monsieur Marius Pontmercy, at M. Courfeyrac’s, Rue de laVerrerie, No. 16.”

He broke the seal and read:—
“My dearest, alas! my father insists on our setting out immediately.We shall be this evening in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7.In a week we shall be in England.  COSETTE.  June 4th.”

Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not evenacquainted with Cosette’s handwriting.
What had taken place may be related in a few words. Éponine had beenthe cause of everything. After the evening of the 3d of June she hadcherished a double idea, to defeat the projects of her father and theruffians on the house of the Rue Plumet, and to separate Marius andCosette. She had exchanged rags with the first young scamp she cameacross who had thought it amusing to dress like a woman, while Époninedisguised herself like a man. It was she who had conveyed to JeanValjean in the Champ de Mars the expressive warning: “Leave yourhouse.” Jean Valjean had, in fact, returned home, and had said toCosette: “We set out this evening and we go to the Rue de l’Homme Arméwith Toussaint. Next week, we shall be in London.” Cosette, utterlyoverwhelmed by this unexpected blow, had hastily penned a couple oflines to Marius. But how was she to get the letter to the post? Shenever went out alone, and Toussaint, surprised at such a commission,would certainly show the letter to M. Fauchelevent. In this dilemma,Cosette had caught sight through the fence of Éponine in man’s clothes,who now prowled incessantly around the garden. Cosette had called to“this young workman” and had handed him five francs and the letter,saying: “Carry this letter immediately to its address.” Éponine had putthe letter in her pocket. The next day, on the 5th of June, she went toCourfeyrac’s quarters to inquire for Marius, not for the purpose ofdelivering the letter, but,—a thing which every jealous and loving soulwill comprehend,—“to see.” There she had waited for Marius, or at leastfor Courfeyrac, still for the purpose of _seeing_. When Courfeyrac hadtold her: “We are going to the barricades,” an idea flashed through hermind, to fling herself into that death, as she would have done into anyother, and to thrust Marius into it also. She had followed Courfeyrac,had made sure of the locality where the barricade was in process ofconstruction; and, quite certain, since Marius had received no warning,and since she had intercepted the letter, that he would go at dusk tohis trysting place for every evening, she had betaken herself to theRue Plumet, had there awaited Marius, and had sent him, in the name ofhis friends, the appeal which would, she thought, lead him to thebarricade. She reckoned on Marius’ despair when he should fail to findCosette; she was not mistaken. She had returned to the Rue de laChanvrerie herself. What she did there the reader has just seen. Shedied with the tragic joy of jealous hearts who drag the beloved beinginto their own death, and who say: “No one shall have him!”

Marius covered Cosette’s letter with kisses. So she loved him! For onemoment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now. Then hesaid to himself: “She is going away. Her father is taking her toEngland, and my grandfather refuses his consent to the marriage.Nothing is changed in our fates.” Dreamers like Marius are subject tosupreme attacks of dejection, and desperate resolves are the result.The fatigue of living is insupportable; death is sooner over with. Thenhe reflected that he had still two duties to fulfil: to inform Cosetteof his death and send her a final farewell, and to save from theimpending catastrophe which was in preparation, that poor child,Éponine’s brother and Thénardier’s son.
He had a pocket-book about him; the same one which had contained thenote-book in which he had inscribed so many thoughts of love forCosette. He tore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil:—
“Our marriage was impossible. I asked my grandfather, he refused; Ihave no fortune, neither hast thou. I hastened to thee, thou wert nolonger there. Thou knowest the promise that I gave thee, I shall keepit. I die. I love thee. When thou readest this, my soul will be nearthee, and thou wilt smile.”

Having nothing wherewith to seal this letter, he contented himself withfolding the paper in four, and added the address:—
“To Mademoiselle Cosette Fauchelevent, at M. Fauchelevent’s, Rue del’Homme Armé, No. 7.”

Having folded the letter, he stood in thought for a moment, drew outhis pocket-book again, opened it, and wrote, with the same pencil,these four lines on the first page:—
“My name is Marius Pontmercy. Carry my body to my grandfather, M.Gillenormand, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the Marais.”

He put his pocketbook back in his pocket, then he called Gavroche.
The gamin, at the sound of Marius’ voice, ran up to him with his merryand devoted air.
“Will you do something for me?”

“Anything,” said Gavroche. “Good God! if it had not been for you, Ishould have been done for.”

“Do you see this letter?”

“Yes.”

“Take it. Leave the barricade instantly” (Gavroche began to scratch hisear uneasily) “and to-morrow morning, you will deliver it at itsaddress to Mademoiselle Cosette, at M. Fauchelevent’s, Rue de l’HommeArmé, No. 7.”

The heroic child replied
“Well, but! in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken, and I shallnot be there.”

“The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak, according to allappearances, and will not be taken before to-morrow noon.”

The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricadehad, in fact, been prolonged. It was one of those intermissions whichfrequently occur in nocturnal combats, which are always followed by anincrease of rage.
“Well,” said Gavroche, “what if I were to go and carry your letterto-morrow?”

“It will be too late. The barricade will probably be blockaded, all thestreets will be guarded, and you will not be able to get out. Go atonce.”

Gavroche could think of no reply to this, and stood there inindecision, scratching his ear sadly.
All at once, he took the letter with one of those birdlike movementswhich were common with him.
“All right,” said he.
And he started off at a run through Mondétour lane.
An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision,but he had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer someobjection to it.
This was the idea:—
“It is barely midnight, the Rue de l’Homme Armé is not far off; I willgo and deliver the letter at once, and I shall get back in time.”




BOOK FIFTEENTH—THE RUE DE L’HOMME ARMÉ



CHAPTER I—A DRINKER IS A BABBLER

What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrectionsof the soul? Man is a depth still greater than the people. Jean Valjeanat that very moment was the prey of a terrible upheaval. Every sort ofgulf had opened again within him. He also was trembling, like Paris, onthe brink of an obscure and formidable revolution. A few hours hadsufficed to bring this about. His destiny and his conscience hadsuddenly been covered with gloom. Of him also, as well as of Paris, itmight have been said: “Two principles are face to face. The white angeland the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of theabyss. Which of the two will hurl the other over? Who will carry theday?”

On the evening preceding this same 5th of June, Jean Valjean,accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Ruede l’Homme Armé. A change awaited him there.
Cosette had not quitted the Rue Plumet without making an effort atresistance. For the first time since they had lived side by side,Cosette’s will and the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct,and had been in opposition, at least, if they had not clashed. Therehad been objections on one side and inflexibility on the other. Theabrupt advice: “Leave your house,” hurled at Jean Valjean by astranger, had alarmed him to the extent of rendering him peremptory. Hethought that he had been traced and followed. Cosette had been obligedto give way.
Both had arrived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé without opening their lips,and without uttering a word, each being absorbed in his own personalpreoccupation; Jean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette’ssadness, Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean’suneasiness.
Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him, a thing which he had neverdone in his previous absences. He perceived the possibility of notreturning to the Rue Plumet, and he could neither leave Toussaintbehind nor confide his secret to her. Besides, he felt that she wasdevoted and trustworthy. Treachery between master and servant begins incuriosity. Now Toussaint, as though she had been destined to be JeanValjean’s servant, was not curious. She stammered in her peasantdialect of Barneville: “I am made so; I do my work; the rest is noaffair of mine.”

In this departure from the Rue Plumet, which had been almost a flight,Jean Valjean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise,baptized by Cosette “the inseparable.” Full trunks would have requiredporters, and porters are witnesses. A fiacre had been summoned to thedoor on the Rue de Babylone, and they had taken their departure.
It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to packup a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles. Cosette hadtaken only her portfolio and her blotting-book.
Jean Valjean, with a view to augmenting the solitude and the mystery ofthis departure, had arranged to quit the pavilion of the Rue Plumetonly at dusk, which had allowed Cosette time to write her note toMarius. They had arrived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé after night hadfully fallen.
They had gone to bed in silence.
The lodgings in the Rue de l’Homme Armé were situated on a back court,on the second floor, and were composed of two sleeping-rooms, adining-room and a kitchen adjoining the dining-room, with a garretwhere there was a folding-bed, and which fell to Toussaint’s share. Thedining-room was an antechamber as well, and separated the two bedrooms.The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils.
People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it; human natureis so constituted. Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l’HommeArmé when his anxiety was lightened and by degrees dissipated. Thereare soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind. Anobscure street, peaceable inhabitants. Jean Valjean experienced anindescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris,which is so narrow that it is barred against carriages by a transversebeam placed on two posts, which is deaf and dumb in the midst of theclamorous city, dimly lighted at midday, and is, so to speak, incapableof emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old, which holdtheir peace like ancients as they are. There was a touch of stagnantoblivion in that street. Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there.How could he be found there?
His first care was to place _the inseparable_ beside him.
He slept well. Night brings wisdom; we may add, night soothes. On thefollowing morning he awoke in a mood that was almost gay. He thoughtthe dining-room charming, though it was hideous, furnished with an oldround table, a long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror, adilapidated armchair, and several plain chairs which were encumberedwith Toussaint’s packages. In one of these packages Jean Valjean’suniform of a National Guard was visible through a rent.
As for Cosette, she had had Toussaint take some broth to her room, anddid not make her appearance until evening.
About five o’clock, Toussaint, who was going and coming and busyingherself with the tiny establishment, set on the table a cold chicken,which Cosette, out of deference to her father, consented to glance at.
That done, Cosette, under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache,had bade Jean Valjean good night and had shut herself up in herchamber. Jean Valjean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a goodappetite, and with his elbows on the table, having gradually recoveredhis serenity, had regained possession of his sense of security.
While he was discussing this modest dinner, he had, twice or thrice,noticed in a confused way, Toussaint’s stammering words as she said tohim: “Monsieur, there is something going on, they are fighting inParis.” But absorbed in a throng of inward calculations, he had paid noheed to it. To tell the truth, he had not heard her. He rose and beganto pace from the door to the window and from the window to the door,growing ever more serene.
With this calm, Cosette, his sole anxiety, recurred to his thoughts.Not that he was troubled by this headache, a little nervous crisis, ayoung girl’s fit of sulks, the cloud of a moment, there would benothing left of it in a day or two; but he meditated on the future,and, as was his habit, he thought of it with pleasure. After all, hesaw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its course. At certainhours, everything seems impossible, at others everything appears easy;Jean Valjean was in the midst of one of these good hours. Theygenerally succeed the bad ones, as day follows night, by virtue of thatlaw of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation ofnature, and which superficial minds call antithesis. In this peacefulstreet where he had taken refuge, Jean Valjean got rid of all that hadbeen troubling him for some time past. This very fact, that he had seenmany shadows, made him begin to perceive a little azure. To havequitted the Rue Plumet without complications or incidents was one goodstep already accomplished. Perhaps it would be wise to go abroad, ifonly for a few months, and to set out for London. Well, they would go.What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or inEngland, provided he had Cosette beside him? Cosette was his nation.Cosette sufficed for his happiness; the idea that he, perhaps, did notsuffice for Cosette’s happiness, that idea which had formerly been thecause of his fever and sleeplessness, did not even present itself tohis mind. He was in a state of collapse from all his past sufferings,and he was fully entered on optimism. Cosette was by his side, sheseemed to be his; an optical illusion which every one has experienced.He arranged in his own mind, with all sorts of felicitous devices, hisdeparture for England with Cosette, and he beheld his felicityreconstituted wherever he pleased, in the perspective of his reverie.
As he paced to and fro with long strides, his glance suddenlyencountered something strange.
In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard, hesaw the four lines which follow:—
“My dearest, alas! my father insists on our setting out immediately. Weshall be this evening in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7. In a week weshall be in England. COSETTE. June 4th.”

Jean Valjean halted, perfectly haggard.
Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard infront of the mirror, and, utterly absorbed in her agony of grief, hadforgotten it and left it there, without even observing that she hadleft it wide open, and open at precisely the page on which she had laidto dry the four lines which she had penned, and which she had given incharge of the young workman in the Rue Plumet. The writing had beenprinted off on the blotter.
The mirror reflected the writing.
The result was, what is called in geometry, _the symmetrical image_; sothat the writing, reversed on the blotter, was righted in the mirrorand presented its natural appearance; and Jean Valjean had beneath hiseyes the letter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening.
It was simple and withering.
Jean Valjean stepped up to the mirror. He read the four lines again,but he did not believe them. They produced on him the effect ofappearing in a flash of lightning. It was a hallucination, it wasimpossible. It was not so.
Little by little, his perceptions became more precise; he looked atCosette’s blotting-book, and the consciousness of the reality returnedto him. He caught up the blotter and said: “It comes from there.” Hefeverishly examined the four lines imprinted on the blotter, thereversal of the letters converted into an odd scrawl, and he saw nosense in it. Then he said to himself: “But this signifies nothing;there is nothing written here.” And he drew a long breath withinexpressible relief. Who has not experienced those foolish joys inhorrible instants? The soul does not surrender to despair until it hasexhausted all illusions.
He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight,almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been thedupe. All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again, and again hebeheld the vision. There were the four lines outlined with inexorableclearness. This time it was no mirage. The recurrence of a vision is areality; it was palpable, it was the writing restored in the mirror. Heunderstood.
Jean Valjean tottered, dropped the blotter, and fell into the oldarmchair beside the buffet, with drooping head, and glassy eyes, inutter bewilderment. He told himself that it was plain, that the lightof the world had been eclipsed forever, and that Cosette had writtenthat to some one. Then he heard his soul, which had become terribleonce more, give vent to a dull roar in the gloom. Try then the effectof taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage!
Strange and sad to say, at that very moment, Marius had not yetreceived Cosette’s letter; chance had treacherously carried it to JeanValjean before delivering it to Marius. Up to that day, Jean Valjeanhad not been vanquished by trial. He had been subjected to fearfulproofs; no violence of bad fortune had been spared him; the ferocity offate, armed with all vindictiveness and all social scorn, had taken himfor her prey and had raged against him. He had accepted every extremitywhen it had been necessary; he had sacrificed his inviolability as areformed man, had yielded up his liberty, risked his head, losteverything, suffered everything, and he had remained disinterested andstoical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absentfrom himself like a martyr. His conscience inured to every assault ofdestiny, might have appeared to be forever impregnable. Well, any onewho had beheld his spiritual self would have been obliged to concedethat it weakened at that moment. It was because, of all the tortureswhich he had undergone in the course of this long inquisition to whichdestiny had doomed him, this was the most terrible. Never had suchpincers seized him hitherto. He felt the mysterious stirring of all hislatent sensibilities. He felt the plucking at the strange chord. Alas!the supreme trial, let us say rather, the only trial, is the loss ofthe beloved being.
Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than asa father; but we have already remarked, above, that into this paternitythe widowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love; heloved Cosette as his daughter, and he loved her as his mother, and heloved her as his sister; and, as he had never had either a woman tolove or a wife, as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest, thatsentiment also, the most impossible to lose, was mingled with the rest,vague, ignorant, pure with the purity of blindness, unconscious,celestial, angelic, divine; less like a sentiment than like aninstinct, less like an instinct than like an imperceptible andinvisible but real attraction; and love, properly speaking, was, in hisimmense tenderness for Cosette, like the thread of gold in themountain, concealed and virgin.
Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have alreadyindicated. No marriage was possible between them; not even that ofsouls; and yet, it is certain that their destinies were wedded. Withthe exception of Cosette, that is to say, with the exception of achildhood, Jean Valjean had never, in the whole of his long life, knownanything of that which may be loved. The passions and loves whichsucceed each other had not produced in him those successive greengrowths, tender green or dark green, which can be seen in foliage whichpasses through the winter and in men who pass fifty. In short, and wehave insisted on it more than once, all this interior fusion, all thiswhole, of which the sum total was a lofty virtue, ended in renderingJean Valjean a father to Cosette. A strange father, forged from thegrandfather, the son, the brother, and the husband, that existed inJean Valjean; a father in whom there was included even a mother; afather who loved Cosette and adored her, and who held that child as hislight, his home, his family, his country, his paradise.
Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come, that she wasescaping from him, that she was slipping from his hands, that she wasgliding from him, like a cloud, like water, when he had before his eyesthis crushing proof: “another is the goal of her heart, another is thewish of her life; there is a dearest one, I am no longer anything buther father, I no longer exist”; when he could no longer doubt, when hesaid to himself: “She is going away from me!” the grief which he feltsurpassed the bounds of possibility. To have done all that he had donefor the purpose of ending like this! And the very idea of beingnothing! Then, as we have just said, a quiver of revolt ran through himfrom head to foot. He felt, even in the very roots of his hair, theimmense reawakening of egotism, and the _I_ in this man’s abyss howled.
There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil. Adespairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrustingaside and breaking certain profound elements which, in some cases, arethe very man himself. Grief, when it attains this shape, is a headlongflight of all the forces of the conscience. These are fatal crises. Fewamong us emerge from them still like ourselves and firm in duty. Whenthe limit of endurance is overstepped, the most imperturbable virtue isdisconcerted. Jean Valjean took the blotter again, and convincedhimself afresh; he remained bowed and as though petrified and withstaring eyes, over those four unobjectionable lines; and there arosewithin him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything inthis soul was crumbling away.
He examined this revelation, athwart the exaggerations of reverie, withan apparent and terrifying calmness, for it is a fearful thing when aman’s calmness reaches the coldness of the statue.
He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without hishaving a suspicion of the fact; he recalled his fears of the precedingsummer, so foolishly dissipated; he recognized the precipice, it wasstill the same; only, Jean Valjean was no longer on the brink, he wasat the bottom of it.
The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he hadfallen without perceiving it. All the light of his life had departed,while he still fancied that he beheld the sun.
His instinct did not hesitate. He put together certain circumstances,certain dates, certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette’s part,and he said to himself: “It is he.”

The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which nevermisses its aim. He struck Marius with his first conjecture. He did notknow the name, but he found the man instantly. He distinctly perceived,in the background of the implacable conjuration of his memories, theunknown prowler of the Luxembourg, that wretched seeker of loveadventures, that idler of romance, that idiot, that coward, for it iscowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them afather who loves them.
After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was atthe bottom of this situation, and that everything proceeded from thatquarter, he, Jean Valjean, the regenerated man, the man who had solabored over his soul, the man who had made so many efforts to resolveall life, all misery, and all unhappiness into love, looked into hisown breast and there beheld a spectre, Hate.
Great griefs contain something of dejection. They discourage one withexistence. The man into whom they enter feels something within himwithdraw from him. In his youth, their visits are lugubrious; later onthey are sinister. Alas, if despair is a fearful thing when the bloodis hot, when the hair is black, when the head is erect on the body likethe flame on the torch, when the roll of destiny still retains its fullthickness, when the heart, full of desirable love, still possessesbeats which can be returned to it, when one has time for redress, whenall women and all smiles and all the future and all the horizon arebefore one, when the force of life is complete, what is it in old age,when the years hasten on, growing ever paler, to that twilight hourwhen one begins to behold the stars of the tomb?
While he was meditating, Toussaint entered. Jean Valjean rose and askedher:—
“In what quarter is it? Do you know?”

Toussaint was struck dumb, and could only answer him:—
“What is it, sir?”

Jean Valjean began again: “Did you not tell me that just now that thereis fighting going on?”

“Ah! yes, sir,” replied Toussaint. “It is in the direction ofSaint-Merry.”

There is a mechanical movement which comes to us, unconsciously, fromthe most profound depths of our thought. It was, no doubt, under theimpulse of a movement of this sort, and of which he was hardlyconscious, that Jean Valjean, five minutes later, found himself in thestreet.
Bareheaded, he sat upon the stone post at the door of his house. Heseemed to be listening.
Night had come.



CHAPTER II—THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT

How long did he remain thus? What was the ebb and flow of this tragicmeditation? Did he straighten up? Did he remain bowed? Had he been bentto breaking? Could he still rise and regain his footing in hisconscience upon something solid? He probably would not have been ableto tell himself.
The street was deserted. A few uneasy bourgeois, who were rapidlyreturning home, hardly saw him. Each one for himself in times of peril.The lamp-lighter came as usual to light the lantern which was situatedprecisely opposite the door of No. 7, and then went away. Jean Valjeanwould not have appeared like a living man to any one who had examinedhim in that shadow. He sat there on the post of his door, motionless asa form of ice. There is congealment in despair. The alarm bells and avague and stormy uproar were audible. In the midst of all theseconvulsions of the bell mingled with the revolt, the clock ofSaint-Paul struck eleven, gravely and without haste; for the tocsin isman; the hour is God. The passage of the hour produced no effect onJean Valjean; Jean Valjean did not stir. Still, at about that moment, abrusque report burst forth in the direction of the Halles, a second yetmore violent followed; it was probably that attack on the barricade inthe Rue de la Chanvrerie which we have just seen repulsed by Marius. Atthis double discharge, whose fury seemed augmented by the stupor of thenight, Jean Valjean started; he rose, turning towards the quarterwhence the noise proceeded; then he fell back upon the post again,folded his arms, and his head slowly sank on his bosom again.
He resumed his gloomy dialogue with himself.
All at once, he raised his eyes; some one was walking in the street, heheard steps near him. He looked, and by the light of the lanterns, inthe direction of the street which ran into the Rue-aux-Archives, heperceived a young, livid, and beaming face.
Gavroche had just arrived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé.
Gavroche was staring into the air, apparently in search of something.He saw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him.
Gavroche after staring into the air, stared below; he raised himself ontiptoe, and felt of the doors and windows of the ground floor; theywere all shut, bolted, and padlocked. After having authenticated thefronts of five or six barricaded houses in this manner, the urchinshrugged his shoulders, and took himself to task in these terms:—
“Pardi!”

Then he began to stare into the air again.
Jean Valjean, who, an instant previously, in his then state of mind,would not have spoken to or even answered any one, felt irresistiblyimpelled to accost that child.
“What is the matter with you, my little fellow?” he said.
“The matter with me is that I am hungry,” replied Gavroche frankly. Andhe added: “Little fellow yourself.”

Jean Valjean fumbled in his fob and pulled out a five-franc piece.
But Gavroche, who was of the wagtail species, and who skippedvivaciously from one gesture to another, had just picked up a stone. Hehad caught sight of the lantern.
“See here,” said he, “you still have your lanterns here. You aredisobeying the regulations, my friend. This is disorderly. Smash thatfor me.”

And he flung the stone at the lantern, whose broken glass fell withsuch a clatter that the bourgeois in hiding behind their curtains inthe opposite house cried: “There is ‘Ninety-three’ come again.”

The lantern oscillated violently, and went out. The street had suddenlybecome black.
“That’s right, old street,” ejaculated Gavroche, “put on yournight-cap.”

And turning to Jean Valjean:—
“What do you call that gigantic monument that you have there at the endof the street? It’s the Archives, isn’t it? I must crumble up those bigstupids of pillars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them.”

Jean Valjean stepped up to Gavroche.
“Poor creature,” he said in a low tone, and speaking to himself, “he ishungry.”

And he laid the hundred-sou piece in his hand.
Gavroche raised his face, astonished at the size of this sou; he staredat it in the darkness, and the whiteness of the big sou dazzled him. Heknew five-franc pieces by hearsay; their reputation was agreeable tohim; he was delighted to see one close to. He said:—
“Let us contemplate the tiger.”

He gazed at it for several minutes in ecstasy; then, turning to JeanValjean, he held out the coin to him, and said majestically to him:—
“Bourgeois, I prefer to smash lanterns. Take back your ferocious beast.You can’t bribe me. That has got five claws; but it doesn’t scratchme.”

“Have you a mother?” asked Jean Valjean.
Gavroche replied:—
“More than you have, perhaps.”

“Well,” returned Jean Valjean, “keep the money for your mother!”

Gavroche was touched. Moreover, he had just noticed that the man whowas addressing him had no hat, and this inspired him with confidence.
“Truly,” said he, “so it wasn’t to keep me from breaking the lanterns?”

“Break whatever you please.”

“You’re a fine man,” said Gavroche.
And he put the five-franc piece into one of his pockets.
His confidence having increased, he added:—
“Do you belong in this street?”

“Yes, why?”

“Can you tell me where No. 7 is?”

“What do you want with No. 7?”

Here the child paused, he feared that he had said too much; he thrusthis nails energetically into his hair and contented himself withreplying:—
“Ah! Here it is.”

An idea flashed through Jean Valjean’s mind. Anguish does have thesegleams. He said to the lad:—
“Are you the person who is bringing a letter that I am expecting?”

“You?” said Gavroche. “You are not a woman.”

“The letter is for Mademoiselle Cosette, is it not?”

“Cosette,” muttered Gavroche. “Yes, I believe that is the queer name.”

“Well,” resumed Jean Valjean, “I am the person to whom you are todeliver the letter. Give it here.”

“In that case, you must know that I was sent from the barricade.”

“Of course,” said Jean Valjean.
Gavroche engulfed his hand in another of his pockets and drew out apaper folded in four.
Then he made the military salute.
“Respect for despatches,” said he. “It comes from the ProvisionalGovernment.”

“Give it to me,” said Jean Valjean.
Gavroche held the paper elevated above his head.
“Don’t go and fancy it’s a love letter. It is for a woman, but it’s forthe people. We men fight and we respect the fair sex. We are not asthey are in fine society, where there are lions who send chickens55 tocamels.”

“Give it to me.”

“After all,” continued Gavroche, “you have the air of an honest man.”

“Give it to me quick.”

“Catch hold of it.”

And he handed the paper to Jean Valjean.
“And make haste, Monsieur What’s-your-name, for Mamselle Cosette iswaiting.”

Gavroche was satisfied with himself for having produced this remark.
Jean Valjean began again:—
“Is it to Saint-Merry that the answer is to be sent?”

“There you are making some of those bits of pastry vulgarly called_brioches_ [blunders]. This letter comes from the barricade of the Ruede la Chanvrerie, and I’m going back there. Good evening, citizen.”

That said, Gavroche took himself off, or, to describe it more exactly,fluttered away in the direction whence he had come with a flight likethat of an escaped bird. He plunged back into the gloom as though hemade a hole in it, with the rigid rapidity of a projectile; the alleyof l’Homme Armé became silent and solitary once more; in a twinkling,that strange child, who had about him something of the shadow and ofthe dream, had buried himself in the mists of the rows of black houses,and was lost there, like smoke in the dark; and one might have thoughtthat he had dissipated and vanished, had there not taken place, a fewminutes after his disappearance, a startling shiver of glass, and hadnot the magnificent crash of a lantern rattling down on the pavementonce more abruptly awakened the indignant bourgeois. It was Gavrocheupon his way through the Rue du Chaume.



CHAPTER III—WHILE COSETTE AND TOUSSAINT ARE ASLEEP

Jean Valjean went into the house with Marius’ letter.
He groped his way up the stairs, as pleased with the darkness as an owlwho grips his prey, opened and shut his door softly, listened to seewhether he could hear any noise,—made sure that, to all appearances,Cosette and Toussaint were asleep, and plunged three or four matchesinto the bottle of the Fumade lighter before he could evoke a spark, sogreatly did his hand tremble. What he had just done smacked of theft.At last the candle was lighted; he leaned his elbows on the table,unfolded the paper, and read.
In violent emotions, one does not read, one flings to the earth, so tospeak, the paper which one holds, one clutches it like a victim, onecrushes it, one digs into it the nails of one’s wrath, or of one’s joy;one hastens to the end, one leaps to the beginning; attention is atfever heat; it takes up in the gross, as it were, the essential points;it seizes on one point, and the rest disappears. In Marius’ note toCosette, Jean Valjean saw only these words:—
“I die. When thou readest this, my soul will be near thee.”

In the presence of these two lines, he was horribly dazzled; heremained for a moment, crushed, as it were, by the change of emotionwhich was taking place within him, he stared at Marius’ note with asort of intoxicated amazement, he had before his eyes that splendor,the death of a hated individual.
He uttered a frightful cry of inward joy. So it was all over. Thecatastrophe had arrived sooner than he had dared to hope. The being whoobstructed his destiny was disappearing. That man had taken himself offof his own accord, freely, willingly. This man was going to his death,and he, Jean Valjean, had had no hand in the matter, and it was throughno fault of his. Perhaps, even, he is already dead. Here his feverentered into calculations. No, he is not dead yet. The letter hadevidently been intended for Cosette to read on the following morning;after the two discharges that were heard between eleven o’clock andmidnight, nothing more has taken place; the barricade will not beattacked seriously until daybreak; but that makes no difference, fromthe moment when “that man” is concerned in this war, he is lost; he iscaught in the gearing. Jean Valjean felt himself delivered. So he wasabout to find himself alone with Cosette once more. The rivalry wouldcease; the future was beginning again. He had but to keep this note inhis pocket. Cosette would never know what had become of that man. Allthat there requires to be done is to let things take their own course.This man cannot escape. If he is not already dead, it is certain thathe is about to die. What good fortune!
Having said all this to himself, he became gloomy.
Then he went downstairs and woke up the porter.
About an hour later, Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of aNational Guard, and with his arms. The porter had easily found in theneighborhood the wherewithal to complete his equipment. He had a loadedgun and a cartridge-box filled with cartridges.
He strode off in the direction of the markets.



CHAPTER IV—GAVROCHE’S EXCESS OF ZEAL

In the meantime, Gavroche had had an adventure.
Gavroche, after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue duChaume, entered the Rue des Vieilles-Haudriettes, and not seeing “evena cat” there, he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up allthe song of which he was capable. His march, far from being retarded byhis singing, was accelerated by it. He began to sow along the sleepingor terrified houses these incendiary couplets:—
“L’oiseau médit dans les charmilles,Et prétend qu’hier AtalaAvec un Russe s’en alla.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Mon ami Pierrot, tu babilles,Parce que l’autre jour MilaCogna sa vitre et m’appela,Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Les drôlesses sont fort gentilles,Leur poison qui m’ensorcelaGriserait Monsieur Orfila.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“J’aime l’amour et les bisbilles,J’aime Agnès, j’aime Paméla,Lise en m’allumant se brûla.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Jadis, quand je vis les mantillesDe Suzette et de Zéila,Mon âme à leurs plis se mêla,Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Amour, quand dans l’ombre où tu brilles,Tu coiffes de roses Lola,Je me damnerais pour cela.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Jeanne à ton miroir tu t’habilles!Mon cœur un beau jour s’envola.Je crois que c’est Jeanne qui l’a.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Le soir, en sortant des quadrilles,Je montre aux étoiles Stella,Et je leur dis: ‘Regardez-la.’Où vont les belles filles,Lon la."56

Gavroche, as he sang, was lavish of his pantomime. Gesture is thestrong point of the refrain. His face, an inexhaustible repertory ofmasks, produced grimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than therents of a cloth torn in a high gale. Unfortunately, as he was alone,and as it was night, this was neither seen nor even visible. Suchwastes of riches do occur.
All at once, he stopped short.
“Let us interrupt the romance,” said he.
His feline eye had just descried, in the recess of a carriage door,what is called in painting, an _ensemble_, that is to say, a person anda thing; the thing was a hand-cart, the person was a man from Auvergenewho was sleeping therein.
The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement, and the Auvergnat’s headwas supported against the front of the cart. His body was coiled up onthis inclined plane and his feet touched the ground.
Gavroche, with his experience of the things of this world, recognized adrunken man. He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much andwas sleeping too much.
“There now,” thought Gavroche, “that’s what the summer nights are goodfor. We’ll take the cart for the Republic, and leave the Auvergnat forthe Monarchy.”

His mind had just been illuminated by this flash of light:—
“How bully that cart would look on our barricade!”

The Auvergnat was snoring.
Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind, and at the Auvergnatfrom the front, that is to say, by the feet, and at the expiration ofanother minute the imperturbable Auvergnat was reposing flat on thepavement.
The cart was free.
Gavroche, habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters, hadeverything about him. He fumbled in one of his pockets, and pulled fromit a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from somecarpenter.
He wrote:—
_“French Republic.”_
“Received thy cart.”
And he signed it:  “GAVROCHE.”

That done, he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoringAuvergnat’s velvet vest, seized the cart shafts in both hands, and setoff in the direction of the Halles, pushing the cart before him at ahard gallop with a glorious and triumphant uproar.
This was perilous. There was a post at the Royal PrintingEstablishment. Gavroche did not think of this. This post was occupiedby the National Guards of the suburbs. The squad began to wake up, andheads were raised from camp beds. Two street lanterns broken insuccession, that ditty sung at the top of the lungs. This was a greatdeal for those cowardly streets, which desire to go to sleep at sunset,and which put the extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour.For the last hour, that boy had been creating an uproar in thatpeaceable arrondissement, the uproar of a fly in a bottle. The sergeantof the banlieue lent an ear. He waited. He was a prudent man.
The mad rattle of the cart, filled to overflowing the possible measureof waiting, and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance.
“There’s a whole band of them there!” said he, “let us proceed gently.”

It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box andthat it was stalking abroad through the quarter.
And the sergeant ventured out of the post with cautious tread.
All at once, Gavroche, pushing his cart in front of him, and at thevery moment when he was about to turn into the Rue desVieilles-Haudriettes, found himself face to face with a uniform, ashako, a plume, and a gun.
For the second time, he stopped short.
“Hullo,” said he, “it’s him. Good day, public order.”

Gavroche’s amazement was always brief and speedily thawed.
“Where are you going, you rascal?” shouted the sergeant.
“Citizen,” retorted Gavroche, “I haven’t called you ‘bourgeois’ yet.Why do you insult me?”

“Where are you going, you rogue?”

“Monsieur,” retorted Gavroche, “perhaps you were a man of wityesterday, but you have degenerated this morning.”

“I ask you where are you going, you villain?”

Gavroche replied:—
“You speak prettily. Really, no one would suppose you as old as youare. You ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece. Thatwould yield you five hundred francs.”

“Where are you going? Where are you going? Where are you going,bandit?”

Gavroche retorted again:—
“What villainous words! You must wipe your mouth better the first timethat they give you suck.”

The sergeant lowered his bayonet.
“Will you tell me where you are going, you wretch?”

“General,” said Gavroche “I’m on my way to look for a doctor for mywife who is in labor.”

“To arms!” shouted the sergeant.
The master-stroke of strong men consists in saving themselves by thevery means that have ruined them; Gavroche took in the whole situationat a glance. It was the cart which had told against him, it was thecart’s place to protect him.
At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descenton Gavroche, the cart, converted into a projectile and launched withall the latter’s might, rolled down upon him furiously, and thesergeant, struck full in the stomach, tumbled over backwards into thegutter while his gun went off in the air.
The men of the post had rushed out pell-mell at the sergeant’s shout;the shot brought on a general random discharge, after which theyreloaded their weapons and began again.
This blind-man’s-buff musketry lasted for a quarter of an hour andkilled several panes of glass.
In the meanwhile, Gavroche, who had retraced his steps at full speed,halted five or six streets distant and seated himself, panting, on thestone post which forms the corner of the Enfants-Rouges.
He listened.
After panting for a few minutes, he turned in the direction where thefusillade was raging, lifted his left hand to a level with his nose andthrust it forward three times, as he slapped the back of his head withhis right hand; an imperious gesture in which Parisian street-urchindomhas condensed French irony, and which is evidently efficacious, sinceit has already lasted half a century.
This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection.
“Yes,” said he, “I’m splitting with laughter, I’m twisting withdelight, I abound in joy, but I’m losing my way, I shall have to take aroundabout way. If I only reach the barricade in season!”

Thereupon he set out again on a run.
And as he ran:—
“Ah, by the way, where was I?” said he.
And he resumed his ditty, as he plunged rapidly through the streets,and this is what died away in the gloom:—
“Mais il reste encore des bastilles,Et je vais mettre le holàDans l’ordre public que voilà.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Quelqu’un veut-il jouer aux quilles?Tout l’ancien monde s‘écroulaQuand la grosse boule roula.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Vieux bon peuple, à coups de béquilles,Cassons ce Louvre où s‘étalaLa monarchie en falbala.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la.
“Nous en avons forcé les grilles,Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour-là,Tenait mal et se décolla.Où vont les belles filles,Lon la."57

The post’s recourse to arms was not without result. The cart wasconquered, the drunken man was taken prisoner. The first was put in thepound, the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils ofwar as an accomplice. The public ministry of the day proved itsindefatigable zeal in the defence of society, in this instance.
Gavroche’s adventure, which has lingered as a tradition in the quartersof the Temple, is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderlybourgeois of the Marais, and is entitled in their memories: “Thenocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment.”

[THE END OF VOLUME IV “SAINT DENIS”]



VOLUME V—JEAN VALJEAN


  Enlarge
Frontispiece Volume Five


  Enlarge
Titlepage Volume Five



BOOK FIRST—THE WAR BETWEEN FOUR WALLS



CHAPTER I—THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE SCYLLA OFTHE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE

The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladiescan name do not belong to the period in which the action of this workis laid. These two barricades, both of them symbols, under twodifferent aspects, of a redoubtable situation, sprang from the earth atthe time of the fatal insurrection of June, 1848, the greatest war ofthe streets that history has ever beheld.
It sometimes happens that, even contrary to principles, even contraryto liberty, equality, and fraternity, even contrary to the universalvote, even contrary to the government, by all for all, from the depthsof its anguish, of its discouragements and its destitutions, of itsfevers, of its distresses, of its miasmas, of its ignorances, of itsdarkness, that great and despairing body, the rabble, protests against,and that the populace wages battle against, the people.
Beggars attack the common right; the ochlocracy rises against demos.
These are melancholy days; for there is always a certain amount ofnight even in this madness, there is suicide in this duel, and thosewords which are intended to be insults—beggars, canaille, ochlocracy,populace—exhibit, alas! rather the fault of those who reign than thefault of those who suffer; rather the fault of the privileged than thefault of the disinherited.
For our own part, we never pronounce those words without pain andwithout respect, for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which theycorrespond, it often finds many a grandeur beside these miseries.Athens was an ochlocracy; the beggars were the making of Holland; thepopulace saved Rome more than once; and the rabble followed JesusChrist.
There is no thinker who has not at times contemplated the magnificencesof the lower classes.
It was of this rabble that Saint Jerome was thinking, no doubt, and ofall these poor people and all these vagabonds and all these miserablepeople whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs, when he uttered thismysterious saying: _“Fex urbis, lex orbis,”_—the dregs of the city, thelaw of the earth.
The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds, its violencescontrary to all sense, directed against the principles which are itslife, its masterful deeds against the right, are its popular _coupsd‘état_ and should be repressed. The man of probity sacrifices himself,and out of his very love for this crowd, he combats it. But howexcusable he feels it even while holding out against it! How hevenerates it even while resisting it! This is one of those rare momentswhen, while doing that which it is one’s duty to do, one feelssomething which disconcerts one, and which would dissuade one fromproceeding further; one persists, it is necessary, but conscience,though satisfied, is sad, and the accomplishment of duty is complicatedwith a pain at the heart.
June, 1848, let us hasten to say, was an exceptional fact, and almostimpossible of classification, in the philosophy of history. All thewords which we have just uttered, must be discarded, when it becomes aquestion of this extraordinary revolt, in which one feels the holyanxiety of toil claiming its rights. It was necessary to combat it, andthis was a duty, for it attacked the republic. But what was June, 1848,at bottom? A revolt of the people against itself.
Where the subject is not lost sight of, there is no digression; may we,then, be permitted to arrest the reader’s attention for a moment on thetwo absolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and whichcharacterized this insurrection.
One blocked the entrance to the Faubourg Saint Antoine; the otherdefended the approach to the Faubourg du Temple; those before whomthese two fearful masterpieces of civil war reared themselves beneaththe brilliant blue sky of June, will never forget them.
The Saint-Antoine barricade was tremendous; it was three stories high,and seven hundred feet wide. It barred the vast opening of thefaubourg, that is to say, three streets, from angle to angle; ravined,jagged, cut up, divided, crenelated, with an immense rent, buttressedwith piles that were bastions in themselves throwing out capes here andthere, powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of thefaubourg, it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of theformidable place which had seen the 14th of July. Nineteen barricadeswere ranged, one behind the other, in the depths of the streets behindthis principal barricade. At the very sight of it, one felt theagonizing suffering in the immense faubourg, which had reached thatpoint of extremity when a distress may become a catastrophe. Of whatwas that barricade made? Of the ruins of three six-story housesdemolished expressly, said some. Of the prodigy of all wraths, saidothers. It wore the lamentable aspect of all constructions of hatred,ruin. It might be asked: Who built this? It might also be said: Whodestroyed this? It was the improvisation of the ebullition. Hold! takethis door! this grating! this penthouse! this chimney-piece! thisbroken brazier! this cracked pot! Give all! cast away all! Push thisroll, dig, dismantle, overturn, ruin everything! It was thecollaboration of the pavement, the block of stone, the beam, the bar ofiron, the rag, the scrap, the broken pane, the unseated chair, thecabbage-stalk, the tatter, the rag, and the malediction. It was grandand it was petty. It was the abyss parodied on the public place byhubbub. The mass beside the atom; the strip of ruined wall and thebroken bowl,—threatening fraternization of every sort of rubbish.Sisyphus had thrown his rock there and Job his potsherd. Terrible, inshort. It was the acropolis of the barefooted. Overturned carts brokethe uniformity of the slope; an immense dray was spread out therecrossways, its axle pointing heavenward, and seemed a scar on thattumultuous façade; an omnibus hoisted gayly, by main force, to the verysummit of the heap, as though the architects of this bit of savageryhad wished to add a touch of the street urchin humor to their terror,presented its horseless, unharnessed pole to no one knows what horsesof the air. This gigantic heap, the alluvium of the revolt, figured tothe mind an Ossa on Pelion of all revolutions; ’93 on ’89, the 9th ofThermidor on the 10th of August, the 18th of Brumaire on the 11th ofJanuary, Vendemiaire on Prairial, 1848 on 1830. The situation deservedthe trouble and this barricade was worthy to figure on the very spotwhence the Bastille had disappeared. If the ocean made dikes, it isthus that it would build. The fury of the flood was stamped upon thisshapeless mass. What flood? The crowd. One thought one beheld hubbubpetrified. One thought one heard humming above this barricade as thoughthere had been over their hive, enormous, dark bees of violentprogress. Was it a thicket? Was it a bacchanalia? Was it a fortress?Vertigo seemed to have constructed it with blows of its wings. Therewas something of the cesspool in that redoubt and something Olympian inthat confusion. One there beheld in a pell-mell full of despair, therafters of roofs, bits of garret windows with their figured paper,window sashes with their glass planted there in the ruins awaiting thecannon, wrecks of chimneys, cupboards, tables, benches, howlingtopsyturveydom, and those thousand poverty-stricken things, the veryrefuse of the mendicant, which contain at the same time fury andnothingness. One would have said that it was the tatters of a people,rags of wood, of iron, of bronze, of stone, and that the Faubourg SaintAntoine had thrust it there at its door, with a colossal flourish ofthe broom making of its misery its barricade. Blocks resemblingheadsman’s blocks, dislocated chains, pieces of woodwork with bracketshaving the form of gibbets, horizontal wheels projecting from therubbish, amalgamated with this edifice of anarchy the sombre figure ofthe old tortures endured by the people. The barricade Saint Antoineconverted everything into a weapon; everything that civil war couldthrow at the head of society proceeded thence; it was not combat, itwas a paroxysm; the carbines which defended this redoubt, among whichthere were some blunderbusses, sent bits of earthenware bones,coat-buttons, even the casters from night-stands, dangerous projectileson account of the brass. This barricade was furious; it hurled to theclouds an inexpressible clamor; at certain moments, when provoking thearmy, it was covered with throngs and tempest; a tumultuous crowd offlaming heads crowned it; a swarm filled it; it had a thorny crest ofguns, of sabres, of cudgels, of axes, of pikes and of bayonets; a vastred flag flapped in the wind; shouts of command, songs of attack, theroll of drums, the sobs of women and bursts of gloomy laughter from thestarving were to be heard there. It was huge and living, and, like theback of an electric beast, there proceeded from it little flashes oflightning. The spirit of revolution covered with its cloud this summitwhere rumbled that voice of the people which resembles the voice ofGod; a strange majesty was emitted by this titanic basket of rubbish.It was a heap of filth and it was Sinai.
As we have said previously, it attacked in the name of therevolution—what? The revolution. It—that barricade, chance, hazard,disorder, terror, misunderstanding, the unknown—had facing it theConstituent Assembly, the sovereignty of the people, universalsuffrage, the nation, the republic; and it was the Carmagnole biddingdefiance to the Marseillaise.
Immense but heroic defiance, for the old faubourg is a hero.
The faubourg and its redoubt lent each other assistance. The faubourgshouldered the redoubt, the redoubt took its stand under cover of thefaubourg. The vast barricade spread out like a cliff against which thestrategy of the African generals dashed itself. Its caverns, itsexcrescences, its warts, its gibbosities, grimaced, so to speak, andgrinned beneath the smoke. The mitraille vanished in shapelessness; thebombs plunged into it; bullets only succeeded in making holes in it;what was the use of cannonading chaos? and the regiments, accustomed tothe fiercest visions of war, gazed with uneasy eyes on that species ofredoubt, a wild beast in its boar-like bristling and a mountain by itsenormous size.
A quarter of a league away, from the corner of the Rue du Temple whichdebouches on the boulevard near the Château-d’Eau, if one thrust one’shead bodily beyond the point formed by the front of the Dallemagneshop, one perceived in the distance, beyond the canal, in the streetwhich mounts the slopes of Belleville at the culminating point of therise, a strange wall reaching to the second story of the house fronts,a sort of hyphen between the houses on the right and the houses on theleft, as though the street had folded back on itself its loftiest wallin order to close itself abruptly. This wall was built ofpaving-stones. It was straight, correct, cold, perpendicular, levelledwith the square, laid out by rule and line. Cement was lacking, ofcourse, but, as in the case of certain Roman walls, without interferingwith its rigid architecture. The entablature was mathematicallyparallel with the base. From distance to distance, one coulddistinguish on the gray surface, almost invisible loopholes whichresembled black threads. These loopholes were separated from each otherby equal spaces. The street was deserted as far as the eye could reach.All windows and doors were closed. In the background rose this barrier,which made a blind thoroughfare of the street, a motionless andtranquil wall; no one was visible, nothing was audible; not a cry, nota sound, not a breath. A sepulchre.
The dazzling sun of June inundated this terrible thing with light.
It was the barricade of the Faubourg of the Temple.
As soon as one arrived on the spot, and caught sight of it, it wasimpossible, even for the boldest, not to become thoughtful before thismysterious apparition. It was adjusted, jointed, imbricated,rectilinear, symmetrical and funereal. Science and gloom met there. Onefelt that the chief of this barricade was a geometrician or a spectre.One looked at it and spoke low.
From time to time, if some soldier, an officer or representative of thepeople, chanced to traverse the deserted highway, a faint, sharpwhistle was heard, and the passer-by fell dead or wounded, or, if heescaped the bullet, sometimes a biscaïen was seen to ensconce itself insome closed shutter, in the interstice between two blocks of stone, orin the plaster of a wall. For the men in the barricade had madethemselves two small cannons out of two cast-iron lengths of gas-pipe,plugged up at one end with tow and fire-clay. There was no waste ofuseless powder. Nearly every shot told. There were corpses here andthere, and pools of blood on the pavement. I remember a white butterflywhich went and came in the street. Summer does not abdicate.
In the neighborhood, the spaces beneath the portes-cochères wereencumbered with wounded.
One felt oneself aimed at by some person whom one did not see, and oneunderstood that guns were levelled at the whole length of the street.
Massed behind the sort of sloping ridge which the vaulted canal formsat the entrance to the Faubourg du Temple, the soldiers of theattacking column, gravely and thoughtfully, watched this dismalredoubt, this immobility, this passivity, whence sprang death. Somecrawled flat on their faces as far as the crest of the curve of thebridge, taking care that their shakos did not project beyond it.
The valiant Colonel Monteynard admired this barricade with ashudder.—“How that is built!” he said to a Representative. “Not onepaving-stone projects beyond its neighbor. It is made of porcelain.”—Atthat moment, a bullet broke the cross on his breast, and he fell.
“The cowards!” people said. “Let them show themselves. Let us see them!They dare not! They are hiding!”

The barricade of the Faubourg du Temple, defended by eighty men,attacked by ten thousand, held out for three days. On the fourth, theydid as at Zaatcha, as at Constantine, they pierced the houses, theycame over the roofs, the barricade was taken. Not one of the eightycowards thought of flight, all were killed there with the exception ofthe leader, Barthélemy, of whom we shall speak presently.
The Saint-Antoine barricade was the tumult of thunders; the barricadeof the Temple was silence. The difference between these two redoubtswas the difference between the formidable and the sinister. One seemeda maw; the other a mask.
Admitting that the gigantic and gloomy insurrection of June wascomposed of a wrath and of an enigma, one divined in the firstbarricade the dragon, and behind the second the sphinx.
These two fortresses had been erected by two men named, the one,Cournet, the other, Barthélemy. Cournet made the Saint-Antoinebarricade; Barthélemy the barricade of the Temple. Each was the imageof the man who had built it.
Cournet was a man of lofty stature; he had broad shoulders, a red face,a crushing fist, a bold heart, a loyal soul, a sincere and terribleeye. Intrepid, energetic, irascible, stormy; the most cordial of men,the most formidable of combatants. War, strife, conflict, were the veryair he breathed and put him in a good humor. He had been an officer inthe navy, and, from his gestures and his voice, one divined that hesprang from the ocean, and that he came from the tempest; he carriedthe hurricane on into battle. With the exception of the genius, therewas in Cournet something of Danton, as, with the exception of thedivinity, there was in Danton something of Hercules.
Barthélemy, thin, feeble, pale, taciturn, was a sort of tragic streeturchin, who, having had his ears boxed by a policeman, lay in wait forhim, and killed him, and at seventeen was sent to the galleys. He cameout and made this barricade.
Later on, fatal circumstance, in London, proscribed by all, Barthélemyslew Cournet. It was a funereal duel. Some time afterwards, caught inthe gearing of one of those mysterious adventures in which passionplays a part, a catastrophe in which French justice sees extenuatingcircumstances, and in which English justice sees only death, Barthélemywas hanged. The sombre social construction is so made that, thanks tomaterial destitution, thanks to moral obscurity, that unhappy being whopossessed an intelligence, certainly firm, possibly great, began inFrance with the galleys, and ended in England with the gallows.Barthélemy, on occasion, flew but one flag, the black flag.



CHAPTER II—WHAT IS TO BE DONE IN THE ABYSS IF ONE DOES NOT CONVERSE

Sixteen years count in the subterranean education of insurrection, andJune, 1848, knew a great deal more about it than June, 1832. So thebarricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was only an outline, and anembryo compared to the two colossal barricades which we have justsketched; but it was formidable for that epoch.
The insurgents under the eye of Enjolras, for Marius no longer lookedafter anything, had made good use of the night. The barricade had beennot only repaired, but augmented. They had raised it two feet. Bars ofiron planted in the pavement resembled lances in rest. All sorts ofrubbish brought and added from all directions complicated the externalconfusion. The redoubt had been cleverly made over, into a wall on theinside and a thicket on the outside.
The staircase of paving-stones which permitted one to mount it like thewall of a citadel had been reconstructed.
The barricade had been put in order, the tap-room disencumbered, thekitchen appropriated for the ambulance, the dressing of the woundedcompleted, the powder scattered on the ground and on the tables hadbeen gathered up, bullets run, cartridges manufactured, lint scraped,the fallen weapons re-distributed, the interior of the redoubt cleaned,the rubbish swept up, corpses removed.
They laid the dead in a heap in the Mondétour lane, of which they werestill the masters. The pavement was red for a long time at that spot.Among the dead there were four National Guardsmen of the suburbs.Enjolras had their uniforms laid aside.
Enjolras had advised two hours of sleep. Advice from Enjolras was acommand. Still, only three or four took advantage of it.
Feuilly employed these two hours in engraving this inscription on thewall which faced the tavern:—
LONG LIVE THE PEOPLES!
These four words, hollowed out in the rough stone with a nail, could bestill read on the wall in 1848.
The three women had profited by the respite of the night to vanishdefinitely; which allowed the insurgents to breathe more freely.
They had found means of taking refuge in some neighboring house.
The greater part of the wounded were able, and wished, to fight still.On a litter of mattresses and trusses of straw in the kitchen, whichhad been converted into an ambulance, there were five men gravelywounded, two of whom were municipal guardsmen. The municipal guardsmenwere attended to first.
In the tap-room there remained only Mabeuf under his black cloth andJavert bound to his post.
“This is the hall of the dead,” said Enjolras.
In the interior of this hall, barely lighted by a candle at one end,the mortuary table being behind the post like a horizontal bar, a sortof vast, vague cross resulted from Javert erect and Mabeuf lying prone.
The pole of the omnibus, although snapped off by the fusillade, wasstill sufficiently upright to admit of their fastening the flag to it.
Enjolras, who possessed that quality of a leader, of always doing whathe said, attached to this staff the bullet-ridden and bloody coat ofthe old man’s.
No repast had been possible. There was neither bread nor meat. Thefifty men in the barricade had speedily exhausted the scanty provisionsof the wine-shop during the sixteen hours which they had passed there.At a given moment, every barricade inevitably becomes the raft of _laMéduse_. They were obliged to resign themselves to hunger. They hadthen reached the first hours of that Spartan day of the 6th of Junewhen, in the barricade Saint-Merry, Jeanne, surrounded by theinsurgents who demanded bread, replied to all combatants crying:“Something to eat!” with: “Why? It is three o’clock; at four we shallbe dead.”

As they could no longer eat, Enjolras forbade them to drink. Heinterdicted wine, and portioned out the brandy.
They had found in the cellar fifteen full bottles hermetically sealed.Enjolras and Combeferre examined them. Combeferre when he came up againsaid:—“It’s the old stock of Father Hucheloup, who began business as agrocer.”—“It must be real wine,” observed Bossuet. “It’s lucky thatGrantaire is asleep. If he were on foot, there would be a good deal ofdifficulty in saving those bottles.”—Enjolras, in spite of all murmurs,placed his veto on the fifteen bottles, and, in order that no one mighttouch them, he had them placed under the table on which Father Mabeufwas lying.
About two o’clock in the morning, they reckoned up their strength.There were still thirty-seven of them.
The day began to dawn. The torch, which had been replaced in its cavityin the pavement, had just been extinguished. The interior of thebarricade, that species of tiny courtyard appropriated from the street,was bathed in shadows, and resembled, athwart the vague, twilighthorror, the deck of a disabled ship. The combatants, as they went andcame, moved about there like black forms. Above that terriblenesting-place of gloom the stories of the mute houses were lividlyoutlined; at the very top, the chimneys stood palely out. The sky wasof that charming, undecided hue, which may be white and may be blue.Birds flew about in it with cries of joy. The lofty house which formedthe back of the barricade, being turned to the East, had upon its roofa rosy reflection. The morning breeze ruffled the gray hair on the headof the dead man at the third-story window.
“I am delighted that the torch has been extinguished,” said Courfeyracto Feuilly. “That torch flickering in the wind annoyed me. It had theappearance of being afraid. The light of torches resembles the wisdomof cowards; it gives a bad light because it trembles.”

Dawn awakens minds as it does the birds; all began to talk.
Joly, perceiving a cat prowling on a gutter, extracted philosophy fromit.
“What is the cat?” he exclaimed. “It is a corrective. The good God,having made the mouse, said: ‘Hullo! I have committed a blunder.’ Andso he made the cat. The cat is the erratum of the mouse. The mouse,plus the cat, is the proof of creation revised and corrected.”

Combeferre, surrounded by students and artisans, was speaking of thedead, of Jean Prouvaire, of Bahorel, of Mabeuf, and even of Cabuc, andof Enjolras’ sad severity. He said:—
“Harmodius and Aristogiton, Brutus, Chereas, Stephanus, Cromwell,Charlotte Corday, Sand, have all had their moment of agony when it wastoo late. Our hearts quiver so, and human life is such a mystery that,even in the case of a civic murder, even in a murder for liberation, ifthere be such a thing, the remorse for having struck a man surpassesthe joy of having served the human race.”

And, such are the windings of the exchange of speech, that, a momentlater, by a transition brought about through Jean Prouvaire’s verses,Combeferre was comparing the translators of the Georgics, Raux withCournand, Cournand with Delille, pointing out the passages translatedby Malfilâtre, particularly the prodigies of Cæsar’s death; and at thatword, Cæsar, the conversation reverted to Brutus.
“Cæsar,” said Combeferre, “fell justly. Cicero was severe towardsCæsar, and he was right. That severity is not diatribe. When Zoïlusinsults Homer, when Mævius insults Virgil, when Visé insults Molière,when Pope insults Shakspeare, when Frederic insults Voltaire, it is anold law of envy and hatred which is being carried out; genius attractsinsult, great men are always more or less barked at. But Zoïlus andCicero are two different persons. Cicero is an arbiter in thought, justas Brutus is an arbiter by the sword. For my own part, I blame thatlast justice, the blade; but, antiquity admitted it. Cæsar, theviolator of the Rubicon, conferring, as though they came from him, thedignities which emanated from the people, not rising at the entrance ofthe senate, committed the acts of a king and almost of a tyrant, _regiaac pene tyrannica_. He was a great man; so much the worse, or so muchthe better; the lesson is but the more exalted. His twenty-three woundstouch me less than the spitting in the face of Jesus Christ. Cæsar isstabbed by the senators; Christ is cuffed by lackeys. One feels the Godthrough the greater outrage.”

Bossuet, who towered above the interlocutors from the summit of a heapof paving-stones, exclaimed, rifle in hand:—
“Oh Cydathenæum, Oh Myrrhinus, Oh Probalinthus, Oh graces of theÆantides! Oh! Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like aGreek of Laurium or of Edapteon?”




CHAPTER III—LIGHT AND SHADOW

Enjolras had been to make a reconnaissance. He had made his way outthrough Mondétour lane, gliding along close to the houses.
The insurgents, we will remark, were full of hope. The manner in whichthey had repulsed the attack of the preceding night had caused them toalmost disdain in advance the attack at dawn. They waited for it with asmile. They had no more doubt as to their success than as to theircause. Moreover, succor was, evidently, on the way to them. Theyreckoned on it. With that facility of triumphant prophecy which is oneof the sources of strength in the French combatant, they divided theday which was at hand into three distinct phases. At six o’clock in themorning a regiment “which had been labored with,” would turn; at noon,the insurrection of all Paris; at sunset, revolution.
They heard the alarm bell of Saint-Merry, which had not been silent foran instant since the night before; a proof that the other barricade,the great one, Jeanne’s, still held out.
All these hopes were exchanged between the different groups in a sortof gay and formidable whisper which resembled the warlike hum of a hiveof bees.
Enjolras reappeared. He returned from his sombre eagle flight intoouter darkness. He listened for a moment to all this joy with foldedarms, and one hand on his mouth. Then, fresh and rosy in the growingwhiteness of the dawn, he said:
“The whole army of Paris is to strike. A third of the army is bearingdown upon the barricades in which you now are. There is the NationalGuard in addition. I have picked out the shakos of the fifth of theline, and the standard-bearers of the sixth legion. In one hour youwill be attacked. As for the populace, it was seething yesterday,to-day it is not stirring. There is nothing to expect; nothing to hopefor. Neither from a faubourg nor from a regiment. You are abandoned.”

These words fell upon the buzzing of the groups, and produced on themthe effect caused on a swarm of bees by the first drops of a storm. Amoment of indescribable silence ensued, in which death might have beenheard flitting by.
This moment was brief.
A voice from the obscurest depths of the groups shouted to Enjolras:
“So be it. Let us raise the barricade to a height of twenty feet, andlet us all remain in it. Citizens, let us offer the protests ofcorpses. Let us show that, if the people abandon the republicans, therepublicans do not abandon the people.”

These words freed the thought of all from the painful cloud ofindividual anxieties. It was hailed with an enthusiastic acclamation.
No one ever has known the name of the man who spoke thus; he was someunknown blouse-wearer, a stranger, a man forgotten, a passing hero,that great anonymous, always mingled in human crises and in socialgeneses who, at a given moment, utters in a supreme fashion thedecisive word, and who vanishes into the shadows after havingrepresented for a minute, in a lightning flash, the people and God.
This inexorable resolution so thoroughly impregnated the air of the 6thof June, 1832, that, almost at the very same hour, on the barricadeSaint-Merry, the insurgents were raising that clamor which has become amatter of history and which has been consigned to the documents in thecase:—“What matters it whether they come to our assistance or not? Letus get ourselves killed here, to the very last man.”

As the reader sees, the two barricades, though materially isolated,were in communication with each other.



CHAPTER IV—MINUS FIVE, PLUS ONE

After the man who decreed the “protest of corpses” had spoken, and hadgiven this formula of their common soul, there issued from all mouths astrangely satisfied and terrible cry, funereal in sense and triumphantin tone:
“Long live death! Let us all remain here!”

“Why all?” said Enjolras.
“All! All!”

Enjolras resumed:
“The position is good; the barricade is fine. Thirty men are enough.Why sacrifice forty?”

They replied:
“Because not one will go away.”

“Citizens,” cried Enjolras, and there was an almost irritated vibrationin his voice, “this republic is not rich enough in men to indulge inuseless expenditure of them. Vain-glory is waste. If the duty of someis to depart, that duty should be fulfilled like any other.”

Enjolras, the man-principle, had over his co-religionists that sort ofomnipotent power which emanates from the absolute. Still, great as wasthis omnipotence, a murmur arose. A leader to the very finger-tips,Enjolras, seeing that they murmured, insisted. He resumed haughtily:
“Let those who are afraid of not numbering more than thirty say so.”

The murmurs redoubled.
“Besides,” observed a voice in one group, “it is easy enough to talkabout leaving. The barricade is hemmed in.”

“Not on the side of the Halles,” said Enjolras. “The Rue Mondétour isfree, and through the Rue des Prêcheurs one can reach the Marché desInnocents.”

“And there,” went on another voice, “you would be captured. You wouldfall in with some grand guard of the line or the suburbs; they will spya man passing in blouse and cap. ‘Whence come you?’ ‘Don’t you belongto the barricade?’ And they will look at your hands. You smell ofpowder. Shot.”

Enjolras, without making any reply, touched Combeferre’s shoulder, andthe two entered the tap-room.
They emerged thence a moment later. Enjolras held in his outstretchedhands the four uniforms which he had laid aside. Combeferre followed,carrying the shoulder-belts and the shakos.
“With this uniform,” said Enjolras, “you can mingle with the ranks andescape; here is enough for four.” And he flung on the ground, deprivedof its pavement, the four uniforms.
No wavering took place in his stoical audience. Combeferre took theword.
“Come,” said he, “you must have a little pity. Do you know what thequestion is here? It is a question of women. See here. Are there womenor are there not? Are there children or are there not? Are theremothers, yes or no, who rock cradles with their foot and who have a lotof little ones around them? Let that man of you who has never beheld anurse’s breast raise his hand. Ah! you want to get yourselves killed,so do I—I, who am speaking to you; but I do not want to feel thephantoms of women wreathing their arms around me. Die, if you will, butdon’t make others die. Suicides like that which is on the brink ofaccomplishment here are sublime; but suicide is narrow, and does notadmit of extension; and as soon as it touches your neighbors, suicideis murder. Think of the little blond heads; think of the white locks.Listen, Enjolras has just told me that he saw at the corner of the Ruedu Cygne a lighted casement, a candle in a poor window, on the fifthfloor, and on the pane the quivering shadow of the head of an oldwoman, who had the air of having spent the night in watching. Perhapsshe is the mother of some one of you. Well, let that man go, and makehaste, to say to his mother: ‘Here I am, mother!’ Let him feel at ease,the task here will be performed all the same. When one supports one’srelatives by one’s toil, one has not the right to sacrifice one’s self.That is deserting one’s family. And those who have daughters! what areyou thinking of? You get yourselves killed, you are dead, that is well.And tomorrow? Young girls without bread—that is a terrible thing. Manbegs, woman sells. Ah! those charming and gracious beings, so graciousand so sweet, who have bonnets of flowers, who fill the house withpurity, who sing and prattle, who are like a living perfume, who provethe existence of angels in heaven by the purity of virgins on earth,that Jeanne, that Lise, that Mimi, those adorable and honest creatureswho are your blessings and your pride, ah! good God, they will sufferhunger! What do you want me to say to you? There is a market for humanflesh; and it is not with your shadowy hands, shuddering around them,that you will prevent them from entering it! Think of the street, thinkof the pavement covered with passers-by, think of the shops past whichwomen go and come with necks all bare, and through the mire. Thesewomen, too, were pure once. Think of your sisters, those of you whohave them. Misery, prostitution, the police, Saint-Lazare—that is whatthose beautiful, delicate girls, those fragile marvels of modesty,gentleness and loveliness, fresher than lilacs in the month of May,will come to. Ah! you have got yourselves killed! You are no longer onhand! That is well; you have wished to release the people from Royalty,and you deliver over your daughters to the police. Friends, have acare, have mercy. Women, unhappy women, we are not in the habit ofbestowing much thought on them. We trust to the women not havingreceived a man’s education, we prevent their reading, we prevent theirthinking, we prevent their occupying themselves with politics; will youprevent them from going to the dead-house this evening, and recognizingyour bodies? Let us see, those who have families must be tractable, andshake hands with us and take themselves off, and leave us here alone toattend to this affair. I know well that courage is required to leave,that it is hard; but the harder it is, the more meritorious. You say:‘I have a gun, I am at the barricade; so much the worse, I shall remainthere.’ So much the worse is easily said. My friends, there is amorrow; you will not be here to-morrow, but your families will; andwhat sufferings! See, here is a pretty, healthy child, with cheeks likean apple, who babbles, prattles, chatters, who laughs, who smells sweetbeneath your kiss,—and do you know what becomes of him when he isabandoned? I have seen one, a very small creature, no taller than that.His father was dead. Poor people had taken him in out of charity, butthey had bread only for themselves. The child was always hungry. It waswinter. He did not cry. You could see him approach the stove, in whichthere was never any fire, and whose pipe, you know, was of mastic andyellow clay. His breathing was hoarse, his face livid, his limbsflaccid, his belly prominent. He said nothing. If you spoke to him, hedid not answer. He is dead. He was taken to the Necker Hospital, whereI saw him. I was house-surgeon in that hospital. Now, if there are anyfathers among you, fathers whose happiness it is to stroll on Sundaysholding their child’s tiny hand in their robust hand, let each one ofthose fathers imagine that this child is his own. That poor brat, Iremember, and I seem to see him now, when he lay nude on the dissectingtable, how his ribs stood out on his skin like the graves beneath thegrass in a cemetery. A sort of mud was found in his stomach. There wereashes in his teeth. Come, let us examine ourselves conscientiously andtake counsel with our heart. Statistics show that the mortality amongabandoned children is fifty-five per cent. I repeat, it is a questionof women, it concerns mothers, it concerns young girls, it concernslittle children. Who is talking to you of yourselves? We know well whatyou are; we know well that you are all brave, parbleu! we know wellthat you all have in your souls the joy and the glory of giving yourlife for the great cause; we know well that you feel yourselves electedto die usefully and magnificently, and that each one of you clings tohis share in the triumph. Very well. But you are not alone in thisworld. There are other beings of whom you must think. You must not beegoists.”

All dropped their heads with a gloomy air.
Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments.Combeferre, who spoke thus, was not an orphan. He recalled the mothersof other men, and forgot his own. He was about to get himself killed.He was “an egoist.”

Marius, fasting, fevered, having emerged in succession from all hope,and having been stranded in grief, the most sombre of shipwrecks, andsaturated with violent emotions and conscious that the end was near,had plunged deeper and deeper into that visionary stupor which alwaysprecedes the fatal hour voluntarily accepted.
A physiologist might have studied in him the growing symptoms of thatfebrile absorption known to, and classified by, science, and which isto suffering what voluptuousness is to pleasure. Despair, also, has itsecstasy. Marius had reached this point. He looked on at everything asfrom without; as we have said, things which passed before him seemedfar away; he made out the whole, but did not perceive the details. Hebeheld men going and coming as through a flame. He heard voicesspeaking as at the bottom of an abyss.
But this moved him. There was in this scene a point which pierced androused even him. He had but one idea now, to die; and he did not wishto be turned aside from it, but he reflected, in his gloomysomnambulism, that while destroying himself, he was not prohibited fromsaving some one else.
He raised his voice.
“Enjolras and Combeferre are right,” said he; “no unnecessarysacrifice. I join them, and you must make haste. Combeferre has saidconvincing things to you. There are some among you who have families,mothers, sisters, wives, children. Let such leave the ranks.”

No one stirred.
“Married men and the supporters of families, step out of the ranks!”repeated Marius.
His authority was great. Enjolras was certainly the head of thebarricade, but Marius was its savior.
“I order it,” cried Enjolras.
“I entreat you,” said Marius.
Then, touched by Combeferre’s words, shaken by Enjolras’ order, touchedby Marius’ entreaty, these heroic men began to denounce each other.—“Itis true,” said one young man to a full grown man, “you are the fatherof a family. Go.”—“It is your duty rather,” retorted the man, “you havetwo sisters whom you maintain.”—And an unprecedented controversy brokeforth. Each struggled to determine which should not allow himself to beplaced at the door of the tomb.
“Make haste,” said Courfeyrac, “in another quarter of an hour it willbe too late.”

“Citizens,” pursued Enjolras, “this is the Republic, and universalsuffrage reigns. Do you yourselves designate those who are to go.”

They obeyed. After the expiration of a few minutes, five wereunanimously selected and stepped out of the ranks.
“There are five of them!” exclaimed Marius.
There were only four uniforms.
“Well,” began the five, “one must stay behind.”

And then a struggle arose as to who should remain, and who should findreasons for the others not remaining. The generous quarrel beganafresh.
“You have a wife who loves you.”—“You have your aged mother.”—” Youhave neither father nor mother, and what is to become of your threelittle brothers?”—“You are the father of five children.”—“You have aright to live, you are only seventeen, it is too early for you to die.”

These great revolutionary barricades were assembling points forheroism. The improbable was simple there. These men did not astonisheach other.
“Be quick,” repeated Courfeyrac.
Men shouted to Marius from the groups:
“Do you designate who is to remain.”

“Yes,” said the five, “choose. We will obey you.”

Marius did not believe that he was capable of another emotion. Still,at this idea, that of choosing a man for death, his blood rushed backto his heart. He would have turned pale, had it been possible for himto become any paler.
He advanced towards the five, who smiled upon him, and each, with hiseyes full of that grand flame which one beholds in the depths ofhistory hovering over Thermopylæ, cried to him:
“Me! me! me!”

And Marius stupidly counted them; there were still five of them! Thenhis glance dropped to the four uniforms.
At that moment, a fifth uniform fell, as if from heaven, upon the otherfour.
The fifth man was saved.
Marius raised his eyes and recognized M. Fauchelevent.
Jean Valjean had just entered the barricade.
He had arrived by way of Mondétour lane, whither by dint of inquiriesmade, or by instinct, or chance. Thanks to his dress of a NationalGuardsman, he had made his way without difficulty.
The sentinel stationed by the insurgents in the Rue Mondétour had nooccasion to give the alarm for a single National Guardsman, and he hadallowed the latter to entangle himself in the street, saying tohimself: “Probably it is a reinforcement, in any case it is aprisoner.” The moment was too grave to admit of the sentinel abandoninghis duty and his post of observation.
At the moment when Jean Valjean entered the redoubt, no one had noticedhim, all eyes being fixed on the five chosen men and the four uniforms.Jean Valjean also had seen and heard, and he had silently removed hiscoat and flung it on the pile with the rest.
The emotion aroused was indescribable.
“Who is this man?” demanded Bossuet.
“He is a man who saves others,” replied Combeferre.
Marius added in a grave voice:
“I know him.”

This guarantee satisfied every one.
Enjolras turned to Jean Valjean.
“Welcome, citizen.”

And he added:
“You know that we are about to die.”

Jean Valjean, without replying, helped the insurgent whom he was savingto don his uniform.



CHAPTER V—THE HORIZON WHICH ONE BEHOLDS FROM THE SUMMIT OF A BARRICADE

The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place, had asresult and culminating point Enjolras’ supreme melancholy.
Enjolras bore within him the plenitude of the revolution; he wasincomplete, however, so far as the absolute can be so; he had too muchof Saint-Just about him, and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots; still,his mind, in the society of the Friends of the A B C, had ended byundergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre’s ideas; for sometime past, he had been gradually emerging from the narrow form ofdogma, and had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influenceof progress, and he had come to accept, as a definitive and magnificentevolution, the transformation of the great French Republic, into theimmense human republic. As far as the immediate means were concerned, aviolent situation being given, he wished to be violent; on that point,he never varied; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable schoolwhich is summed up in the words: “Eighty-three.” Enjolras was standingerect on the staircase of paving-stones, one elbow resting on the stockof his gun. He was engaged in thought; he quivered, as at the passageof prophetic breaths; places where death is have these effects oftripods. A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes, which were filledwith an inward look. All at once he threw back his head, his blondlocks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made ofstars, they were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of anhalo, and Enjolras cried:
“Citizens, do you picture the future to yourselves? The streets ofcities inundated with light, green branches on the thresholds, nationssisters, men just, old men blessing children, the past loving thepresent, thinkers entirely at liberty, believers on terms of fullequality, for religion heaven, God the direct priest, human consciencebecome an altar, no more hatreds, the fraternity of the workshop andthe school, for sole penalty and recompense fame, work for all, rightfor all, peace over all, no more bloodshed, no more wars, happymothers! To conquer matter is the first step; to realize the ideal isthe second. Reflect on what progress has already accomplished.Formerly, the first human races beheld with terror the hydra passbefore their eyes, breathing on the waters, the dragon which vomitedflame, the griffin who was the monster of the air, and who flew withthe wings of an eagle and the talons of a tiger; fearful beasts whichwere above man. Man, nevertheless, spread his snares, consecrated byintelligence, and finally conquered these monsters. We have vanquishedthe hydra, and it is called the locomotive; we are on the point ofvanquishing the griffin, we already grasp it, and it is called theballoon. On the day when this Promethean task shall be accomplished,and when man shall have definitely harnessed to his will the tripleChimæra of antiquity, the hydra, the dragon and the griffin, he will bethe master of water, fire, and of air, and he will be for the rest ofanimated creation that which the ancient gods formerly were to him.Courage, and onward! Citizens, whither are we going? To science madegovernment, to the force of things become the sole public force, to thenatural law, having in itself its sanction and its penalty andpromulgating itself by evidence, to a dawn of truth corresponding to adawn of day. We are advancing to the union of peoples; we are advancingto the unity of man. No more fictions; no more parasites. The realgoverned by the true, that is the goal. Civilization will hold itsassizes at the summit of Europe, and, later on, at the centre ofcontinents, in a grand parliament of the intelligence. Somethingsimilar has already been seen. The amphictyons had two sittings a year,one at Delphos the seat of the gods, the other at Thermopylæ, the placeof heroes. Europe will have her amphictyons; the globe will have itsamphictyons. France bears this sublime future in her breast. This isthe gestation of the nineteenth century. That which Greece sketched outis worthy of being finished by France. Listen to me, you, Feuilly,valiant artisan, man of the people. I revere you. Yes, you clearlybehold the future, yes, you are right. You had neither father normother, Feuilly; you adopted humanity for your mother and right foryour father. You are about to die, that is to say to triumph, here.Citizens, whatever happens to-day, through our defeat as well asthrough our victory, it is a revolution that we are about to create. Asconflagrations light up a whole city, so revolutions illuminate thewhole human race. And what is the revolution that we shall cause? Ihave just told you, the Revolution of the True. From a political pointof view, there is but a single principle; the sovereignty of man overhimself. This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty.Where two or three of these sovereignties are combined, the statebegins. But in that association there is no abdication. Eachsovereignty concedes a certain quantity of itself, for the purpose offorming the common right. This quantity is the same for all of us. Thisidentity of concession which each makes to all, is called Equality.Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming on theright of each. This protection of all over each is called Fraternity.The point of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties iscalled society. This intersection being a junction, this point is aknot. Hence what is called the social bond. Some say social contract;which is the same thing, the word contract being etymologically formedwith the idea of a bond. Let us come to an understanding aboutequality; for, if liberty is the summit, equality is the base.Equality, citizens, is not wholly a surface vegetation, a society ofgreat blades of grass and tiny oaks; a proximity of jealousies whichrender each other null and void; legally speaking, it is all aptitudespossessed of the same opportunity; politically, it is all votespossessed of the same weight; religiously, it is all consciencespossessed of the same right. Equality has an organ: gratuitous andobligatory instruction. The right to the alphabet, that is where thebeginning must be made. The primary school imposed on all, thesecondary school offered to all, that is the law. From an identicalschool, an identical society will spring. Yes, instruction! light!light! everything comes from light, and to it everything returns.Citizens, the nineteenth century is great, but the twentieth centurywill be happy. Then, there will be nothing more like the history ofold, we shall no longer, as to-day, have to fear a conquest, aninvasion, a usurpation, a rivalry of nations, arms in hand, aninterruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings, on abirth in hereditary tyrannies, a partition of peoples by a congress, adismemberment because of the failure of a dynasty, a combat of tworeligions meeting face to face, like two bucks in the dark, on thebridge of the infinite; we shall no longer have to fear famine, farmingout, prostitution arising from distress, misery from the failure ofwork and the scaffold and the sword, and battles and the ruffianism ofchance in the forest of events. One might almost say: There will be nomore events. We shall be happy. The human race will accomplish its law,as the terrestrial globe accomplishes its law; harmony will bere-established between the soul and the star; the soul will gravitatearound the truth, as the planet around the light. Friends, the presenthour in which I am addressing you, is a gloomy hour; but these areterrible purchases of the future. A revolution is a toll. Oh! the humanrace will be delivered, raised up, consoled! We affirm it on thisbarrier. Whence should proceed that cry of love, if not from theheights of sacrifice? Oh my brothers, this is the point of junction, ofthose who think and of those who suffer; this barricade is not made ofpaving-stones, nor of joists, nor of bits of iron; it is made of twoheaps, a heap of ideas, and a heap of woes. Here misery meets theideal. The day embraces the night, and says to it: ‘I am about to die,and thou shalt be born again with me.’ From the embrace of alldesolations faith leaps forth. Sufferings bring hither their agony andideas their immortality. This agony and this immortality are about tojoin and constitute our death. Brothers, he who dies here dies in theradiance of the future, and we are entering a tomb all flooded with thedawn.”

Enjolras paused rather than became silent; his lips continued to movesilently, as though he were talking to himself, which caused them allto gaze attentively at him, in the endeavor to hear more. There was noapplause; but they whispered together for a long time. Speech being abreath, the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves.



CHAPTER VI—MARIUS HAGGARD, JAVERT LACONIC

Let us narrate what was passing in Marius’ thoughts.
Let the reader recall the state of his soul. We have just recalled it,everything was a vision to him now. His judgment was disturbed. Marius,let us insist on this point, was under the shadow of the great, darkwings which are spread over those in the death agony. He felt that hehad entered the tomb, it seemed to him that he was already on the otherside of the wall, and he no longer beheld the faces of the livingexcept with the eyes of one dead.
How did M. Fauchelevent come there? Why was he there? What had he comethere to do? Marius did not address all these questions to himself.Besides, since our despair has this peculiarity, that it envelopsothers as well as ourselves, it seemed logical to him that all theworld should come thither to die.
Only, he thought of Cosette with a pang at his heart.
However, M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him, did not look at him, andhad not even the air of hearing him, when Marius raised his voice tosay: “I know him.”

As far as Marius was concerned, this attitude of M. Fauchelevent wascomforting, and, if such a word can be used for such impressions, weshould say that it pleased him. He had always felt the absoluteimpossibility of addressing that enigmatical man, who was, in his eyes,both equivocal and imposing. Moreover, it had been a long time since hehad seen him; and this still further augmented the impossibility forMarius’ timid and reserved nature.
The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondétour lane; theybore a perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard. One ofthem wept as he took his leave. Before setting out, they embraced thosewho remained.
When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure, Enjolrasthought of the man who had been condemned to death.
He entered the tap-room. Javert, still bound to the post, was engagedin meditation.
“Do you want anything?” Enjolras asked him.
Javert replied: “When are you going to kill me?”

“Wait. We need all our cartridges just at present.”

“Then give me a drink,” said Javert.
Enjolras himself offered him a glass of water, and, as Javert waspinioned, he helped him to drink.
“Is that all?” inquired Enjolras.
“I am uncomfortable against this post,” replied Javert. “You are nottender to have left me to pass the night here. Bind me as you please,but you surely might lay me out on a table like that other man.”

And with a motion of the head, he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf.
There was, as the reader will remember, a long, broad table at the endof the room, on which they had been running bullets and makingcartridges. All the cartridges having been made, and all the powderused, this table was free.
At Enjolras’ command, four insurgents unbound Javert from the post.While they were loosing him, a fifth held a bayonet against his breast.
Leaving his arms tied behind his back, they placed about his feet aslender but stout whip-cord, as is done to men on the point of mountingthe scaffold, which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches inlength, and made him walk to the table at the end of the room, wherethey laid him down, closely bound about the middle of the body.
By way of further security, and by means of a rope fastened to hisneck, they added to the system of ligatures which rendered everyattempt at escape impossible, that sort of bond which is called inprisons a martingale, which, starting at the neck, forks on thestomach, and meets the hands, after passing between the legs.
While they were binding Javert, a man standing on the threshold wassurveying him with singular attention. The shadow cast by this man madeJavert turn his head. He raised his eyes, and recognized Jean Valjean.He did not even start, but dropped his lids proudly and confinedhimself to the remark: “It is perfectly simple.”




CHAPTER VII—THE SITUATION BECOMES AGGRAVATED

The daylight was increasing rapidly. Not a window was opened, not adoor stood ajar; it was the dawn but not the awaking. The end of theRue de la Chanvrerie, opposite the barricade, had been evacuated by thetroops, as we have stated, it seemed to be free, and presented itselfto passers-by with a sinister tranquillity. The Rue Saint-Denis was asdumb as the avenue of Sphinxes at Thebes. Not a living being in thecrossroads, which gleamed white in the light of the sun. Nothing is somournful as this light in deserted streets. Nothing was to be seen, butthere was something to be heard. A mysterious movement was going on ata certain distance. It was evident that the critical moment wasapproaching. As on the previous evening, the sentinels had come in; butthis time all had come.
The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack.Since the departure of the five, they had increased its height stillfurther.
On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of theHalles, Enjolras, for fear of a surprise in the rear, came to a seriousdecision. He had the small gut of the Mondétour lane, which had beenleft open up to that time, barricaded. For this purpose, they tore upthe pavement for the length of several houses more. In this manner, thebarricade, walled on three streets, in front on the Rue de laChanvrerie, to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la PetiteTruanderie, to the right on the Rue Mondétour, was really almostimpregnable; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there. It hadthree fronts, but no exit.—“A fortress but a rat hole too,” saidCourfeyrac with a laugh.
Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones “torn up in excess,” saidBossuet, piled up near the door of the wine-shop.
The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack mustneeds come, that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle.
An allowance of brandy was doled out to each.
Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault. Eachman selects his place as though at the theatre. They jostle, and elbowand crowd each other. There are some who make stalls of paving-stones.Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way, it is removed; hereis a redan which may afford protection, they take shelter behind it.Left-handed men are precious; they take the places that areinconvenient to the rest. Many arrange to fight in a sitting posture.They wish to be at ease to kill, and to die comfortably. In the sad warof June, 1848, an insurgent who was a formidable marksman, and who wasfiring from the top of a terrace upon a roof, had a reclining-chairbrought there for his use; a charge of grape-shot found him out there.
As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks foraction, all disorderly movements cease; there is no more pulling fromone another; there are no more coteries; no more asides, there is nomore holding aloof; everything in their spirits converges in, andchanges into, a waiting for the assailants. A barricade before thearrival of danger is chaos; in danger, it is discipline itself. Perilproduces order.
As soon as Enjolras had seized his double-barrelled rifle, and hadplaced himself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved forhimself, all the rest held their peace. A series of faint, sharp noisesresounded confusedly along the wall of paving-stones. It was the mencocking their guns.
Moreover, their attitudes were prouder, more confident than ever; theexcess of sacrifice strengthens; they no longer cherished any hope, butthey had despair, despair,—the last weapon, which sometimes givesvictory; Virgil has said so. Supreme resources spring from extremeresolutions. To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping ashipwreck; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety.
As on the preceding evening, the attention of all was directed, wemight almost say leaned upon, the end of the street, now lighted up andvisible.
They had not long to wait. A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leuquarter, but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack. Aclashing of chains, the uneasy jolting of a mass, the click of brassskipping along the pavement, a sort of solemn uproar, announced thatsome sinister construction of iron was approaching. There arose atremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old streets, pierced and builtfor the fertile circulation of interests and ideas, and which are notmade for the horrible rumble of the wheels of war.
The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of thestreet became ferocious.
A cannon made its appearance.
Artillery-men were pushing the piece; it was in firing trim; thefore-carriage had been detached; two upheld the gun-carriage, four wereat the wheels; others followed with the caisson. They could see thesmoke of the burning lint-stock.
“Fire!” shouted Enjolras.
The whole barricade fired, the report was terrible; an avalanche ofsmoke covered and effaced both cannon and men; after a few seconds, thecloud dispersed, and the cannon and men reappeared; the gun-crew hadjust finished rolling it slowly, correctly, without haste, intoposition facing the barricade. Not one of them had been struck. Thenthe captain of the piece, bearing down upon the breech in order toraise the muzzle, began to point the cannon with the gravity of anastronomer levelling a telescope.
“Bravo for the cannoneers!” cried Bossuet.
And the whole barricade clapped their hands.
A moment later, squarely planted in the very middle of the street,astride of the gutter, the piece was ready for action. A formidablepair of jaws yawned on the barricade.
“Come, merrily now!” ejaculated Courfeyrac. “That’s the brutal part ofit. After the fillip on the nose, the blow from the fist. The army isreaching out its big paw to us. The barricade is going to be severelyshaken up. The fusillade tries, the cannon takes.”

“It is a piece of eight, new model, brass,” added Combeferre. “Thosepieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts oftin to one hundred of brass is exceeded. The excess of tin renders themtoo tender. Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chamberswhen looked at from the vent hole. In order to obviate this danger, andto render it possible to force the charge, it may become necessary toreturn to the process of the fourteenth century, hooping, and toencircle the piece on the outside with a series of unwelded steelbands, from the breech to the trunnions. In the meantime, they remedythis defect as best they may; they manage to discover where the holesare located in the vent of a cannon, by means of a searcher. But thereis a better method, with Gribeauval’s movable star.”

“In the sixteenth century,” remarked Bossuet, “they used to riflecannon.”

“Yes,” replied Combeferre, “that augments the projectile force, butdiminishes the accuracy of the firing. In firing at short range, thetrajectory is not as rigid as could be desired, the parabola isexaggerated, the line of the projectile is no longer sufficientlyrectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects, which is,nevertheless, a necessity of battle, the importance of which increaseswith the proximity of the enemy and the precipitation of the discharge.This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifledcannon of the sixteenth century arose from the smallness of the charge;small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballisticnecessities, such, for instance, as the preservation of thegun-carriage. In short, that despot, the cannon, cannot do all that itdesires; force is a great weakness. A cannon-ball only travels sixhundred leagues an hour; light travels seventy thousand leagues asecond. Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon.”

“Reload your guns,” said Enjolras.
How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under thecannon-balls? Would they effect a breach? That was the question. Whilethe insurgents were reloading their guns, the artillery-men wereloading the cannon.
The anxiety in the redoubt was profound.
The shot sped the report burst forth.
“Present!” shouted a joyous voice.
And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashedagainst it.
He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne, and he had nimblyclimbed over the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth ofthe Rue de la Petite Truanderie.
Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than thecannon-ball.
The ball buried itself in the mass of rubbish. At the most there was anomnibus wheel broken, and the old Anceau cart was demolished. On seeingthis, the barricade burst into a laugh.
“Go on!” shouted Bossuet to the artillerists.



CHAPTER VIII—THE ARTILLERY-MEN COMPEL PEOPLE TO TAKE THEM SERIOUSLY

They flocked round Gavroche. But he had no time to tell anything.Marius drew him aside with a shudder.
“What are you doing here?”

“Hullo!” said the child, “what are you doing here yourself?”

And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery. His eyesgrew larger with the proud light within them.
It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued:
“Who told you to come back? Did you deliver my letter at the address?”

Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of thatletter. In his haste to return to the barricade, he had got rid of itrather than delivered it. He was forced to acknowledge to himself thathe had confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he hadnot been able to make out. It is true that the man was bareheaded, butthat was not sufficient. In short, he had been administering to himselflittle inward remonstrances and he feared Marius’ reproaches. In orderto extricate himself from the predicament, he took the simplest course;he lied abominably.
“Citizen, I delivered the letter to the porter. The lady was asleep.She will have the letter when she wakes up.”

Marius had had two objects in sending that letter: to bid farewell toCosette and to save Gavroche. He was obliged to content himself withthe half of his desire.
The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in thebarricade, was a coincidence which occurred to him. He pointed out M.Fauchelevent to Gavroche.
“Do you know that man?”

“No,” said Gavroche.
Gavroche had, in fact, as we have just mentioned, seen Jean Valjeanonly at night.
The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves inMarius’ mind were dissipated. Did he know M. Fauchelevent’s opinions?Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican. Hence his very naturalpresence in this combat.
In the meanwhile, Gavroche was shouting, at the other end of thebarricade: “My gun!”

Courfeyrac had it returned to him.
Gavroche warned “his comrades” as he called them, that the barricadewas blocked. He had had great difficulty in reaching it. A battalion ofthe line whose arms were piled in the Rue de la Petite Truanderie wason the watch on the side of the Rue du Cygne; on the opposite side, themunicipal guard occupied the Rue des Prêcheurs. The bulk of the armywas facing them in front.
This information given, Gavroche added:
“I authorize you to hit ‘em a tremendous whack.”

Meanwhile, Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at hisembrasure.
The assailants, dissatisfied, no doubt, with their shot, had notrepeated it.
A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end ofthe street behind the piece of ordnance. The soldiers were tearing upthe pavement and constructing with the stones a small, low wall, a sortof side-work not more than eighteen inches high, and facing thebarricade. In the angle at the left of this epaulement, there wasvisible the head of the column of a battalion from the suburbs massedin the Rue Saint-Denis.
Enjolras, on the watch, thought he distinguished the peculiar soundwhich is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from thecaissons, and he saw the commander of the piece change the elevationand incline the mouth of the cannon slightly to the left. Then thecannoneers began to load the piece. The chief seized the lint-stockhimself and lowered it to the vent.
“Down with your heads, hug the wall!” shouted Enjolras, “and all onyour knees along the barricade!”

The insurgents who were straggling in front of the wine-shop, and whohad quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche’s arrival, rushedpell-mell towards the barricade; but before Enjolras’ order could beexecuted, the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of around of grape-shot. This is what it was, in fact.
The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt, and had thererebounded from the wall; and this terrible rebound had produced twodead and three wounded.
If this were continued, the barricade was no longer tenable. Thegrape-shot made its way in.
A murmur of consternation arose.
“Let us prevent the second discharge,” said Enjolras.
And, lowering his rifle, he took aim at the captain of the gun, who, atthat moment, was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifyingand definitely fixing its pointing.
The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery, veryyoung, blond, with a very gentle face, and the intelligent air peculiarto that predestined and redoubtable weapon which, by dint of perfectingitself in horror, must end in killing war.
Combeferre, who was standing beside Enjolras, scrutinized this youngman.
“What a pity!” said Combeferre. “What hideous things these butcheriesare! Come, when there are no more kings, there will be no more war.Enjolras, you are taking aim at that sergeant, you are not looking athim. Fancy, he is a charming young man; he is intrepid; it is evidentthat he is thoughtful; those young artillery-men are very welleducated; he has a father, a mother, a family; he is probably in love;he is not more than five and twenty at the most; he might be yourbrother.”

“He is,” said Enjolras.
“Yes,” replied Combeferre, “he is mine too. Well, let us not kill him.”

“Let me alone. It must be done.”

And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras’ marble cheek.
At the same moment, he pressed the trigger of his rifle. The flameleaped forth. The artillery-man turned round twice, his arms extendedin front of him, his head uplifted, as though for breath, then he fellwith his side on the gun, and lay there motionless. They could see hisback, from the centre of which there flowed directly a stream of blood.The ball had traversed his breast from side to side. He was dead.
He had to be carried away and replaced by another. Several minutes werethus gained, in fact.



CHAPTER IX—EMPLOYMENT OF THE OLD TALENTS OF A POACHER AND THATINFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796

Opinions were exchanged in the barricade. The firing from the gun wasabout to begin again. Against that grape-shot, they could not hold outa quarter of an hour longer. It was absolutely necessary to deaden theblows.
Enjolras issued this command:
“We must place a mattress there.”

“We have none,” said Combeferre, “the wounded are lying on them.”

Jean Valjean, who was seated apart on a stone post, at the corner ofthe tavern, with his gun between his knees, had, up to that moment,taken no part in anything that was going on. He did not appear to hearthe combatants saying around him: “Here is a gun that is doingnothing.”

At the order issued by Enjolras, he rose.
It will be remembered that, on the arrival of the rabble in the Rue dela Chanvrerie, an old woman, foreseeing the bullets, had placed hermattress in front of her window. This window, an attic window, was onthe roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade.The mattress, placed cross-wise, supported at the bottom on two polesfor drying linen, was upheld at the top by two ropes, which, at thatdistance, looked like two threads, and which were attached to two nailsplanted in the window frames. These ropes were distinctly visible, likehairs, against the sky.
“Can some one lend me a double-barrelled rifle?” said Jean Valjean.
Enjolras, who had just re-loaded his, handed it to him.
Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired.
One of the mattress ropes was cut.
The mattress now hung by one thread only.
Jean Valjean fired the second charge. The second rope lashed the panesof the attic window. The mattress slipped between the two poles andfell into the street.
The barricade applauded.
All voices cried:
“Here is a mattress!”

“Yes,” said Combeferre, “but who will go and fetch it?”

The mattress had, in fact, fallen outside the barricade, betweenbesiegers and besieged. Now, the death of the sergeant of artilleryhaving exasperated the troop, the soldiers had, for several minutes,been lying flat on their stomachs behind the line of paving-stoneswhich they had erected, and, in order to supply the forced silence ofthe piece, which was quiet while its service was in course ofreorganization, they had opened fire on the barricade. The insurgentsdid not reply to this musketry, in order to spare their ammunition. Thefusillade broke against the barricade; but the street, which it filled,was terrible.
Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut, entered the street, traversed thestorm of bullets, walked up to the mattress, hoisted it upon his back,and returned to the barricade.
He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands. He fixed it thereagainst the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not seeit.
That done, they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot.
It was not long in coming.
The cannon vomited forth its package of buckshot with a roar. But therewas no rebound. The effect which they had foreseen had been attained.The barricade was saved.
“Citizen,” said Enjolras to Jean Valjean, “the Republic thanks you.”

Bossuet admired and laughed. He exclaimed:
“It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power. Triumph ofthat which yields over that which strikes with lightning. But nevermind, glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon!”




CHAPTER X—DAWN

At that moment, Cosette awoke.
Her chamber was narrow, neat, unobtrusive, with a long sash-window,facing the East on the back court-yard of the house.
Cosette knew nothing of what was going on in Paris. She had not beenthere on the preceding evening, and she had already retired to herchamber when Toussaint had said:
“It appears that there is a row.”

Cosette had slept only a few hours, but soundly. She had had sweetdreams, which possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was verywhite. Some one, who was Marius, had appeared to her in the light. Sheawoke with the sun in her eyes, which, at first, produced on her theeffect of being a continuation of her dream. Her first thought onemerging from this dream was a smiling one. Cosette felt herselfthoroughly reassured. Like Jean Valjean, she had, a few hourspreviously, passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutelywill not hear of unhappiness. She began to cherish hope, with all hermight, without knowing why. Then she felt a pang at her heart. It wasthree days since she had seen Marius. But she said to herself that hemust have received her letter, that he knew where she was, and that hewas so clever that he would find means of reaching her.—And thatcertainly to-day, and perhaps that very morning.—It was broad daylight,but the rays of light were very horizontal; she thought that it wasvery early, but that she must rise, nevertheless, in order to receiveMarius.
She felt that she could not live without Marius, and that,consequently, that was sufficient and that Marius would come. Noobjection was valid. All this was certain. It was monstrous enoughalready to have suffered for three days. Marius absent three days, thiswas horrible on the part of the good God. Now, this cruel teasing fromon high had been gone through with. Marius was about to arrive, and hewould bring good news. Youth is made thus; it quickly dries its eyes;it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it. Youth is the smile ofthe future in the presence of an unknown quantity, which is itself. Itis natural to it to be happy. It seems as though its respiration weremade of hope.
Moreover, Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on thesubject of this absence which was to last only one day, and whatexplanation of it he had given her. Every one has noticed with whatnimbleness a coin which one has dropped on the ground rolls away andhides, and with what art it renders itself undiscoverable. There arethoughts which play us the same trick; they nestle away in a corner ofour brain; that is the end of them; they are lost; it is impossible tolay the memory on them. Cosette was somewhat vexed at the uselesslittle effort made by her memory. She told herself, that it was verynaughty and very wicked of her, to have forgotten the words uttered byMarius.
She sprang out of bed and accomplished the two ablutions of soul andbody, her prayers and her toilet.
One may, in a case of exigency, introduce the reader into a nuptialchamber, not into a virginal chamber. Verse would hardly venture it,prose must not.
It is the interior of a flower that is not yet unfolded, it iswhiteness in the dark, it is the private cell of a closed lily, whichmust not be gazed upon by man so long as the sun has not gazed upon it.Woman in the bud is sacred. That innocent bud which opens, thatadorable half-nudity which is afraid of itself, that white foot whichtakes refuge in a slipper, that throat which veils itself before amirror as though a mirror were an eye, that chemise which makes hasteto rise up and conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture ora passing vehicle, those cords tied, those clasps fastened, those lacesdrawn, those tremors, those shivers of cold and modesty, that exquisiteaffright in every movement, that almost winged uneasiness where thereis no cause for alarm, the successive phases of dressing, as charmingas the clouds of dawn,—it is not fitting that all this should benarrated, and it is too much to have even called attention to it.
The eye of man must be more religious in the presence of the rising ofa young girl than in the presence of the rising of a star. Thepossibility of hurting should inspire an augmentation of respect. Thedown on the peach, the bloom on the plum, the radiated crystal of thesnow, the wing of the butterfly powdered with feathers, are coarsecompared to that chastity which does not even know that it is chaste.The young girl is only the flash of a dream, and is not yet a statue.Her bed-chamber is hidden in the sombre part of the ideal. Theindiscreet touch of a glance brutalizes this vague penumbra. Here,contemplation is profanation.
We shall, therefore, show nothing of that sweet little flutter ofCosette’s rising.
An oriental tale relates how the rose was made white by God, but thatAdam looked upon her when she was unfolding, and she was ashamed andturned crimson. We are of the number who fall speechless in thepresence of young girls and flowers, since we think them worthy ofveneration.
Cosette dressed herself very hastily, combed and dressed her hair,which was a very simple matter in those days, when women did not swellout their curls and bands with cushions and puffs, and did not putcrinoline in their locks. Then she opened the window and cast her eyesaround her in every direction, hoping to descry some bit of the street,an angle of the house, an edge of pavement, so that she might be ableto watch for Marius there. But no view of the outside was to be had.The back court was surrounded by tolerably high walls, and the outlookwas only on several gardens. Cosette pronounced these gardens hideous:for the first time in her life, she found flowers ugly. The smallestscrap of the gutter of the street would have met her wishes better. Shedecided to gaze at the sky, as though she thought that Marius mightcome from that quarter.
All at once, she burst into tears. Not that this was fickleness ofsoul; but hopes cut in twain by dejection—that was her case. She had aconfused consciousness of something horrible. Thoughts were rife in theair, in fact. She told herself that she was not sure of anything, thatto withdraw herself from sight was to be lost; and the idea that Mariuscould return to her from heaven appeared to her no longer charming butmournful.
Then, as is the nature of these clouds, calm returned to her, and hopeand a sort of unconscious smile, which yet indicated trust in God.
Every one in the house was still asleep. A country-like silencereigned. Not a shutter had been opened. The porter’s lodge was closed.Toussaint had not risen, and Cosette, naturally, thought that herfather was asleep. She must have suffered much, and she must have stillbeen suffering greatly, for she said to herself, that her father hadbeen unkind; but she counted on Marius. The eclipse of such a light wasdecidedly impossible. Now and then, she heard sharp shocks in thedistance, and she said: “It is odd that people should be opening andshutting their carriage gates so early.” They were the reports of thecannon battering the barricade.
A few feet below Cosette’s window, in the ancient and perfectly blackcornice of the wall, there was a martin’s nest; the curve of this nestformed a little projection beyond the cornice, so that from above itwas possible to look into this little paradise. The mother was there,spreading her wings like a fan over her brood; the father flutteredabout, flew away, then came back, bearing in his beak food and kisses.The dawning day gilded this happy thing, the great law, “Multiply,” laythere smiling and august, and that sweet mystery unfolded in the gloryof the morning. Cosette, with her hair in the sunlight, her soulabsorbed in chimæras, illuminated by love within and by the dawnwithout, bent over mechanically, and almost without daring to avow toherself that she was thinking at the same time of Marius, began to gazeat these birds, at this family, at that male and female, that motherand her little ones, with the profound trouble which a nest produces ona virgin.



CHAPTER XI—THE SHOT WHICH MISSES NOTHING AND KILLS NO ONE

The assailants’ fire continued. Musketry and grape-shot alternated, butwithout committing great ravages, to tell the truth. The top alone ofthe Corinthe façade suffered; the window on the first floor, and theattic window in the roof, riddled with buckshot and biscaïens, wereslowly losing their shape. The combatants who had been posted there hadbeen obliged to withdraw. However, this is according to the tactics ofbarricades; to fire for a long while, in order to exhaust theinsurgents’ ammunition, if they commit the mistake of replying. When itis perceived, from the slackening of their fire, that they have no morepowder and ball, the assault is made. Enjolras had not fallen into thistrap; the barricade did not reply.
At every discharge by platoons, Gavroche puffed out his cheek with histongue, a sign of supreme disdain.
“Good for you,” said he, “rip up the cloth. We want some lint.”

Courfeyrac called the grape-shot to order for the little effect whichit produced, and said to the cannon:
“You are growing diffuse, my good fellow.”

One gets puzzled in battle, as at a ball. It is probable that thissilence on the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegersuneasy, and to make them fear some unexpected incident, and that theyfelt the necessity of getting a clear view behind that heap ofpaving-stones, and of knowing what was going on behind that impassablewall which received blows without retorting. The insurgents suddenlyperceived a helmet glittering in the sun on a neighboring roof. Afireman had placed his back against a tall chimney, and seemed to beacting as sentinel. His glance fell directly down into the barricade.
“There’s an embarrassing watcher,” said Enjolras.
Jean Valjean had returned Enjolras’ rifle, but he had his own gun.
Without saying a word, he took aim at the fireman, and, a second later,the helmet, smashed by a bullet, rattled noisily into the street. Theterrified soldier made haste to disappear. A second observer took hisplace. This one was an officer. Jean Valjean, who had re-loaded hisgun, took aim at the newcomer and sent the officer’s casque to join thesoldier’s. The officer did not persist, and retired speedily. This timethe warning was understood. No one made his appearance thereafter onthat roof; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned.
“Why did you not kill the man?” Bossuet asked Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean made no reply.



CHAPTER XII—DISORDER A PARTISAN OF ORDER

Bossuet muttered in Combeferre’s ear:
“He did not answer my question.”

“He is a man who does good by gun-shots,” said Combeferre.
Those who have preserved some memory of this already distant epoch knowthat the National Guard from the suburbs was valiant againstinsurrections. It was particularly zealous and intrepid in the days ofJune, 1832. A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or laCunette, whose “establishment” had been closed by the riots, becameleonine at the sight of his deserted dance-hall, and got himself killedto preserve the order represented by a tea-garden. In that bourgeoisand heroic time, in the presence of ideas which had their knights,interests had their paladins. The prosiness of the originatorsdetracted nothing from the bravery of the movement. The diminution of apile of crowns made bankers sing the Marseillaise. They shed theirblood lyrically for the counting-house; and they defended the shop,that immense diminutive of the fatherland, with Lacedæmonianenthusiasm.
At bottom, we will observe, there was nothing in all this that was notextremely serious. It was social elements entering into strife, whileawaiting the day when they should enter into equilibrium.
Another sign of the times was the anarchy mingled with governmentalism[the barbarous name of the correct party]. People were for order incombination with lack of discipline.
The drum suddenly beat capricious calls, at the command of such or sucha Colonel of the National Guard; such and such a captain went intoaction through inspiration; such and such National Guardsmen fought,“for an idea,” and on their own account. At critical moments, on “days”they took counsel less of their leaders than of their instincts. Thereexisted in the army of order, veritable guerilleros, some of the sword,like Fannicot, others of the pen, like Henri Fonfrède.
Civilization, unfortunately, represented at this epoch rather by anaggregation of interests than by a group of principles, was or thoughtitself, in peril; it set up the cry of alarm; each, constitutinghimself a centre, defended it, succored it, and protected it with hisown head; and the first comer took it upon himself to save society.
Zeal sometimes proceeded to extermination. A platoon of the NationalGuard would constitute itself on its own authority a private council ofwar, and judge and execute a captured insurgent in five minutes. It wasan improvisation of this sort that had slain Jean Prouvaire. FierceLynch law, with which no one party had any right to reproach the rest,for it has been applied by the Republic in America, as well as by themonarchy in Europe. This Lynch law was complicated with mistakes. Onone day of rioting, a young poet, named Paul Aimé Garnier, was pursuedin the Place Royale, with a bayonet at his loins, and only escaped bytaking refuge under the porte-cochère of No. 6. They shouted:—“There’sanother of those Saint-Simonians!” and they wanted to kill him. Now, hehad under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon. ANational Guard had read the words _Saint-Simon_ on the book, and hadshouted: “Death!”

On the 6th of June, 1832, a company of the National Guards from thesuburbs, commanded by the Captain Fannicot, above mentioned, had itselfdecimated in the Rue de la Chanvrerie out of caprice and its own goodpleasure. This fact, singular though it may seem, was proved at thejudicial investigation opened in consequence of the insurrection of1832. Captain Fannicot, a bold and impatient bourgeois, a sort ofcondottiere of the order of those whom we have just characterized, afanatical and intractable governmentalist, could not resist thetemptation to fire prematurely, and the ambition of capturing thebarricade alone and unaided, that is to say, with his company.Exasperated by the successive apparition of the red flag and the oldcoat which he took for the black flag, he loudly blamed the generalsand chiefs of the corps, who were holding council and did not thinkthat the moment for the decisive assault had arrived, and who wereallowing “the insurrection to fry in its own fat,” to use thecelebrated expression of one of them. For his part, he thought thebarricade ripe, and as that which is ripe ought to fall, he made theattempt.
He commanded men as resolute as himself, “raging fellows,” as a witnesssaid. His company, the same which had shot Jean Prouvaire the poet, wasthe first of the battalion posted at the angle of the street. At themoment when they were least expecting it, the captain launched his menagainst the barricade. This movement, executed with more good will thanstrategy, cost the Fannicot company dear. Before it had traversed twothirds of the street it was received by a general discharge from thebarricade. Four, the most audacious, who were running on in front, weremown down point-blank at the very foot of the redoubt, and thiscourageous throng of National Guards, very brave men but lacking inmilitary tenacity, were forced to fall back, after some hesitation,leaving fifteen corpses on the pavement. This momentary hesitation gavethe insurgents time to re-load their weapons, and a second and verydestructive discharge struck the company before it could regain thecorner of the street, its shelter. A moment more, and it was caughtbetween two fires, and it received the volley from the battery piecewhich, not having received the order, had not discontinued its firing.
The intrepid and imprudent Fannicot was one of the dead from thisgrape-shot. He was killed by the cannon, that is to say, by order.
This attack, which was more furious than serious, irritatedEnjolras.—“The fools!” said he. “They are getting their own men killedand they are using up our ammunition for nothing.”

Enjolras spoke like the real general of insurrection which he was.Insurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons.Insurrection, which is speedily exhausted, has only a certain number ofshots to fire and a certain number of combatants to expend. An emptycartridge-box, a man killed, cannot be replaced. As repression has thearmy, it does not count its men, and, as it has Vincennes, it does notcount its shots. Repression has as many regiments as the barricade hasmen, and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes. Thusthey are struggles of one against a hundred, which always end incrushing the barricade; unless the revolution, uprising suddenly,flings into the balance its flaming archangel’s sword. This does happensometimes. Then everything rises, the pavements begin to seethe,popular redoubts abound. Paris quivers supremely, the _quid divinum_ isgiven forth, a 10th of August is in the air, a 29th of July is in theair, a wonderful light appears, the yawning maw of force draws back,and the army, that lion, sees before it, erect and tranquil, thatprophet, France.



CHAPTER XIII—PASSING GLEAMS

In the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade, thereis a little of everything; there is bravery, there is youth, honor,enthusiasm, the ideal, conviction, the rage of the gambler, and, aboveall, intermittences of hope.
One of these intermittences, one of these vague quivers of hopesuddenly traversed the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie at themoment when it was least expected.
“Listen,” suddenly cried Enjolras, who was still on the watch, “itseems to me that Paris is waking up.”

It is certain that, on the morning of the 6th of June, the insurrectionbroke out afresh for an hour or two, to a certain extent. The obstinacyof the alarm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies. Barricadeswere begun in the Rue du Poirier and the Rue des Gravilliers. In frontof the Porte Saint-Martin, a young man, armed with a rifle, attackedalone a squadron of cavalry. In plain sight, on the open boulevard, heplaced one knee on the ground, shouldered his weapon, fired, killed thecommander of the squadron, and turned away, saying: “There’s anotherwho will do us no more harm.”

He was put to the sword. In the Rue Saint-Denis, a woman fired on theNational Guard from behind a lowered blind. The slats of the blindcould be seen to tremble at every shot. A child fourteen years of agewas arrested in the Rue de la Cossonerie, with his pockets full ofcartridges. Many posts were attacked. At the entrance to the RueBertin-Poirée, a very lively and utterly unexpected fusillade welcomeda regiment of cuirrassiers, at whose head marched Marshal GeneralCavaignac de Barague. In the Rue Planche-Mibray, they threw old piecesof pottery and household utensils down on the soldiers from the roofs;a bad sign; and when this matter was reported to Marshal Soult,Napoleon’s old lieutenant grew thoughtful, as he recalled Suchet’ssaying at Saragossa: “We are lost when the old women empty their potsde chambre on our heads.”

These general symptoms which presented themselves at the moment when itwas thought that the uprising had been rendered local, this fever ofwrath, these sparks which flew hither and thither above those deepmasses of combustibles which are called the faubourgs of Paris,—allthis, taken together, disturbed the military chiefs. They made haste tostamp out these beginnings of conflagration.
They delayed the attack on the barricades Maubuée, de la Chanvrerie andSaint-Merry until these sparks had been extinguished, in order thatthey might have to deal with the barricades only and be able to finishthem at one blow. Columns were thrown into the streets where there wasfermentation, sweeping the large, sounding the small, right and left,now slowly and cautiously, now at full charge. The troops broke in thedoors of houses whence shots had been fired; at the same time,manœuvres by the cavalry dispersed the groups on the boulevards. Thisrepression was not effected without some commotion, and without thattumultuous uproar peculiar to collisions between the army and thepeople. This was what Enjolras had caught in the intervals of thecannonade and the musketry. Moreover, he had seen wounded men passingthe end of the street in litters, and he said to Courfeyrac:—“Thosewounded do not come from us.”

Their hope did not last long; the gleam was quickly eclipsed. In lessthan half an hour, what was in the air vanished, it was a flash oflightning unaccompanied by thunder, and the insurgents felt that sortof leaden cope, which the indifference of the people casts overobstinate and deserted men, fall over them once more.
The general movement, which seemed to have assumed a vague outline, hadmiscarried; and the attention of the minister of war and the strategyof the generals could now be concentrated on the three or fourbarricades which still remained standing.
The sun was mounting above the horizon.
An insurgent hailed Enjolras.
“We are hungry here. Are we really going to die like this, withoutanything to eat?”

Enjolras, who was still leaning on his elbows at his embrasure, made anaffirmative sign with his head, but without taking his eyes from theend of the street.



CHAPTER XIV—WHEREIN WILL APPEAR THE NAME OF ENJOLRAS’ MISTRESS

Courfeyrac, seated on a paving-stone beside Enjolras, continued toinsult the cannon, and each time that that gloomy cloud of projectileswhich is called grape-shot passed overhead with its terrible sound heassailed it with a burst of irony.
“You are wearing out your lungs, poor, brutal, old fellow, you pain me,you are wasting your row. That’s not thunder, it’s a cough.”

And the bystanders laughed.
Courfeyrac and Bossuet, whose brave good humor increased with theperil, like Madame Scarron, replaced nourishment with pleasantry, and,as wine was lacking, they poured out gayety to all.
“I admire Enjolras,” said Bossuet. “His impassive temerity astounds me.He lives alone, which renders him a little sad, perhaps; Enjolrascomplains of his greatness, which binds him to widowhood. The rest ofus have mistresses, more or less, who make us crazy, that is to say,brave. When a man is as much in love as a tiger, the least that he cando is to fight like a lion. That is one way of taking our revenge forthe capers that mesdames our grisettes play on us. Roland gets himselfkilled for Angélique; all our heroism comes from our women. A manwithout a woman is a pistol without a trigger; it is the woman thatsets the man off. Well, Enjolras has no woman. He is not in love, andyet he manages to be intrepid. It is a thing unheard of that a manshould be as cold as ice and as bold as fire.”

Enjolras did not appear to be listening, but had any one been near him,that person would have heard him mutter in a low voice: “Patria.”

Bossuet was still laughing when Courfeyrac exclaimed:
“News!”

And assuming the tone of an usher making an announcement, he added:
“My name is Eight-Pounder.”

In fact, a new personage had entered on the scene. This was a secondpiece of ordnance.
The artillery-men rapidly performed their manœuvres in force and placedthis second piece in line with the first.
This outlined the catastrophe.
A few minutes later, the two pieces, rapidly served, were firingpoint-blank at the redoubt; the platoon firing of the line and of thesoldiers from the suburbs sustained the artillery.
Another cannonade was audible at some distance. At the same time thatthe two guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de laChanvrerie, two other cannons, trained one from the Rue Saint-Denis,the other from the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher, were riddling the Saint-Merrybarricade. The four cannons echoed each other mournfully.
The barking of these sombre dogs of war replied to each other.
One of the two pieces which was now battering the barricade on the Ruede la Chanvrerie was firing grape-shot, the other balls.
The piece which was firing balls was pointed a little high, and the aimwas calculated so that the ball struck the extreme edge of the uppercrest of the barricade, and crumbled the stone down upon theinsurgents, mingled with bursts of grape-shot.
The object of this mode of firing was to drive the insurgents from thesummit of the redoubt, and to compel them to gather close in theinterior, that is to say, this announced the assault.
The combatants once driven from the crest of the barricade by balls,and from the windows of the cabaret by grape-shot, the attackingcolumns could venture into the street without being picked off,perhaps, even, without being seen, could briskly and suddenly scale theredoubt, as on the preceding evening, and, who knows? take it bysurprise.
“It is absolutely necessary that the inconvenience of those guns shouldbe diminished,” said Enjolras, and he shouted: “Fire on theartillery-men!”

All were ready. The barricade, which had long been silent, poured fortha desperate fire; seven or eight discharges followed, with a sort ofrage and joy; the street was filled with blinding smoke, and, at theend of a few minutes, athwart this mist all streaked with flame, twothirds of the gunners could be distinguished lying beneath the wheelsof the cannons. Those who were left standing continued to serve thepieces with severe tranquillity, but the fire had slackened.
“Things are going well now,” said Bossuet to Enjolras. “Success.”

Enjolras shook his head and replied:
“Another quarter of an hour of this success, and there will not be anycartridges left in the barricade.”

It appears that Gavroche overheard this remark.



CHAPTER XV—GAVROCHE OUTSIDE

Courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of thebarricade, outside in the street, amid the bullets.
Gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine-shop, had made his wayout through the cut, and was quietly engaged in emptying the fullcartridge-boxes of the National Guardsmen who had been killed on theslope of the redoubt, into his basket.
“What are you doing there?” asked Courfeyrac.
Gavroche raised his face:—
“I’m filling my basket, citizen.”

“Don’t you see the grape-shot?”

Gavroche replied:
“Well, it is raining. What then?”

Courfeyrac shouted:—“Come in!”

“Instanter,” said Gavroche.
And with a single bound he plunged into the street.
It will be remembered that Fannicot’s company had left behind it atrail of bodies. Twenty corpses lay scattered here and there on thepavement, through the whole length of the street. Twenty cartouches forGavroche meant a provision of cartridges for the barricade.
The smoke in the street was like a fog. Whoever has beheld a cloudwhich has fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpmentscan imagine this smoke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rowsof lofty houses. It rose gradually and was incessantly renewed; hence atwilight which made even the broad daylight turn pale. The combatantscould hardly see each other from one end of the street to the other,short as it was.
This obscurity, which had probably been desired and calculated on bythe commanders who were to direct the assault on the barricade, wasuseful to Gavroche.
Beneath the folds of this veil of smoke, and thanks to his small size,he could advance tolerably far into the street without being seen. Herifled the first seven or eight cartridge-boxes without much danger.
He crawled flat on his belly, galloped on all fours, took his basket inhis teeth, twisted, glided, undulated, wound from one dead body toanother, and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens anut.
They did not dare to shout to him to return from the barricade, whichwas quite near, for fear of attracting attention to him.
On one body, that of a corporal, he found a powder-flask.
“For thirst,” said he, putting it in his pocket.
By dint of advancing, he reached a point where the fog of the fusilladebecame transparent. So that the sharpshooters of the line ranged on theoutlook behind their paving-stone dike and the sharpshooters of thebanlieue massed at the corner of the street suddenly pointed out toeach other something moving through the smoke.
At the moment when Gavroche was relieving a sergeant, who was lyingnear a stone door-post, of his cartridges, a bullet struck the body.
“Fichtre!” ejaculated Gavroche. “They are killing my dead men for me.”

A second bullet struck a spark from the pavement beside him.—A thirdoverturned his basket.
Gavroche looked and saw that this came from the men of the banlieue.
He sprang to his feet, stood erect, with his hair flying in the wind,his hands on his hips, his eyes fixed on the National Guardsmen whowere firing, and sang:
“On est laid à Nanterre,       “Men are ugly at Nanterre,C’est la faute à Voltaire;     ‘Tis the  fault of Voltaire;Et bête à Palaiseau,           And dull at Palaiseau,C’est la faute à Rousseau.”    ‘Tis the fault of Rousseau.”

Then he picked up his basket, replaced the cartridges which had fallenfrom it, without missing a single one, and, advancing towards thefusillade, set about plundering another cartridge-box. There a fourthbullet missed him, again. Gavroche sang:
“Je ne suis pas notaire,      “I am not a notary,C’est la faute à Voltaire;    ‘Tis the fault of Voltaire;Je suis un petit oiseau,      I’m a little bird,C’est la faute à Rousseau.”   ‘Tis the fault of Rousseau.”

A fifth bullet only succeeded in drawing from him a third couplet.
“Joie est mon caractère,      “Joy is my character,C’est la faute à Voltaire;    ‘Tis the fault of Voltaire;Misère est mon trousseau,     Misery is my trousseau,C’est la faute à Rousseau.”   ‘Tis the fault of Rousseau.”

Thus it went on for some time.
It was a charming and terrible sight. Gavroche, though shot at, wasteasing the fusillade. He had the air of being greatly diverted. It wasthe sparrow pecking at the sportsmen. To each discharge he retortedwith a couplet. They aimed at him constantly, and always missed him.The National Guardsmen and the soldiers laughed as they took aim athim. He lay down, sprang to his feet, hid in the corner of a doorway,then made a bound, disappeared, reappeared, scampered away, returned,replied to the grape-shot with his thumb at his nose, and, all thewhile, went on pillaging the cartouches, emptying the cartridge-boxes,and filling his basket. The insurgents, panting with anxiety, followedhim with their eyes. The barricade trembled; he sang. He was not achild, he was not a man; he was a strange gamin-fairy. He might havebeen called the invulnerable dwarf of the fray. The bullets flew afterhim, he was more nimble than they. He played a fearful game of hide andseek with death; every time that the flat-nosed face of the spectreapproached, the urchin administered to it a fillip.
One bullet, however, better aimed or more treacherous than the rest,finally struck the will-o’-the-wisp of a child. Gavroche was seen tostagger, then he sank to the earth. The whole barricade gave vent to acry; but there was something of Antæus in that pygmy; for the gamin totouch the pavement is the same as for the giant to touch the earth;Gavroche had fallen only to rise again; he remained in a sittingposture, a long thread of blood streaked his face, he raised both armsin the air, glanced in the direction whence the shot had come, andbegan to sing:
“Je suis tombé par terre,     “I have fallen to the earth,C’est la faute à Voltaire;    ‘Tis the fault of Voltaire;Le nez dans le ruisseau,      With my nose in the gutter,C’est la faute à . . . “      ‘Tis the fault of . . . ”

He did not finish. A second bullet from the same marksman stopped himshort. This time he fell face downward on the pavement, and moved nomore. This grand little soul had taken its flight.



CHAPTER XVI—HOW FROM A BROTHER ONE BECOMES A FATHER

At that same moment, in the garden of the Luxembourg,—for the gaze ofthe drama must be everywhere present,—two children were holding eachother by the hand. One might have been seven years old, the other five.The rain having soaked them, they were walking along the paths on thesunny side; the elder was leading the younger; they were pale andragged; they had the air of wild birds. The smaller of them said: “I amvery hungry.”

The elder, who was already somewhat of a protector, was leading hisbrother with his left hand and in his right he carried a small stick.
They were alone in the garden. The garden was deserted, the gates hadbeen closed by order of the police, on account of the insurrection. Thetroops who had been bivouacking there had departed for the exigenciesof combat.
How did those children come there? Perhaps they had escaped from someguard-house which stood ajar; perhaps there was in the vicinity, at theBarrière d’Enfer; or on the Esplanade de l’Observatoire, or in theneighboring carrefour, dominated by the pediment on which could beread: _Invenerunt parvulum pannis involutum_, some mountebank’s boothfrom which they had fled; perhaps they had, on the preceding evening,escaped the eye of the inspectors of the garden at the hour of closing,and had passed the night in some one of those sentry-boxes where peopleread the papers? The fact is, they were stray lambs and they seemedfree. To be astray and to seem free is to be lost. These poor littlecreatures were, in fact, lost.
These two children were the same over whom Gavroche had been put tosome trouble, as the reader will recollect. Children of theThénardiers, leased out to Magnon, attributed to M. Gillenormand, andnow leaves fallen from all these rootless branches, and swept over theground by the wind. Their clothing, which had been clean in Magnon’sday, and which had served her as a prospectus with M. Gillenormand, hadbeen converted into rags.
Henceforth these beings belonged to the statistics as “Abandonedchildren,” whom the police take note of, collect, mislay and find againon the pavements of Paris.
It required the disturbance of a day like that to account for thesemiserable little creatures being in that garden. If the superintendentshad caught sight of them, they would have driven such rags forth. Poorlittle things do not enter public gardens; still, people should reflectthat, as children, they have a right to flowers.
These children were there, thanks to the locked gates. They were therecontrary to the regulations. They had slipped into the garden and therethey remained. Closed gates do not dismiss the inspectors, oversight issupposed to continue, but it grows slack and reposes; and theinspectors, moved by the public anxiety and more occupied with theoutside than the inside, no longer glanced into the garden, and had notseen the two delinquents.
It had rained the night before, and even a little in the morning. Butin June, showers do not count for much. An hour after a storm, it canhardly be seen that the beautiful blonde day has wept. The earth, insummer, is as quickly dried as the cheek of a child. At that period ofthe solstice, the light of full noonday is, so to speak, poignant. Ittakes everything. It applies itself to the earth, and superposes itselfwith a sort of suction. One would say that the sun was thirsty. Ashower is but a glass of water; a rainstorm is instantly drunk up. Inthe morning everything was dripping, in the afternoon everything ispowdered over.
Nothing is so worthy of admiration as foliage washed by the rain andwiped by the rays of sunlight; it is warm freshness. The gardens andmeadows, having water at their roots, and sun in their flowers, becomeperfuming-pans of incense, and smoke with all their odors at once.Everything smiles, sings and offers itself. One feels gentlyintoxicated. The springtime is a provisional paradise, the sun helpsman to have patience.
There are beings who demand nothing further; mortals, who, having theazure of heaven, say: “It is enough!” dreamers absorbed in thewonderful, dipping into the idolatry of nature, indifferent to good andevil, contemplators of cosmos and radiantly forgetful of man, who donot understand how people can occupy themselves with the hunger ofthese, and the thirst of those, with the nudity of the poor in winter,with the lymphatic curvature of the little spinal column, with thepallet, the attic, the dungeon, and the rags of shivering young girls,when they can dream beneath the trees; peaceful and terrible spiritsthey, and pitilessly satisfied. Strange to say, the infinite sufficesthem. That great need of man, the finite, which admits of embrace, theyignore. The finite which admits of progress and sublime toil, they donot think about. The indefinite, which is born from the human anddivine combination of the infinite and the finite, escapes them.Provided that they are face to face with immensity, they smile. Joynever, ecstasy forever. Their life lies in surrendering theirpersonality in contemplation. The history of humanity is for them onlya detailed plan. All is not there; the true All remains without; whatis the use of busying oneself over that detail, man? Man suffers, thatis quite possible; but look at Aldebaran rising! The mother has no moremilk, the new-born babe is dying. I know nothing about that, but justlook at this wonderful rosette which a slice of wood-cells of the pinepresents under the microscope! Compare the most beautiful Mechlin laceto that if you can! These thinkers forget to love. The zodiac thriveswith them to such a point that it prevents their seeing the weepingchild. God eclipses their souls. This is a family of minds which are,at once, great and petty. Horace was one of them; so was Goethe. LaFontaine perhaps; magnificent egoists of the infinite, tranquilspectators of sorrow, who do not behold Nero if the weather be fair,for whom the sun conceals the funeral pile, who would look on at anexecution by the guillotine in the search for an effect of light, whohear neither the cry nor the sob, nor the death rattle, nor the alarmpeal, for whom everything is well, since there is a month of May, who,so long as there are clouds of purple and gold above their heads,declare themselves content, and who are determined to be happy untilthe radiance of the stars and the songs of the birds are exhausted.
These are dark radiances. They have no suspicion that they are to bepitied. Certainly they are so. He who does not weep does not see. Theyare to be admired and pitied, as one would both pity and admire a beingat once night and day, without eyes beneath his lashes but with a staron his brow.
The indifference of these thinkers, is, according to some, a superiorphilosophy. That may be; but in this superiority there is someinfirmity. One may be immortal and yet limp: witness Vulcan. One may bemore than man and less than man. There is incomplete immensity innature. Who knows whether the sun is not a blind man?
But then, what? In whom can we trust? _Solem quis dicere falsumaudeat?_ Who shall dare to say that the sun is false? Thus certaingeniuses, themselves, certain Very-Lofty mortals, man-stars, may bemistaken? That which is on high at the summit, at the crest, at thezenith, that which sends down so much light on the earth, sees butlittle, sees badly, sees not at all? Is not this a desperate state ofthings? No. But what is there, then, above the sun? The god.
On the 6th of June, 1832, about eleven o’clock in the morning, theLuxembourg, solitary and depopulated, was charming. The quincunxes andflower-beds shed forth balm and dazzling beauty into the sunlight. Thebranches, wild with the brilliant glow of midday, seemed endeavoring toembrace. In the sycamores there was an uproar of linnets, sparrowstriumphed, woodpeckers climbed along the chestnut trees, administeringlittle pecks on the bark. The flower-beds accepted the legitimateroyalty of the lilies; the most august of perfumes is that whichemanates from whiteness. The peppery odor of the carnations wasperceptible. The old crows of Marie de Medici were amorous in the talltrees. The sun gilded, empurpled, set fire to and lighted up thetulips, which are nothing but all the varieties of flame made intoflowers. All around the banks of tulips the bees, the sparks of theseflame-flowers, hummed. All was grace and gayety, even the impendingrain; this relapse, by which the lilies of the valley and thehoneysuckles were destined to profit, had nothing disturbing about it;the swallows indulged in the charming threat of flying low. He who wasthere aspired to happiness; life smelled good; all nature exhaledcandor, help, assistance, paternity, caress, dawn. The thoughts whichfell from heaven were as sweet as the tiny hand of a baby when onekisses it.
The statues under the trees, white and nude, had robes of shadowpierced with light; these goddesses were all tattered with sunlight;rays hung from them on all sides. Around the great fountain, the earthwas already dried up to the point of being burnt. There was sufficientbreeze to raise little insurrections of dust here and there. A fewyellow leaves, left over from the autumn, chased each other merrily,and seemed to be playing tricks on each other.
This abundance of light had something indescribably reassuring aboutit. Life, sap, heat, odors overflowed; one was conscious, beneathcreation, of the enormous size of the source; in all these breathspermeated with love, in this interchange of reverberations andreflections, in this marvellous expenditure of rays, in this infiniteoutpouring of liquid gold, one felt the prodigality of theinexhaustible; and, behind this splendor as behind a curtain of flame,one caught a glimpse of God, that millionaire of stars.
Thanks to the sand, there was not a speck of mud; thanks to the rain,there was not a grain of ashes. The clumps of blossoms had just beenbathed; every sort of velvet, satin, gold and varnish, which springsfrom the earth in the form of flowers, was irreproachable. Thismagnificence was cleanly. The grand silence of happy nature filled thegarden. A celestial silence that is compatible with a thousand sorts ofmusic, the cooing of nests, the buzzing of swarms, the flutterings ofthe breeze. All the harmony of the season was complete in one graciouswhole; the entrances and exits of spring took place in proper order;the lilacs ended; the jasmines began; some flowers were tardy, someinsects in advance of their time; the van-guard of the red Junebutterflies fraternized with the rear-guard of the white butterflies ofMay. The plantain trees were getting their new skins. The breezehollowed out undulations in the magnificent enormity of thechestnut-trees. It was splendid. A veteran from the neighboringbarracks, who was gazing through the fence, said: “Here is the Springpresenting arms and in full uniform.”

All nature was breakfasting; creation was at table; this was its hour;the great blue cloth was spread in the sky, and the great green clothon earth; the sun lighted it all up brilliantly. God was serving theuniversal repast. Each creature had his pasture or his mess. Thering-dove found his hemp-seed, the chaffinch found his millet, thegoldfinch found chickweed, the red-breast found worms, the green finchfound flies, the fly found infusoriæ, the bee found flowers. They ateeach other somewhat, it is true, which is the misery of evil mixed withgood; but not a beast of them all had an empty stomach.
The two little abandoned creatures had arrived in the vicinity of thegrand fountain, and, rather bewildered by all this light, they tried tohide themselves, the instinct of the poor and the weak in the presenceof even impersonal magnificence; and they kept behind the swans’ hutch.
Here and there, at intervals, when the wind blew, shouts, clamor, asort of tumultuous death rattle, which was the firing, and dull blows,which were discharges of cannon, struck the ear confusedly. Smoke hungover the roofs in the direction of the Halles. A bell, which had theair of an appeal, was ringing in the distance.
These children did not appear to notice these noises. The little onerepeated from time to time: “I am hungry.”

Almost at the same instant with the children, another couple approachedthe great basin. They consisted of a goodman, about fifty years of age,who was leading by the hand a little fellow of six. No doubt, a fatherand his son. The little man of six had a big brioche.
At that epoch, certain houses abutting on the river, in the Rues Madameand d’Enfer, had keys to the Luxembourg garden, of which the lodgersenjoyed the use when the gates were shut, a privilege which wassuppressed later on. This father and son came from one of these houses,no doubt.
The two poor little creatures watched “that gentleman” approaching, andhid themselves a little more thoroughly.
He was a bourgeois. The same person, perhaps, whom Marius had one dayheard, through his love fever, near the same grand basin, counsellinghis son “to avoid excesses.” He had an affable and haughty air, and amouth which was always smiling, since it did not shut. This mechanicalsmile, produced by too much jaw and too little skin, shows the teethrather than the soul. The child, with his brioche, which he had bitteninto but had not finished eating, seemed satiated. The child wasdressed as a National Guardsman, owing to the insurrection, and thefather had remained clad as a bourgeois out of prudence.
Father and son halted near the fountain where two swans were sporting.This bourgeois appeared to cherish a special admiration for the swans.He resembled them in this sense, that he walked like them.
For the moment, the swans were swimming, which is their principaltalent, and they were superb.
If the two poor little beings had listened and if they had been of anage to understand, they might have gathered the words of this graveman. The father was saying to his son:
“The sage lives content with little. Look at me, my son. I do not lovepomp. I am never seen in clothes decked with gold lace and stones; Ileave that false splendor to badly organized souls.”

Here the deep shouts which proceeded from the direction of the Hallesburst out with fresh force of bell and uproar.
“What is that?” inquired the child.
The father replied:
“It is the Saturnalia.”

All at once, he caught sight of the two little ragged boys behind thegreen swan-hutch.
“There is the beginning,” said he.
And, after a pause, he added:
“Anarchy is entering this garden.”

In the meanwhile, his son took a bite of his brioche, spit it out, and,suddenly burst out crying.
“What are you crying about?” demanded his father.
“I am not hungry any more,” said the child.
The father’s smile became more accentuated.
“One does not need to be hungry in order to eat a cake.”

“My cake tires me. It is stale.”

“Don’t you want any more of it?”

“No.”

The father pointed to the swans.
“Throw it to those palmipeds.”

The child hesitated. A person may not want any more of his cake; butthat is no reason for giving it away.
The father went on:
“Be humane. You must have compassion on animals.”

And, taking the cake from his son, he flung it into the basin.
The cake fell very near the edge.
The swans were far away, in the centre of the basin, and busy with someprey. They had seen neither the bourgeois nor the brioche.
The bourgeois, feeling that the cake was in danger of being wasted, andmoved by this useless shipwreck, entered upon a telegraphic agitation,which finally attracted the attention of the swans.
They perceived something floating, steered for the edge like ships, asthey are, and slowly directed their course toward the brioche, with thestupid majesty which befits white creatures.
“The swans [_cygnes_] understand signs [_signes_],” said the bourgeois,delighted to make a jest.
At that moment, the distant tumult of the city underwent another suddenincrease. This time it was sinister. There are some gusts of wind whichspeak more distinctly than others. The one which was blowing at thatmoment brought clearly defined drum-beats, clamors, platoon firing, andthe dismal replies of the tocsin and the cannon. This coincided with ablack cloud which suddenly veiled the sun.
The swans had not yet reached the brioche.
“Let us return home,” said the father, “they are attacking theTuileries.”

He grasped his son’s hand again. Then he continued:
“From the Tuileries to the Luxembourg, there is but the distance whichseparates Royalty from the peerage; that is not far. Shots will soonrain down.”

He glanced at the cloud.
“Perhaps it is rain itself that is about to shower down; the sky isjoining in; the younger branch is condemned. Let us return homequickly.”

“I should like to see the swans eat the brioche,” said the child.
The father replied:
“That would be imprudent.”

And he led his little bourgeois away.
The son, regretting the swans, turned his head back toward the basinuntil a corner of the quincunxes concealed it from him.
In the meanwhile, the two little waifs had approached the brioche atthe same time as the swans. It was floating on the water. The smallerof them stared at the cake, the elder gazed after the retreatingbourgeois.
Father and son entered the labyrinth of walks which leads to the grandflight of steps near the clump of trees on the side of the Rue Madame.
As soon as they had disappeared from view, the elder child hastilyflung himself flat on his stomach on the rounding curb of the basin,and clinging to it with his left hand, and leaning over the water, onthe verge of falling in, he stretched out his right hand with his sticktowards the cake. The swans, perceiving the enemy, made haste, and inso doing, they produced an effect of their breasts which was of serviceto the little fisher; the water flowed back before the swans, and oneof these gentle concentric undulations softly floated the briochetowards the child’s wand. Just as the swans came up, the stick touchedthe cake. The child gave it a brisk rap, drew in the brioche,frightened away the swans, seized the cake, and sprang to his feet. Thecake was wet; but they were hungry and thirsty. The elder broke thecake into two portions, a large one and a small one, took the small onefor himself, gave the large one to his brother, and said to him:
“Ram that into your muzzle.”




CHAPTER XVII—MORTUUS PATER FILIUM MORITURUM EXPECTAT

Marius dashed out of the barricade, Combeferre followed him. But he wastoo late. Gavroche was dead. Combeferre brought back the basket ofcartridges; Marius bore the child.
“Alas!” he thought, “that which the father had done for his father, hewas requiting to the son; only, Thénardier had brought back his fatheralive; he was bringing back the child dead.”

When Marius re-entered the redoubt with Gavroche in his arms, his face,like the child, was inundated with blood.
At the moment when he had stooped to lift Gavroche, a bullet had grazedhis head; he had not noticed it.
Courfeyrac untied his cravat and with it bandaged Marius’ brow.
They laid Gavroche on the same table with Mabeuf, and spread over thetwo corpses the black shawl. There was enough of it for both the oldman and the child.
Combeferre distributed the cartridges from the basket which he hadbrought in.
This gave each man fifteen rounds to fire.
Jean Valjean was still in the same place, motionless on his stone post.When Combeferre offered him his fifteen cartridges, he shook his head.
“Here’s a rare eccentric,” said Combeferre in a low voice to Enjolras.“He finds a way of not fighting in this barricade.”

“Which does not prevent him from defending it,” responded Enjolras.
“Heroism has its originals,” resumed Combeferre.
And Courfeyrac, who had overheard, added:
“He is another sort from Father Mabeuf.”

One thing which must be noted is, that the fire which was battering thebarricade hardly disturbed the interior. Those who have never traversedthe whirlwind of this sort of war can form no idea of the singularmoments of tranquillity mingled with these convulsions. Men go andcome, they talk, they jest, they lounge. Some one whom we know heard acombatant say to him in the midst of the grape-shot: “We are here as ata bachelor breakfast.” The redoubt of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, werepeat, seemed very calm within. All mutations and all phases had been,or were about to be, exhausted. The position, from critical, had becomemenacing, and, from menacing, was probably about to become desperate.In proportion as the situation grew gloomy, the glow of heroismempurpled the barricade more and more. Enjolras, who was grave,dominated it, in the attitude of a young Spartan sacrificing his nakedsword to the sombre genius, Epidotas.
Combeferre, wearing an apron, was dressing the wounds: Bossuet andFeuilly were making cartridges with the powder-flask picked up byGavroche on the dead corporal, and Bossuet said to Feuilly: “We aresoon to take the diligence for another planet”; Courfeyrac wasdisposing and arranging on some paving-stones which he had reserved forhimself near Enjolras, a complete arsenal, his sword-cane, his gun, twoholster pistols, and a cudgel, with the care of a young girl setting asmall dunkerque in order. Jean Valjean stared silently at the wallopposite him. An artisan was fastening Mother Hucheloup’s big straw haton his head with a string, “for fear of sun-stroke,” as he said. Theyoung men from the Cougourde d’Aix were chatting merrily amongthemselves, as though eager to speak patois for the last time. Joly,who had taken Widow Hucheloup’s mirror from the wall, was examining histongue in it. Some combatants, having discovered a few crusts of rathermouldy bread, in a drawer, were eagerly devouring them. Marius wasdisturbed with regard to what his father was about to say to him.



CHAPTER XVIII—THE VULTURE BECOME PREY

We must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades.Nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streetsshould be omitted.
Whatever may have been the singular inward tranquillity which we havejust mentioned, the barricade, for those who are inside it, remains,nonetheless, a vision.
There is something of the apocalypse in civil war, all the mists of theunknown are commingled with fierce flashes, revolutions are sphinxes,and any one who has passed through a barricade thinks he has traverseda dream.
The feelings to which one is subject in these places we have pointedout in the case of Marius, and we shall see the consequences; they areboth more and less than life. On emerging from a barricade, one nolonger knows what one has seen there. One has been terrible, but oneknows it not. One has been surrounded with conflicting ideas which hadhuman faces; one’s head has been in the light of the future. There werecorpses lying prone there, and phantoms standing erect. The hours werecolossal and seemed hours of eternity. One has lived in death. Shadowshave passed by. What were they?
One has beheld hands on which there was blood; there was a deafeninghorror; there was also a frightful silence; there were open mouthswhich shouted, and other open mouths which held their peace; one was inthe midst of smoke, of night, perhaps. One fancied that one had touchedthe sinister ooze of unknown depths; one stares at something red onone’s finger nails. One no longer remembers anything.
Let us return to the Rue de la Chanvrerie.
All at once, between two discharges, the distant sound of a clockstriking the hour became audible.
“It is midday,” said Combeferre.
The twelve strokes had not finished striking when Enjolras sprang tohis feet, and from the summit of the barricade hurled this thunderingshout:
“Carry stones up into the houses; line the windowsills and the roofswith them. Half the men to their guns, the other half to thepaving-stones. There is not a minute to be lost.”

A squad of sappers and miners, axe on shoulder, had just made theirappearance in battle array at the end of the street.
This could only be the head of a column; and of what column? Theattacking column, evidently; the sappers charged with the demolition ofthe barricade must always precede the soldiers who are to scale it.
They were, evidently, on the brink of that moment which M.Clermont-Tonnerre, in 1822, called “the tug of war.”

Enjolras’ order was executed with the correct haste which is peculiarto ships and barricades, the only two scenes of combat where escape isimpossible. In less than a minute, two thirds of the stones whichEnjolras had had piled up at the door of Corinthe had been carried upto the first floor and the attic, and before a second minute hadelapsed, these stones, artistically set one upon the other, walled upthe sash-window on the first floor and the windows in the roof to halftheir height. A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly, theprincipal architect, allowed of the passage of the gun-barrels. Thisarmament of the windows could be effected all the more easily since thefiring of grape-shot had ceased. The two cannons were now dischargingball against the centre of the barrier in order to make a hole there,and, if possible, a breach for the assault.
When the stones destined to the final defence were in place, Enjolrashad the bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay,carried to the first floor.
“Who is to drink that?” Bossuet asked him.
“They,” replied Enjolras.
Then they barricaded the window below, and held in readiness the ironcross-bars which served to secure the door of the wine-shop at night.
The fortress was complete. The barricade was the rampart, the wine-shopwas the dungeon. With the stones which remained they stopped up theoutlet.
As the defenders of a barricade are always obliged to be sparing oftheir ammunition, and as the assailants know this, the assailantscombine their arrangements with a sort of irritating leisure, exposethemselves to fire prematurely, though in appearance more than inreality, and take their ease. The preparations for attack are alwaysmade with a certain methodical deliberation; after which, the lightningstrikes.
This deliberation permitted Enjolras to take a review of everything andto perfect everything. He felt that, since such men were to die, theirdeath ought to be a masterpiece.
He said to Marius: “We are the two leaders. I will give the last ordersinside. Do you remain outside and observe.”

Marius posted himself on the lookout upon the crest of the barricade.
Enjolras had the door of the kitchen, which was the ambulance, as thereader will remember, nailed up.
“No splashing of the wounded,” he said.
He issued his final orders in the tap-room in a curt, but profoundlytranquil tone; Feuilly listened and replied in the name of all.
“On the first floor, hold your axes in readiness to cut the staircase.Have you them?”

“Yes,” said Feuilly.
“How many?”

“Two axes and a pole-axe.”

“That is good. There are now twenty-six combatants of us on foot. Howmany guns are there?”

“Thirty-four.”

“Eight too many. Keep those eight guns loaded like the rest and athand. Swords and pistols in your belts. Twenty men to the barricade.Six ambushed in the attic windows, and at the window on the first floorto fire on the assailants through the loop-holes in the stones. Let nota single worker remain inactive here. Presently, when the drum beatsthe assault, let the twenty below stairs rush to the barricade. Thefirst to arrive will have the best places.”

These arrangements made, he turned to Javert and said:
“I am not forgetting you.”

And, laying a pistol on the table, he added:
“The last man to leave this room will smash the skull of this spy.”

“Here?” inquired a voice.
“No, let us not mix their corpses with our own. The little barricade ofthe Mondétour lane can be scaled. It is only four feet high. The man iswell pinioned. He shall be taken thither and put to death.”

There was some one who was more impassive at that moment than Enjolras,it was Javert. Here Jean Valjean made his appearance.
He had been lost among the group of insurgents. He stepped forth andsaid to Enjolras:
“You are the commander?”

“Yes.”

“You thanked me a while ago.”

“In the name of the Republic. The barricade has two saviors, MariusPontmercy and yourself.”

“Do you think that I deserve a recompense?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, I request one.”

“What is it?”

“That I may blow that man’s brains out.”

Javert raised his head, saw Jean Valjean, made an almost imperceptiblemovement, and said:
“That is just.”

As for Enjolras, he had begun to re-load his rifle; he cut his eyesabout him:
“No objections.”

And he turned to Jean Valjean:
“Take the spy.”

Jean Valjean did, in fact, take possession of Javert, by seatinghimself on the end of the table. He seized the pistol, and a faintclick announced that he had cocked it.
Almost at the same moment, a blast of trumpets became audible.
“Take care!” shouted Marius from the top of the barricade.
Javert began to laugh with that noiseless laugh which was peculiar tohim, and gazing intently at the insurgents, he said to them:
“You are in no better case than I am.”

“All out!” shouted Enjolras.
The insurgents poured out tumultuously, and, as they went, received inthe back,—may we be permitted the expression,—this sally of Javert’s:
“We shall meet again shortly!”




CHAPTER XIX—JEAN VALJEAN TAKES HIS REVENGE

When Jean Valjean was left alone with Javert, he untied the rope whichfastened the prisoner across the middle of the body, and the knot ofwhich was under the table. After this he made him a sign to rise.
Javert obeyed with that indefinable smile in which the supremacy ofenchained authority is condensed.
Jean Valjean took Javert by the martingale, as one would take a beastof burden by the breast-band, and, dragging the latter after him,emerged from the wine-shop slowly, because Javert, with his impededlimbs, could take only very short steps.
Jean Valjean had the pistol in his hand.
In this manner they crossed the inner trapezium of the barricade. Theinsurgents, all intent on the attack, which was imminent, had theirbacks turned to these two.
Marius alone, stationed on one side, at the extreme left of thebarricade, saw them pass. This group of victim and executioner wasilluminated by the sepulchral light which he bore in his own soul.
Jean Valjean with some difficulty, but without relaxing his hold for asingle instant, made Javert, pinioned as he was, scale the littleentrenchment in the Mondétour lane.
When they had crossed this barrier, they found themselves alone in thelane. No one saw them. Among the heap they could distinguish a lividface, streaming hair, a pierced hand and the half nude breast of awoman. It was Éponine. The corner of the houses hid them from theinsurgents. The corpses carried away from the barricade formed aterrible pile a few paces distant.
Javert gazed askance at this body, and, profoundly calm, said in a lowtone:
“It strikes me that I know that girl.”

Then he turned to Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean thrust the pistol under his arm and fixed on Javert a lookwhich it required no words to interpret: “Javert, it is I.”

Javert replied:
“Take your revenge.”

Jean Valjean drew from his pocket a knife, and opened it.
“A clasp-knife!” exclaimed Javert, “you are right. That suits youbetter.”

Jean Valjean cut the martingale which Javert had about his neck, thenhe cut the cords on his wrists, then, stooping down, he cut the cord onhis feet; and, straightening himself up, he said to him:
“You are free.”

Javert was not easily astonished. Still, master of himself though hewas, he could not repress a start. He remained open-mouthed andmotionless.
Jean Valjean continued:
“I do not think that I shall escape from this place. But if, by chance,I do, I live, under the name of Fauchelevent, in the Rue de l’HommeArmé, No. 7.”

Javert snarled like a tiger, which made him half open one corner of hismouth, and he muttered between his teeth:
“Have a care.”

“Go,” said Jean Valjean.
Javert began again:
“Thou saidst Fauchelevent, Rue de l’Homme Armé?”

“Number 7.”

Javert repeated in a low voice:—“Number 7.”

He buttoned up his coat once more, resumed the military stiffnessbetween his shoulders, made a half turn, folded his arms and,supporting his chin on one of his hands, he set out in the direction ofthe Halles. Jean Valjean followed him with his eyes:
A few minutes later, Javert turned round and shouted to Jean Valjean:
“You annoy me. Kill me, rather.”

Javert himself did not notice that he no longer addressed Jean Valjeanas “thou.”

“Be off with you,” said Jean Valjean.
Javert retreated slowly. A moment later he turned the corner of the Ruedes Prêcheurs.
When Javert had disappeared, Jean Valjean fired his pistol in the air.
Then he returned to the barricade and said:
“It is done.”

In the meanwhile, this is what had taken place.
Marius, more intent on the outside than on the interior, had not, up tothat time, taken a good look at the pinioned spy in the dark backgroundof the tap-room.
When he beheld him in broad daylight, striding over the barricade inorder to proceed to his death, he recognized him. Something suddenlyrecurred to his mind. He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise,and the two pistols which the latter had handed to him and which he,Marius, had used in this very barricade, and not only did he recall hisface, but his name as well.
This recollection was misty and troubled, however, like all his ideas.
It was not an affirmation that he made, but a question which he put tohimself:
“Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name wasJavert?”

Perhaps there was still time to intervene in behalf of that man. But,in the first place, he must know whether this was Javert.
Marius called to Enjolras, who had just stationed himself at the otherextremity of the barricade:
“Enjolras!”

“What?”

“What is the name of yonder man?”

“What man?”

“The police agent. Do you know his name?”

“Of course. He told us.”

“What is it?”

“Javert.”

Marius sprang to his feet.
At that moment, they heard the report of the pistol.
Jean Valjean reappeared and cried: “It is done.”

A gloomy chill traversed Marius’ heart.



CHAPTER XX—THE DEAD ARE IN THE RIGHT AND THE LIVING ARE NOT IN THEWRONG

The death agony of the barricade was about to begin.
Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment; athousand mysterious crashes in the air, the breath of armed masses setin movement in the streets which were not visible, the intermittentgallop of cavalry, the heavy shock of artillery on the march, thefiring by squads, and the cannonades crossing each other in thelabyrinth of Paris, the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above theroofs, indescribable and vaguely terrible cries, lightnings of menaceeverywhere, the tocsin of Saint-Merry, which now had the accents of asob, the mildness of the weather, the splendor of the sky filled withsun and clouds, the beauty of the day, and the alarming silence of thehouses.
For, since the preceding evening, the two rows of houses in the Rue dela Chanvrerie had become two walls; ferocious walls, doors closed,windows closed, shutters closed.
In those days, so different from those in which we live, when the hourwas come, when the people wished to put an end to a situation, whichhad lasted too long, with a charter granted or with a legal country,when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere, when the cityconsented to the tearing up of the pavements, when insurrection madethe bourgeoisie smile by whispering its password in its ear, then theinhabitant, thoroughly penetrated with the revolt, so to speak, was theauxiliary of the combatant, and the house fraternized with theimprovised fortress which rested on it. When the situation was notripe, when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted, when the massesdisowned the movement, all was over with the combatants, the city waschanged into a desert around the revolt, souls grew chilled, refugeswere nailed up, and the street turned into a defile to help the army totake the barricade.
A people cannot be forced, through surprise, to walk more quickly thanit chooses. Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand! A people doesnot let itself go at random. Then it abandons the insurrection toitself. The insurgents become noxious, infected with the plague. Ahouse is an escarpment, a door is a refusal, a façade is a wall. Thiswall hears, sees and will not. It might open and save you. No. Thiswall is a judge. It gazes at you and condemns you. What dismal thingsare closed houses. They seem dead, they are living. Life which is, asit were, suspended there, persists there. No one has gone out of themfor four and twenty hours, but no one is missing from them. In theinterior of that rock, people go and come, go to bed and rise again;they are a family party there; there they eat and drink; they areafraid, a terrible thing! Fear excuses this fearful lack ofhospitality; terror is mixed with it, an extenuating circumstance.Sometimes, even, and this has been actually seen, fear turns topassion; fright may change into fury, as prudence does into rage; hencethis wise saying: “The enraged moderates.” There are outbursts ofsupreme terror, whence springs wrath like a mournful smoke.—“What dothese people want? What have they come there to do? Let them get out ofthe scrape. So much the worse for them. It is their fault. They areonly getting what they deserve. It does not concern us. Here is ourpoor street all riddled with balls. They are a pack of rascals. Aboveall things, don’t open the door.”—And the house assumes the air of atomb. The insurgent is in the death-throes in front of that house; hesees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near; if he cries, heknows that they are listening to him, and that no one will come; therestand walls which might protect him, there are men who might save him;and these walls have ears of flesh, and these men have bowels of stone.
Whom shall he reproach?
No one and every one.
The incomplete times in which we live.
It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted intorevolution, and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest,and from Minerva turns to Pallas.
The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaitsit; it almost always comes too soon. Then it becomes resigned, andstoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph. It serves those whodeny it without complaint, even excusing them, and even disculpatesthem, and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment. It isindomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle towards ingratitude.
Is this ingratitude, however?
Yes, from the point of view of the human race.
No, from the point of view of the individual.
Progress is man’s mode of existence. The general life of the human raceis called Progress, the collective stride of the human race is calledProgress. Progress advances; it makes the great human and terrestrialjourney towards the celestial and the divine; it has its halting placeswhere it rallies the laggard troop, it has its stations where itmeditates, in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled onits horizon, it has its nights when it sleeps; and it is one of thepoignant anxieties of the thinker that he sees the shadow resting onthe human soul, and that he gropes in darkness without being able toawaken that slumbering Progress.
“God is dead, perhaps,” said Gerard de Nerval one day to the writer ofthese lines, confounding progress with God, and taking the interruptionof movement for the death of Being.
He who despairs is in the wrong. Progress infallibly awakes, and, inshort, we may say that it marches on, even when it is asleep, for ithas increased in size. When we behold it erect once more, we find ittaller. To be always peaceful does not depend on progress any more thanit does on the stream; erect no barriers, cast in no boulders;obstacles make water froth and humanity boil. Hence arise troubles; butafter these troubles, we recognize the fact that ground has beengained. Until order, which is nothing else than universal peace, hasbeen established, until harmony and unity reign, progress will haverevolutions as its halting-places.
What, then, is progress? We have just enunciated it; the permanent lifeof the peoples.
Now, it sometimes happens, that the momentary life of individualsoffers resistance to the eternal life of the human race.
Let us admit without bitterness, that the individual has his distinctinterests, and can, without forfeiture, stipulate for his interest, anddefend it; the present has its pardonable dose of egotism; momentarylife has its rights, and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly tothe future. The generation which is passing in its turn over the earth,is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations, its equal,after all, who will have their turn later on.—“I exist,” murmurs thatsome one whose name is All. “I am young and in love, I am old and Iwish to repose, I am the father of a family, I toil, I prosper, I amsuccessful in business, I have houses to lease, I have money in thegovernment funds, I am happy, I have a wife and children, I have allthis, I desire to live, leave me in peace.”—Hence, at certain hours, aprofound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race.
Utopia, moreover, we must admit, quits its radiant sphere when it makeswar. It, the truth of to-morrow, borrows its mode of procedure, battle,from the lie of yesterday. It, the future, behaves like the past. It,pure idea, becomes a deed of violence. It complicates its heroism witha violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer; aviolence of occasion and expedient, contrary to principle, and forwhich it is fatally punished. The Utopia, insurrection, fights with theold military code in its fist; it shoots spies, it executes traitors;it suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown darkness. Itmakes use of death, a serious matter. It seems as though Utopia had nolonger any faith in radiance, its irresistible and incorruptible force.It strikes with the sword. Now, no sword is simple. Every blade has twoedges; he who wounds with the one is wounded with the other.
Having made this reservation, and made it with all severity, it isimpossible for us not to admire, whether they succeed or not, those theglorious combatants of the future, the confessors of Utopia. Even whenthey miscarry, they are worthy of veneration; and it is, perhaps, infailure, that they possess the most majesty. Victory, when it is inaccord with progress, merits the applause of the people; but a heroicdefeat merits their tender compassion. The one is magnificent, theother sublime. For our own part, we prefer martyrdom to success. JohnBrown is greater than Washington, and Pisacane is greater thanGaribaldi.
It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of thevanquished.
We are unjust towards these great men who attempt the future, when theyfail.
Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad. Every barricade seemsa crime. Their theories are incriminated, their aim suspected, theirulterior motive is feared, their conscience denounced. They arereproached with raising, erecting, and heaping up, against the reigningsocial state, a mass of miseries, of griefs, of iniquities, of wrongs,of despairs, and of tearing from the lowest depths blocks of shadow inorder therein to embattle themselves and to combat. People shout tothem: “You are tearing up the pavements of hell!” They might reply:“That is because our barricade is made of good intentions.”

The best thing, assuredly, is the pacific solution. In short, let usagree that when we behold the pavement, we think of the bear, and it isa good will which renders society uneasy. But it depends on society tosave itself, it is to its own good will that we make our appeal. Noviolent remedy is necessary. To study evil amiably, to prove itsexistence, then to cure it. It is to this that we invite it.
However that may be, even when fallen, above all when fallen, thesemen, who at every point of the universe, with their eyes fixed onFrance, are striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic ofthe ideal, are august; they give their life a free offering toprogress; they accomplish the will of Providence; they perform areligious act. At the appointed hour, with as much disinterestedness asan actor who answers to his cue, in obedience to the divinestage-manager, they enter the tomb. And this hopeless combat, thisstoical disappearance they accept in order to bring about the supremeand universal consequences, the magnificent and irresistibly humanmovement begun on the 14th of July, 1789; these soldiers are priests.The French revolution is an act of God.
Moreover, there are, and it is proper to add this distinction to thedistinctions already pointed out in another chapter,—there are acceptedrevolutions, revolutions which are called revolutions; there arerefused revolutions, which are called riots.
An insurrection which breaks out, is an idea which is passing itsexamination before the people. If the people lets fall a black ball,the idea is dried fruit; the insurrection is a mere skirmish.
Waging war at every summons and every time that Utopia desires it, isnot the thing for the peoples. Nations have not always and at everyhour the temperament of heroes and martyrs.
They are positive. _A priori_, insurrection is repugnant to them, inthe first place, because it often results in a catastrophe, in thesecond place, because it always has an abstraction as its point ofdeparture.
Because, and this is a noble thing, it is always for the ideal, and forthe ideal alone, that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrificethemselves. An insurrection is an enthusiasm. Enthusiasm may wax wroth;hence the appeal to arms. But every insurrection, which aims at agovernment or a régime, aims higher. Thus, for instance, and we insistupon it, what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832, and, inparticular, the young enthusiasts of the Rue de la Chanvrerie werecombating, was not precisely Louis Philippe. The majority of them, whentalking freely, did justice to this king who stood midway betweenmonarchy and revolution; no one hated him. But they attacked theyounger branch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they hadattacked its elder branch in Charles X.; and that which they wished tooverturn in overturning royalty in France, was, as we have explained,the usurpation of man over man, and of privilege over right in theentire universe. Paris without a king has as result the world withoutdespots. This is the manner in which they reasoned. Their aim wasdistant no doubt, vague perhaps, and it retreated in the face of theirefforts; but it was great.
Thus it is. And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions, which arealmost always illusions for the sacrificed, but illusions with which,after all, the whole of human certainty is mingled. We throw ourselvesinto these tragic affairs and become intoxicated with that which we areabout to do. Who knows? We may succeed. We are few in number, we have awhole army arrayed against us; but we are defending right, the naturallaw, the sovereignty of each one over himself from which no abdicationis possible, justice and truth, and in case of need, we die like thethree hundred Spartans. We do not think of Don Quixote but of Leonidas.And we march straight before us, and once pledged, we do not draw back,and we rush onwards with head held low, cherishing as our hope anunprecedented victory, revolution completed, progress set free again,the aggrandizement of the human race, universal deliverance; and in theevent of the worst, Thermopylæ.
These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck,and we have just explained why. The crowd is restive in the presence ofthe impulses of paladins. Heavy masses, the multitudes which arefragile because of their very weight, fear adventures; and there is atouch of adventure in the ideal.
Moreover, and we must not forget this, interests which are not veryfriendly to the ideal and the sentimental are in the way. Sometimes thestomach paralyzes the heart.
The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this, that she takes lessfrom the stomach than other nations: she more easily knots the ropeabout her loins. She is the first awake, the last asleep. She marchesforwards. She is a seeker.
This arises from the fact that she is an artist.
The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic, the same asthe beautiful is nothing but the summit of the true. Artistic peoplesare also consistent peoples. To love beauty is to see the light. Thatis why the torch of Europe, that is to say of civilization, was firstborne by Greece, who passed it on to Italy, who handed it on to France.Divine, illuminating nations of scouts! _Vitælampada tradunt_.
It is an admirable thing that the poetry of a people is the element ofits progress. The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity ofimagination. Only, a civilizing people should remain a manly people.Corinth, yes; Sybaris, no. Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself abastard. He must be neither a dilettante nor a virtuoso: but he must beartistic. In the matter of civilization, he must not refine, but hemust sublime. On this condition, one gives to the human race thepattern of the ideal.
The modern ideal has its type in art, and its means is science. It isthrough science that it will realize that august vision of the poets,the socially beautiful. Eden will be reconstructed by A+B. At the pointwhich civilization has now reached, the exact is a necessary element ofthe splendid, and the artistic sentiment is not only served, butcompleted by the scientific organ; dreams must be calculated. Art,which is the conqueror, should have for support science, which is thewalker; the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance.The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the genius of India asits vehicle; Alexander on the elephant.
Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit toguide civilization. Genuflection before the idol or before money wastesaway the muscles which walk and the will which advances. Hieratic ormercantile absorption lessens a people’s power of radiance, lowers itshorizon by lowering its level, and deprives it of that intelligence, atonce both human and divine of the universal goal, which makesmissionaries of nations. Babylon has no ideal; Carthage has no ideal.Athens and Rome have and keep, throughout all the nocturnal darkness ofthe centuries, halos of civilization.
France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy. She isAthenian in the matter of beauty, and Roman in her greatness. Moreover,she is good. She gives herself. Oftener than is the case with otherraces, is she in the humor for self-devotion and sacrifice. Only, thishumor seizes upon her, and again abandons her. And therein lies thegreat peril for those who run when she desires only to walk, or whowalk on when she desires to halt. France has her relapses intomaterialism, and, at certain instants, the ideas which obstruct thatsublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatnessand are of the dimensions of a Missouri or a South Carolina. What is tobe done in such a case? The giantess plays at being a dwarf; immenseFrance has her freaks of pettiness. That is all.
To this there is nothing to say. Peoples, like planets, possess theright to an eclipse. And all is well, provided that the light returnsand that the eclipse does not degenerate into night. Dawn andresurrection are synonymous. The reappearance of the light is identicalwith the persistence of the _I_.
Let us state these facts calmly. Death on the barricade or the tomb inexile, is an acceptable occasion for devotion. The real name ofdevotion is disinterestedness. Let the abandoned allow themselves to beabandoned, let the exiled allow themselves to be exiled, and let usconfine ourselves to entreating great nations not to retreat too far,when they do retreat. One must not push too far in descent underpretext of a return to reason.
Matter exists, the minute exists, interest exists, the stomach exists;but the stomach must not be the sole wisdom. The life of the moment hasits rights, we admit, but permanent life has its rights also. Alas! thefact that one is mounted does not preclude a fall. This can be seen inhistory more frequently than is desirable: A nation is great, it tastesthe ideal, then it bites the mire, and finds it good; and if it beasked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff, itreplies: “Because I love statesmen.”

One word more before returning to our subject, the conflict.
A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothingelse than a convulsion towards the ideal. Progress trammelled issickly, and is subject to these tragic epilepsies. With that malady ofprogress, civil war, we have been obliged to come in contact in ourpassage. This is one of the fatal phases, at once act and entr’acte ofthat drama whose pivot is a social condemnation, and whose veritabletitle is _Progress_.
Progress!
The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought;and, at the point of this drama which we have now reached, the ideawhich it contains having still more than one trial to undergo, it is,perhaps, permitted to us, if not to lift the veil from it, to at leastallow its light to shine through.
The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is, from oneend to the other, as a whole and in detail, whatever may be itsintermittences, exceptions and faults, the march from evil to good,from the unjust to the just, from night to day, from appetite toconscience, from rottenness to life, from hell to heaven, fromnothingness to God. Point of departure: matter; point of arrival: thesoul. The hydra at the beginning, the angel at the end.



CHAPTER XXI—THE HEROES

All at once, the drum beat the charge.
The attack was a hurricane. On the evening before, in the darkness, thebarricade had been approached silently, as by a boa. Now, in broaddaylight, in that widening street, surprise was decidedly impossible,rude force had, moreover, been unmasked, the cannon had begun the roar,the army hurled itself on the barricade. Fury now became skill. Apowerful detachment of infantry of the line, broken at regularintervals, by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot, andsupported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen,debauched into the street at a run, with drums beating, trumpetsbraying, bayonets levelled, the sappers at their head, and,imperturbable under the projectiles, charged straight for the barricadewith the weight of a brazen beam against a wall.
The wall held firm.
The insurgents fired impetuously. The barricade once scaled had a maneof lightning flashes. The assault was so furious, that for one moment,it was inundated with assailants; but it shook off the soldiers as thelion shakes off the dogs, and it was only covered with besiegers as thecliff is covered with foam, to reappear, a moment later, beetling,black and formidable.
The column, forced to retreat, remained massed in the street,unprotected but terrible, and replied to the redoubt with a terribledischarge of musketry. Any one who has seen fireworks will recall thesheaf formed of interlacing lightnings which is called a bouquet. Letthe reader picture to himself this bouquet, no longer vertical buthorizontal, bearing a bullet, buckshot or a biscaïen at the tip of eachone of its jets of flame, and picking off dead men one after anotherfrom its clusters of lightning. The barricade was underneath it.
On both sides, the resolution was equal. The bravery exhibited therewas almost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocitywhich began by the sacrifice of self.
This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave. Thetroop wished to make an end of it, insurrection was desirous offighting. The acceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth andin the flush of health turns intrepidity into frenzy. In this fray,each one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour. The streetwas strewn with corpses.
The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at theother. Enjolras, who carried the whole barricade in his head, reservedand sheltered himself; three soldiers fell, one after the other, underhis embrasure, without having even seen him; Marius fought unprotected.He made himself a target. He stood with more than half his body abovethe breastworks. There is no more violent prodigal than the avariciousman who takes the bit in his teeth; there is no man more terrible inaction than a dreamer. Marius was formidable and pensive. In battle hewas as in a dream. One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged infiring a gun.
The insurgents’ cartridges were giving out; but not their sarcasms. Inthis whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood, they laughed.
Courfeyrac was bareheaded.
“What have you done with your hat?” Bossuet asked him.
Courfeyrac replied:
“They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls.”

Or they uttered haughty comments.
“Can any one understand,” exclaimed Feuilly bitterly, “those men,—[andhe cited names, well-known names, even celebrated names, some belongingto the old army]—who had promised to join us, and taken an oath to aidus, and who had pledged their honor to it, and who are our generals,and who abandon us!”

And Combeferre restricted himself to replying with a grave smile.
“There are people who observe the rules of honor as one observes thestars, from a great distance.”

The interior of the barricade was so strewn with torn cartridges thatone would have said that there had been a snowstorm.
The assailants had numbers in their favor; the insurgents had position.They were at the top of a wall, and they thundered point-blank upon thesoldiers tripping over the dead and wounded and entangled in theescarpment. This barricade, constructed as it was and admirablybuttressed, was really one of those situations where a handful of menhold a legion in check. Nevertheless, the attacking column, constantlyrecruited and enlarged under the shower of bullets, drew inexorablynearer, and now, little by little, step by step, but surely, the armyclosed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the wine-press.
One assault followed another. The horror of the situation keptincreasing.
Then there burst forth on that heap of paving-stones, in that Rue de laChanvrerie, a battle worthy of a wall of Troy. These haggard, ragged,exhausted men, who had had nothing to eat for four and twenty hours,who had not slept, who had but a few more rounds to fire, who werefumbling in their pockets which had been emptied of cartridges, nearlyall of whom were wounded, with head or arm bandaged with black andblood-stained linen, with holes in their clothes from which the bloodtrickled, and who were hardly armed with poor guns and notched swords,became Titans. The barricade was ten times attacked, approached,assailed, scaled, and never captured.
In order to form an idea of this struggle, it is necessary to imaginefire set to a throng of terrible courages, and then to gaze at theconflagration. It was not a combat, it was the interior of a furnace;there mouths breathed the flame; there countenances were extraordinary.The human form seemed impossible there, the combatants flamed forththere, and it was formidable to behold the going and coming in that redglow of those salamanders of the fray.
The successive and simultaneous scenes of this grand slaughter werenounce all attempts at depicting. The epic alone has the right tofill twelve thousand verses with a battle.
One would have pronounced this that hell of Brahmanism, the mostredoubtable of the seventeen abysses, which the Veda calls the Forestof Swords.
They fought hand to hand, foot to foot, with pistol shots, with blowsof the sword, with their fists, at a distance, close at hand, fromabove, from below, from everywhere, from the roofs of the houses, fromthe windows of the wine-shop, from the cellar windows, whither some hadcrawled. They were one against sixty.
The façade of Corinthe, half demolished, was hideous. The window,tattooed with grape-shot, had lost glass and frame and was nothing nowbut a shapeless hole, tumultuously blocked with paving-stones.
Bossuet was killed; Feuilly was killed; Courfeyrac was killed;Combeferre, transfixed by three blows from a bayonet in the breast atthe moment when he was lifting up a wounded soldier, had only time tocast a glance to heaven when he expired.
Marius, still fighting, was so riddled with wounds, particularly in thehead, that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood, and one wouldhave said that his face was covered with a red kerchief.
Enjolras alone was not struck. When he had no longer any weapon, hereached out his hands to right and left and an insurgent thrust somearm or other into his fist. All he had left was the stumps of fourswords; one more than François I. at Marignan. Homer says: “Diomedescuts the throat of Axylus, son of Teuthranis, who dwelt in happyArisba; Euryalus, son of Mecistæus, exterminates Dresos and Opheltios,Esepius, and that Pedasus whom the naiad Abarbarea bore to theblameless Bucolion; Ulysses overthrows Pidytes of Percosius;Antilochus, Ablerus; Polypætes, Astyalus; Polydamas, Otos, of Cyllene;and Teucer, Aretaon. Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus’pike. Agamemnon, king of the heroes, flings to earth Elatos, born inthe rocky city which is laved by the sounding river Satnoïs.” In ourold poems of exploits, Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantiborewith a cobbler’s shoulder-stick of fire, and the latter defends himselfby stoning the hero with towers which he plucks up by the roots. Ourancient mural frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon,armed, emblazoned and crested in war-like guise, on horseback andapproaching each other, their battle-axes in hand, masked with iron,gloved with iron, booted with iron, the one caparisoned in ermine, theother draped in azure: Bretagne with his lion between the two horns ofhis crown, Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor.But, in order to be superb, it is not necessary to wear, like Yvon, theducal morion, to have in the fist, like Esplandian, a living flame, or,like Phyles, father of Polydamas, to have brought back from Ephyra agood suit of mail, a present from the king of men, Euphetes; itsuffices to give one’s life for a conviction or a loyalty. Thisingenuous little soldier, yesterday a peasant of Bauce or Limousin, whoprowls with his clasp-knife by his side, around the children’s nursesin the Luxembourg garden, this pale young student bent over a piece ofanatomy or a book, a blond youth who shaves his beard withscissors,—take both of them, breathe upon them with a breath of duty,place them face to face in the Carrefour Boucherat or in the blindalley Planche-Mibray, and let the one fight for his flag, and the otherfor his ideal, and let both of them imagine that they are fighting fortheir country; the struggle will be colossal; and the shadow which thisraw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that grandepic field where humanity is striving, will equal the shadow cast byMegaryon, King of Lycia, tiger-filled, crushing in his embrace theimmense body of Ajax, equal to the gods.



CHAPTER XXII—FOOT TO FOOT

When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive, exceptEnjolras and Marius at the two extremities of the barricade, thecentre, which had so long sustained Courfeyrac, Joly, Bossuet, Feuillyand Combeferre, gave way. The cannon, though it had not effected apracticable breach, had made a rather large hollow in the middle of theredoubt; there, the summit of the wall had disappeared before theballs, and had crumbled away; and the rubbish which had fallen, nowinside, now outside, had, as it accumulated, formed two piles in thenature of slopes on the two sides of the barrier, one on the inside,the other on the outside. The exterior slope presented an inclinedplane to the attack.
A final assault was there attempted, and this assault succeeded. Themass bristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run, came up withirresistible force, and the serried front of battle of the attackingcolumn made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of thebattlements. This time, it was decisive. The group of insurgents whowere defending the centre retreated in confusion.
Then the gloomy love of life awoke once more in some of them. Many,finding themselves under the muzzles of this forest of guns, did notwish to die. This is a moment when the instinct of self-preservationemits howls, when the beast reappears in men. They were hemmed in bythe lofty, six-story house which formed the background of theirredoubt. This house might prove their salvation. The building wasbarricaded, and walled, as it were, from top to bottom. Before thetroops of the line had reached the interior of the redoubt, there wastime for a door to open and shut, the space of a flash of lightning wassufficient for that, and the door of that house, suddenly opened acrack and closed again instantly, was life for these despairing men.Behind this house, there were streets, possible flight, space. They setto knocking at that door with the butts of their guns, and with kicks,shouting, calling, entreating, wringing their hands. No one opened.From the little window on the third floor, the head of the dead mangazed down upon them.
But Enjolras and Marius, and the seven or eight rallied about them,sprang forward and protected them. Enjolras had shouted to thesoldiers: “Don’t advance!” and as an officer had not obeyed, Enjolrashad killed the officer. He was now in the little inner court of theredoubt, with his back planted against the Corinthe building, a swordin one hand, a rifle in the other, holding open the door of thewine-shop which he barred against assailants. He shouted to thedesperate men:—“There is but one door open; this one.”—And shieldingthem with his body, and facing an entire battalion alone, he made thempass in behind him. All precipitated themselves thither. Enjolras,executing with his rifle, which he now used like a cane, whatsingle-stick players call a “covered rose” round his head, levelled thebayonets around and in front of him, and was the last to enter; andthen ensued a horrible moment, when the soldiers tried to make theirway in, and the insurgents strove to bar them out. The door was slammedwith such violence, that, as it fell back into its frame, it showed thefive fingers of a soldier who had been clinging to it, cut off andglued to the post.
Marius remained outside. A shot had just broken his collar bone, hefelt that he was fainting and falling. At that moment, with eyesalready shut, he felt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him, and theswoon in which his senses vanished, hardly allowed him time for thethought, mingled with a last memory of Cosette:—“I am taken prisoner. Ishall be shot.”

Enjolras, not seeing Marius among those who had taken refuge in thewine-shop, had the same idea. But they had reached a moment when eachman has not the time to meditate on his own death. Enjolras fixed thebar across the door, and bolted it, and double-locked it with key andchain, while those outside were battering furiously at it, the soldierswith the butts of their muskets, the sappers with their axes. Theassailants were grouped about that door. The siege of the wine-shop wasnow beginning.
The soldiers, we will observe, were full of wrath.
The death of the artillery-sergeant had enraged them, and then, a stillmore melancholy circumstance. During the few hours which had precededthe attack, it had been reported among them that the insurgents weremutilating their prisoners, and that there was the headless body of asoldier in the wine-shop. This sort of fatal rumor is the usualaccompaniment of civil wars, and it was a false report of this kindwhich, later on, produced the catastrophe of the Rue Transnonain.
When the door was barricaded, Enjolras said to the others:
“Let us sell our lives dearly.”

Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche. Beneaththe black cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible, one large,the other small, and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath thecold folds of the shroud. A hand projected from beneath the windingsheet and hung near the floor. It was that of the old man.
Enjolras bent down and kissed that venerable hand, just as he hadkissed his brow on the preceding evening.
These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course ofhis life.
Let us abridge the tale. The barricade had fought like a gate ofThebes; the wine-shop fought like a house of Saragossa. Theseresistances are dogged. No quarter. No flag of truce possible. Men arewilling to die, provided their opponent will kill them.
When Suchet says:—“Capitulate,”—Palafox replies: “After the war withcannon, the war with knives.” Nothing was lacking in the capture byassault of the Hucheloup wine-shop; neither paving-stones raining fromthe windows and the roof on the besiegers and exasperating the soldiersby crushing them horribly, nor shots fired from the attic-windows andthe cellar, nor the fury of attack, nor, finally, when the dooryielded, the frenzied madness of extermination. The assailants, rushinginto the wine-shop, their feet entangled in the panels of the doorwhich had been beaten in and flung on the ground, found not a singlecombatant there. The spiral staircase, hewn asunder with the axe, layin the middle of the tap-room, a few wounded men were just breathingtheir last, every one who was not killed was on the first floor, andfrom there, through the hole in the ceiling, which had formed theentrance of the stairs, a terrific fire burst forth. It was the last oftheir cartridges. When they were exhausted, when these formidable menon the point of death had no longer either powder or ball, each graspedin his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved, and ofwhich we have spoken, and held the scaling party in check with thesefrightfully fragile clubs. They were bottles of aquafortis.
We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred. Thebesieged man, alas! converts everything into a weapon. Greek fire didnot disgrace Archimedes, boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard. All waris a thing of terror, and there is no choice in it. The musketry of thebesiegers, though confined and embarrassed by being directed from belowupwards, was deadly. The rim of the hole in the ceiling was speedilysurrounded by heads of the slain, whence dripped long, red and smokingstreams, the uproar was indescribable; a close and burning smoke almostproduced night over this combat. Words are lacking to express horrorwhen it has reached this pitch. There were no longer men in thisconflict, which was now infernal. They were no longer giants matchedwith colossi. It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer. Demonsattacked, spectres resisted.
It was heroism become monstrous.



CHAPTER XXIII—ORESTES FASTING AND PYLADES DRUNK

At length, by dint of mounting on each other’s backs, aiding themselveswith the skeleton of the staircase, climbing up the walls, clinging tothe ceiling, slashing away at the very brink of the trap-door, the lastone who offered resistance, a score of assailants, soldiers, NationalGuardsmen, municipal guardsmen, in utter confusion, the majoritydisfigured by wounds in the face during that redoubtable ascent,blinded by blood, furious, rendered savage, made an irruption into theapartment on the first floor. There they found only one man still onhis feet, Enjolras. Without cartridges, without sword, he had nothingin his hand now but the barrel of his gun whose stock he had brokenover the head of those who were entering. He had placed the billiardtable between his assailants and himself; he had retreated into thecorner of the room, and there, with haughty eye, and head borne high,with this stump of a weapon in his hand, he was still so alarming as tospeedily create an empty space around him. A cry arose:
“He is the leader! It was he who slew the artillery-man. It is wellthat he has placed himself there. Let him remain there. Let us shoothim down on the spot.”

“Shoot me,” said Enjolras.
And flinging away his bit of gun-barrel, and folding his arms, heoffered his breast.
The audacity of a fine death always affects men. As soon as Enjolrasfolded his arms and accepted his end, the din of strife ceased in theroom, and this chaos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchralsolemnity. The menacing majesty of Enjolras disarmed and motionless,appeared to oppress this tumult, and this young man, haughty, bloody,and charming, who alone had not a wound, who was as indifferent as aninvulnerable being, seemed, by the authority of his tranquil glance, toconstrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully. His beauty, atthat moment augmented by his pride, was resplendent, and he was freshand rosy after the fearful four and twenty hours which had justelapsed, as though he could no more be fatigued than wounded. It was ofhim, possibly, that a witness spoke afterwards, before the council ofwar: “There was an insurgent whom I heard called Apollo.” A NationalGuardsman who had taken aim at Enjolras, lowered his gun, saying: “Itseems to me that I am about to shoot a flower.”

Twelve men formed into a squad in the corner opposite Enjolras, andsilently made ready their guns.
Then a sergeant shouted:
“Take aim!”

An officer intervened.
“Wait.”

And addressing Enjolras:
“Do you wish to have your eyes bandaged?”

“No.”

“Was it you who killed the artillery sergeant?”

“Yes.”

Grantaire had waked up a few moments before.
Grantaire, it will be remembered, had been asleep ever since thepreceding evening in the upper room of the wine-shop, seated on a chairand leaning on the table.
He realized in its fullest sense the old metaphor of “dead drunk.” Thehideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into alethargy. His table being small, and not suitable for the barricade, hehad been left in possession of it. He was still in the same posture,with his breast bent over the table, his head lying flat on his arms,surrounded by glasses, beer-jugs and bottles. His was the overwhelmingslumber of the torpid bear and the satiated leech. Nothing had had anyeffect upon it, neither the fusillade, nor the cannon-balls, nor thegrape-shot which had made its way through the window into the roomwhere he was. Nor the tremendous uproar of the assault. He merelyreplied to the cannonade, now and then, by a snore. He seemed to bewaiting there for a bullet which should spare him the trouble ofwaking. Many corpses were strewn around him; and, at the first glance,there was nothing to distinguish him from those profound sleepers ofdeath.
Noise does not rouse a drunken man; silence awakens him. The fall ofeverything around him only augmented Grantaire’s prostration; thecrumbling of all things was his lullaby. The sort of halt which thetumult underwent in the presence of Enjolras was a shock to this heavyslumber. It had the effect of a carriage going at full speed, whichsuddenly comes to a dead stop. The persons dozing within it wake up.Grantaire rose to his feet with a start, stretched out his arms, rubbedhis eyes, stared, yawned, and understood.
A fit of drunkenness reaching its end resembles a curtain which is tornaway. One beholds, at a single glance and as a whole, all that it hasconcealed. All suddenly presents itself to the memory; and the drunkardwho has known nothing of what has been taking place during the lasttwenty-four hours, has no sooner opened his eyes than he is perfectlyinformed. Ideas recur to him with abrupt lucidity; the obliteration ofintoxication, a sort of steam which has obscured the brain, isdissipated, and makes way for the clear and sharply outlinedimportunity of realities.
Relegated, as he was, to one corner, and sheltered behind thebilliard-table, the soldiers whose eyes were fixed on Enjolras, had noteven noticed Grantaire, and the sergeant was preparing to repeat hisorder: “Take aim!” when all at once, they heard a strong voice shoutbeside them:
“Long live the Republic! I’m one of them.”

Grantaire had risen. The immense gleam of the whole combat which he hadmissed, and in which he had had no part, appeared in the brilliantglance of the transfigured drunken man.
He repeated: “Long live the Republic!” crossed the room with a firmstride and placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras.
“Finish both of us at one blow,” said he.
And turning gently to Enjolras, he said to him:
“Do you permit it?”

Enjolras pressed his hand with a smile.
This smile was not ended when the report resounded.
Enjolras, pierced by eight bullets, remained leaning against the wall,as though the balls had nailed him there. Only, his head was bowed.
Grantaire fell at his feet, as though struck by a thunderbolt.
A few moments later, the soldiers dislodged the last remaininginsurgents, who had taken refuge at the top of the house. They firedinto the attic through a wooden lattice. They fought under the veryroof. They flung bodies, some of them still alive, out through thewindows. Two light-infantrymen, who tried to lift the shatteredomnibus, were slain by two shots fired from the attic. A man in ablouse was flung down from it, with a bayonet wound in the abdomen, andbreathed his last on the ground. A soldier and an insurgent slippedtogether on the sloping slates of the roof, and, as they would notrelease each other, they fell, clasped in a ferocious embrace. Asimilar conflict went on in the cellar. Shouts, shots, a fiercetrampling. Then silence. The barricade was captured.
The soldiers began to search the houses round about, and to pursue thefugitives.



CHAPTER XXIV—PRISONER

Marius was, in fact, a prisoner.
The hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had feltat the moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that ofJean Valjean.
Jean Valjean had taken no other part in the combat than to exposehimself in it. Had it not been for him, no one, in that supreme phaseof agony, would have thought of the wounded. Thanks to him, everywherepresent in the carnage, like a providence, those who fell were pickedup, transported to the tap-room, and cared for. In the intervals, hereappeared on the barricade. But nothing which could resemble a blow,an attack or even personal defence proceeded from his hands. He heldhis peace and lent succor. Moreover, he had received only a fewscratches. The bullets would have none of him. If suicide formed partof what he had meditated on coming to this sepulchre, to that spot, hehad not succeeded. But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide, anirreligious act.
Jean Valjean, in the thick cloud of the combat, did not appear to seeMarius; the truth is, that he never took his eyes from the latter. Whena shot laid Marius low, Jean Valjean leaped forward with the agility ofa tiger, fell upon him as on his prey, and bore him off.
The whirlwind of the attack was, at that moment, so violentlyconcentrated upon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop, that noone saw Jean Valjean sustaining the fainting Marius in his arms,traverse the unpaved field of the barricade and disappear behind theangle of the Corinthe building.
The reader will recall this angle which formed a sort of cape on thestreet; it afforded shelter from the bullets, the grape-shot, and alleyes, and a few square feet of space. There is sometimes a chamberwhich does not burn in the midst of a conflagration, and in the midstof raging seas, beyond a promontory or at the extremity of a blindalley of shoals, a tranquil nook. It was in this sort of fold in theinterior trapezium of the barricade, that Éponine had breathed herlast.
There Jean Valjean halted, let Marius slide to the ground, placed hisback against the wall, and cast his eyes about him.
The situation was alarming.
For an instant, for two or three perhaps, this bit of wall was ashelter, but how was he to escape from this massacre? He recalled theanguish which he had suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before,and in what manner he had contrived to make his escape; it wasdifficult then, to-day it was impossible. He had before him that deafand implacable house, six stories in height, which appeared to beinhabited only by a dead man leaning out of his window; he had on hisright the rather low barricade, which shut off the Rue de la PetiteTruanderie; to pass this obstacle seemed easy, but beyond the crest ofthe barrier a line of bayonets was visible. The troops of the line wereposted on the watch behind that barricade. It was evident, that to passthe barricade was to go in quest of the fire of the platoon, and thatany head which should run the risk of lifting itself above the top ofthat wall of stones would serve as a target for sixty shots. On hisleft he had the field of battle. Death lurked round the corner of thatwall.
What was to be done?
Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament.
And it was necessary to decide on the instant, to devise someexpedient, to come to some decision. Fighting was going on a few pacesaway; fortunately, all were raging around a single point, the door ofthe wine-shop; but if it should occur to one soldier, to one singlesoldier, to turn the corner of the house, or to attack him on theflank, all was over.
Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him, he gazed at the barricadeat one side of him, then he looked at the ground, with the violence ofthe last extremity, bewildered, and as though he would have liked topierce a hole there with his eyes.
By dint of staring, something vaguely striking in such an agony beganto assume form and outline at his feet, as though it had been a powerof glance which made the thing desired unfold. A few paces distant heperceived, at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded andwatched on the exterior, beneath a disordered mass of paving-stoneswhich partly concealed it, an iron grating, placed flat and on a levelwith the soil. This grating, made of stout, transverse bars, was abouttwo feet square. The frame of paving-stones which supported it had beentorn up, and it was, as it were, unfastened.
Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture, something likethe flue of a chimney, or the pipe of a cistern. Jean Valjean dartedforward. His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination.To thrust aside the stones, to raise the grating, to lift Marius, whowas as inert as a dead body, upon his shoulders, to descend, with thisburden on his loins, and with the aid of his elbows and knees into thatsort of well, fortunately not very deep, to let the heavy trap, uponwhich the loosened stones rolled down afresh, fall into its placebehind him, to gain his footing on a flagged surface three metres belowthe surface,—all this was executed like that which one does in dreams,with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of an eagle; this tookonly a few minutes.
Jean Valjean found himself with Marius, who was still unconscious, in asort of long, subterranean corridor.
There reigned profound peace, absolute silence, night.
The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from thewall into the convent recurred to him. Only, what he was carryingto-day was not Cosette; it was Marius. He could barely hear theformidable tumult in the wine-shop, taken by assault, like a vaguemurmur overhead.



BOOK SECOND—THE INTESTINE OF THE LEVIATHAN



CHAPTER I—THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA

Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water. And thiswithout metaphor. How, and in what manner? Day and night. With whatobject? With no object. With what intention? With no intention. Why?For no reason. By means of what organ? By means of its intestine. Whatis its intestine? The sewer.
Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure whichthe valuations of special science have set upon it.
Science, after having long groped about, now knows that the mostfecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure.The Chinese, let us confess it to our shame, knew it before us. Not aChinese peasant—it is Eckberg who says this,—goes to town withoutbringing back with him, at the two extremities of his bamboo pole, twofull buckets of what we designate as filth. Thanks to human dung, theearth in China is still as young as in the days of Abraham. Chinesewheat yields a hundred fold of the seed. There is no guano comparablein fertility with the detritus of a capital. A great city is the mostmighty of dung-makers. Certain success would attend the experiment ofemploying the city to manure the plain. If our gold is manure, ourmanure, on the other hand, is gold.
What is done with this golden manure? It is swept into the abyss.
Fleets of vessels are despatched, at great expense, to collect the dungof petrels and penguins at the South Pole, and the incalculable elementof opulence which we have on hand, we send to the sea. All the humanand animal manure which the world wastes, restored to the land insteadof being cast into the water, would suffice to nourish the world.
Those heaps of filth at the gate-posts, those tumbrils of mud whichjolt through the street by night, those terrible casks of the streetdepartment, those fetid drippings of subterranean mire, which thepavements hide from you,—do you know what they are? They are the meadowin flower, the green grass, wild thyme, thyme and sage, they are game,they are cattle, they are the satisfied bellows of great oxen in theevening, they are perfumed hay, they are golden wheat, they are thebread on your table, they are the warm blood in your veins, they arehealth, they are joy, they are life. This is the will of thatmysterious creation which is transformation on earth andtransfiguration in heaven.
Restore this to the great crucible; your abundance will flow forth fromit. The nutrition of the plains furnishes the nourishment of men.
You have it in your power to lose this wealth, and to consider meridiculous to boot. This will form the master-piece of your ignorance.
Statisticians have calculated that France alone makes a deposit of halfa milliard every year, in the Atlantic, through the mouths of herrivers. Note this: with five hundred millions we could pay one quarterof the expenses of our budget. The cleverness of man is such that heprefers to get rid of these five hundred millions in the gutter. It isthe very substance of the people that is carried off, here drop bydrop, there wave after wave, the wretched outpour of our sewers intothe rivers, and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the ocean.Every hiccough of our sewers costs us a thousand francs. From thisspring two results, the land impoverished, and the water tainted.Hunger arising from the furrow, and disease from the stream.
It is notorious, for example, that at the present hour, the Thames ispoisoning London.
So far as Paris is concerned, it has become indispensable of late, totransport the mouths of the sewers downstream, below the last bridge.
A double tubular apparatus, provided with valves and sluices, suckingup and driving back, a system of elementary drainage, simple as thelungs of a man, and which is already in full working order in manycommunities in England, would suffice to conduct the pure water of thefields into our cities, and to send back to the fields the rich waterof the cities, and this easy exchange, the simplest in the world, wouldretain among us the five hundred millions now thrown away. People arethinking of other things.
The process actually in use does evil, with the intention of doinggood. The intention is good, the result is melancholy. Thinking topurge the city, the population is blanched like plants raised incellars. A sewer is a mistake. When drainage, everywhere, with itsdouble function, restoring what it takes, shall have replaced thesewer, which is a simple impoverishing washing, then, this beingcombined with the data of a now social economy, the product of theearth will be increased tenfold, and the problem of misery will besingularly lightened. Add the suppression of parasitism, and it will besolved.
In the meanwhile, the public wealth flows away to the river, andleakage takes place. Leakage is the word. Europe is being ruined inthis manner by exhaustion.
As for France, we have just cited its figures. Now, Paris contains onetwenty-fifth of the total population of France, and Parisian guanobeing the richest of all, we understate the truth when we value theloss on the part of Paris at twenty-five millions in the half milliardwhich France annually rejects. These twenty-five millions, employed inassistance and enjoyment, would double the splendor of Paris. The cityspends them in sewers. So that we may say that Paris’s greatprodigality, its wonderful festival, its Beaujon folly, its orgy, itsstream of gold from full hands, its pomp, its luxury, its magnificence,is its sewer system.
It is in this manner that, in the blindness of a poor politicaleconomy, we drown and allow to float downstream and to be lost in thegulfs the well-being of all. There should be nets at Saint-Cloud forthe public fortune.
Economically considered, the matter can be summed up thus: Paris is aspendthrift. Paris, that model city, that patron of well-arrangedcapitals, of which every nation strives to possess a copy, thatmetropolis of the ideal, that august country of the initiative, ofimpulse and of effort, that centre and that dwelling of minds, thatnation-city, that hive of the future, that marvellous combination ofBabylon and Corinth, would make a peasant of the Fo-Kian shrug hisshoulders, from the point of view which we have just indicated.
Imitate Paris and you will ruin yourselves.
Moreover, and particularly in this immemorial and senseless waste,Paris is itself an imitator.
These surprising exhibitions of stupidity are not novel; this is noyoung folly. The ancients did like the moderns. “The sewers of Rome,”says Liebig, “have absorbed all the well-being of the Roman peasant.”When the Campagna of Rome was ruined by the Roman sewer, Rome exhaustedItaly, and when she had put Italy in her sewer, she poured in Sicily,then Sardinia, then Africa. The sewer of Rome has engulfed the world.This cesspool offered its engulfment to the city and the universe._Urbi et orbi_. Eternal city, unfathomable sewer.
Rome sets the example for these things as well as for others.
Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar tointelligent towns.
For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we havejust explained our views, Paris has beneath it another Paris; a Parisof sewers; which has its streets, its crossroads, its squares, itsblind-alleys, its arteries, and its circulation, which is of mire andminus the human form.
For nothing must be flattered, not even a great people; where there iseverything there is also ignominy by the side of sublimity; and, ifParis contains Athens, the city of light, Tyre, the city of might,Sparta, the city of virtue, Nineveh, the city of marvels, it alsocontains Lutetia, the city of mud.
However, the stamp of its power is there also, and the Titanic sink ofParis realizes, among monuments, that strange ideal realized inhumanity by some men like Macchiavelli, Bacon and Mirabeau, grandiosevileness.
The sub-soil of Paris, if the eye could penetrate its surface, wouldpresent the aspect of a colossal madrepore. A sponge has no morepartitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of sixleagues round about, on which rests the great and ancient city. Not tomention its catacombs, which are a separate cellar, not to mention theinextricable trellis-work of gas pipes, without reckoning the vasttubular system for the distribution of fresh water which ends in thepillar fountains, the sewers alone form a tremendous, shadowy networkunder the two banks; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guidingthread.
There appears, in the humid mist, the rat which seems the product towhich Paris has given birth.



CHAPTER II—ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE SEWER

Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover, the subterraneannetwork of sewers, from a bird’s-eye view, will outline on the banks aspecies of large branch grafted on the river. On the right bank, thebelt sewer will form the trunk of this branch, the secondary ducts willform the branches, and those without exit the twigs.
This figure is but a summary one and half exact, the right angle, whichis the customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications,being very rare in vegetation.
A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed bysupposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet, asintricate as a thicket, against a background of shadows, and themisshapen letters should be welded one to another in apparentconfusion, and as at haphazard, now by their angles, again by theirextremities.
Sinks and sewers played a great part in the Middle Ages, in the LowerEmpire and in the Orient of old. The masses regarded these beds ofdecomposition, these monstrous cradles of death, with a fear that wasalmost religious. The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive togiddiness than the lions’ ditch of Babylon. Teglath-Phalasar, accordingto the rabbinical books, swore by the sink of Nineveh. It was from thesewer of Münster that John of Leyden produced his false moon, and itwas from the cesspool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme, Mokanna, theveiled prophet of Khorassan, caused his false sun to emerge.
The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers. TheGermoniæ58 narrated Rome. The sewer of Paris has been an ancient andformidable thing. It has been a sepulchre, it has served as an asylum.Crime, intelligence, social protest, liberty of conscience, thought,theft, all that human laws persecute or have persecuted, is hidden inthat hole; the _maillotins_ in the fourteenth century, the _tire-laine_of the fifteenth, the Huguenots in the sixteenth, Morin’s _illuminated_in the seventeenth, the _chauffeurs_ [brigands] in the eighteenth. Ahundred years ago, the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged thence, thepickpocket in danger slipped thither; the forest had its cave, Parishad its sewer. Vagrancy, that Gallic _picareria_, accepted the sewer asthe adjunct of the Cour des Miracles, and at evening, it returnedthither, fierce and sly, through the Maubuée outlet, as into abed-chamber.
It was quite natural, that those who had the blind-alley Vide-Gousset,[Empty-Pocket] or the Rue Coupe-Gorge [Cut-Throat], for the scene oftheir daily labor, should have for their domicile by night the culvertof the Chemin-Vert, or the catch basin of Hurepoix. Hence a throng ofsouvenirs. All sorts of phantoms haunt these long, solitary corridors;everywhere is putrescence and miasma; here and there arebreathing-holes, where Villon within converses with Rabelais without.
The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and ofall attempts. Political economy therein spies a detritus, socialphilosophy there beholds a residuum.
The sewer is the conscience of the city. Everything there converges andconfronts everything else. In that livid spot there are shades, butthere are no longer any secrets. Each thing bears its true form, or atleast, its definitive form. The mass of filth has this in its favor,that it is not a liar. Ingenuousness has taken refuge there. The maskof Basil is to be found there, but one beholds its cardboard and itsstrings and the inside as well as the outside, and it is accentuated byhonest mud. Scapin’s false nose is its next-door neighbor. All theuncleannesses of civilization, once past their use, fall into thistrench of truth, where the immense social sliding ends. They are thereengulfed, but they display themselves there. This mixture is aconfession. There, no more false appearances, no plastering over ispossible, filth removes its shirt, absolute denudation puts to the routall illusions and mirages, there is nothing more except what reallyexists, presenting the sinister form of that which is coming to an end.There, the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness, a basket-handletells a tale of domesticity; there the core of an apple which hasentertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more; theeffigy on the big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris, Caiphas’spittle meets Falstaff’s puking, the louis-d’or which comes from thegaming-house jostles the nail whence hangs the rope’s end of thesuicide. A livid fœtus rolls along, enveloped in the spangles whichdanced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday, a cap which has pronouncedjudgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerlyMargoton’s petticoat; it is more than fraternization, it is equivalentto addressing each other as _thou_. All which was formerly rouged, iswashed free. The last veil is torn away. A sewer is a cynic. It tellseverything.
The sincerity of foulness pleases us, and rests the soul. When one haspassed one’s time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the greatairs which reasons of state, the oath, political sagacity, humanjustice, professional probity, the austerities of situation,incorruptible robes all assume, it solaces one to enter a sewer and tobehold the mire which befits it.
This is instructive at the same time. We have just said that historypasses through the sewer. The Saint-Barthélemys filter through there,drop by drop, between the paving-stones. Great public assassinations,political and religious butcheries, traverse this underground passageof civilization, and thrust their corpses there. For the eye of thethinker, all historic murderers are to be found there, in that hideouspenumbra, on their knees, with a scrap of their winding-sheet for anapron, dismally sponging out their work. Louis XI. is there withTristan, François I. with Duprat, Charles IX. is there with his mother,Richelieu is there with Louis XIII., Louvois is there, Letellier isthere, Hébert and Maillard are there, scratching the stones, and tryingto make the traces of their actions disappear. Beneath these vaults onehears the brooms of spectres. One there breathes the enormous fetidnessof social catastrophes. One beholds reddish reflections in the corners.There flows a terrible stream, in which bloody hands have been washed.
The social observer should enter these shadows. They form a part of hislaboratory. Philosophy is the microscope of the thought. Everythingdesires to flee from it, but nothing escapes it. Tergiversation isuseless. What side of oneself does one display in evasions? theshameful side. Philosophy pursues with its glance, probes the evil, anddoes not permit it to escape into nothingness. In the obliteration ofthings which disappear, in the watching of things which vanish, itrecognizes all. It reconstructs the purple from the rag, and the womanfrom the scrap of her dress. From the cesspool, it reconstitutes thecity; from mud, it reconstructs manners; from the potsherd it infersthe amphora or the jug. By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece ofparchment, it recognizes the difference which separates the Jewry ofthe Judengasse from the Jewry of the Ghetto. It re-discovers in whatremains that which has been, good, evil, the true, the blood-stain ofthe palace, the ink-blot of the cavern, the drop of sweat from thebrothel, trials undergone, temptations welcomed, orgies cast forth, theturn which characters have taken as they became abased, the trace ofprostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable,and on the vesture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina’selbowing.



CHAPTER III—BRUNESEAU

The sewer of Paris in the Middle Ages was legendary. In the sixteenthcentury, Henri II. attempted a bore, which failed. Not a hundred yearsago, the cesspool, Mercier attests the fact, was abandoned to itself,and fared as best it might.
Such was this ancient Paris, delivered over to quarrels, to indecision,and to gropings. It was tolerably stupid for a long time. Later on, ’89showed how understanding comes to cities. But in the good, old times,the capital had not much head. It did not know how to manage its ownaffairs either morally or materially, and could not sweep out filth anybetter than it could abuses. Everything presented an obstacle,everything raised a question. The sewer, for example, was refractory toevery itinerary. One could no more find one’s bearings in the sewerthan one could understand one’s position in the city; above theunintelligible, below the inextricable; beneath the confusion oftongues there reigned the confusion of caverns; Dædalus backed upBabel.
Sometimes the Paris sewer took a notion to overflow, as though thismisunderstood Nile were suddenly seized with a fit of rage. Thereoccurred, infamous to relate, inundations of the sewer. At times, thatstomach of civilization digested badly, the cesspool flowed back intothe throat of the city, and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth.These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points; theywere warnings; very badly accepted, however; the city waxed indignantat the audacity of its mire, and did not admit that the filth shouldreturn. Drive it out better.
The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians ofthe age of eighty. The mud spread in cross-form over the Place desVictoires, where stands the statue of Louis XIV.; it entered the RueSaint-Honoré by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Élysées, theRue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer, the RuePierre-à-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie, the Rue Popincourt,through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert, the Rue de la Roquette, throughthe sewer of the Rue de Lappe; it covered the drain of the Rue desChamps-Élysées to the height of thirty-five centimetres; and, to theSouth, through the vent of the Seine, performing its functions ininverse sense, it penetrated the Rue Mazarine, the Rue de l‘Échaudé,and the Rue des Marais, where it stopped at a distance of one hundredand nine metres, a few paces distant from the house in which Racine hadlived, respecting, in the seventeenth century, the poet more than theKing. It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre, where itrose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of thewater-spout, and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin, where itspread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres inlength.
At the beginning of this century, the sewer of Paris was still amysterious place. Mud can never enjoy a good fame; but in this case itsevil renown reached the verge of the terrible. Paris knew, in aconfused way, that she had under her a terrible cavern. People talkedof it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedesfifteen long feet in length, and which might have served Behemoth for abathtub. The great boots of the sewermen never ventured further thancertain well-known points. We were then very near the epoch when thescavenger’s carts, from the summit of which Sainte-Foix fraternizedwith the Marquis de Créqui, discharged their loads directly into thesewer. As for cleaning out,—that function was entrusted to the pouringrains which encumbered rather than swept away. Rome left some poetry toher sewer, and called it the Gemoniæ; Paris insulted hers, and entitledit the Polypus-Hole. Science and superstition were in accord, inhorror. The Polypus hole was no less repugnant to hygiene than tolegend. The goblin was developed under the fetid covering of theMouffetard sewer; the corpses of the Marmousets had been cast into thesewer de la Barillerie; Fagon attributed the redoubtable malignantfever of 1685 to the great hiatus of the sewer of the Marais, whichremained yawning until 1833 in the Rue Saint-Louis, almost opposite thesign of the _Gallant Messenger_. The mouth of the sewer of the Rue dela Mortellerie was celebrated for the pestilences which had theirsource there; with its grating of iron, with points simulating a row ofteeth, it was like a dragon’s maw in that fatal street, breathing forthhell upon men. The popular imagination seasoned the sombre Parisiansink with some indescribably hideous intermixture of the infinite. Thesewer had no bottom. The sewer was the lower world. The idea ofexploring these leprous regions did not even occur to the police. Totry that unknown thing, to cast the plummet into that shadow, to setout on a voyage of discovery in that abyss—who would have dared? It wasalarming. Nevertheless, some one did present himself. The cesspool hadits Christopher Columbus.
One day, in 1805, during one of the rare apparitions which the Emperormade in Paris, the Minister of the Interior, some Decrès or Crétet orother, came to the master’s intimate levee. In the Carrousel there wasaudible the clanking of swords of all those extraordinary soldiers ofthe great Republic, and of the great Empire; then Napoleon’s door wasblocked with heroes; men from the Rhine, from the Escaut, from theAdige, and from the Nile; companions of Joubert, of Desaix, of Marceau,of Hoche, of Kléber; the aérostiers of Fleurus, the grenadiers ofMayence, the pontoon-builders of Genoa, hussars whom the Pyramids hadlooked down upon, artillerists whom Junot’s cannon-ball had spatteredwith mud, cuirassiers who had taken by assault the fleet lying atanchor in the Zuyderzee; some had followed Bonaparte upon the bridge ofLodi, others had accompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua, othershad preceded Lannes in the hollow road of Montebello. The whole army ofthat day was present there, in the court-yard of the Tuileries,represented by a squadron or a platoon, and guarding Napoleon inrepose; and that was the splendid epoch when the grand army had Marengobehind it and Austerlitz before it.—“Sire,” said the Minister of theInterior to Napoleon, “yesterday I saw the most intrepid man in yourEmpire.”—“What man is that?” said the Emperor brusquely, “and what hashe done?”—“He wants to do something, Sire.”—“What is it?”—“To visit thesewers of Paris.”

This man existed and his name was Bruneseau.



CHAPTER IV

The visit took place. It was a formidable campaign; a nocturnal battleagainst pestilence and suffocation. It was, at the same time, a voyageof discovery. One of the survivors of this expedition, an intelligentworkingman, who was very young at the time, related curious detailswith regard to it, several years ago, which Bruneseau thought himselfobliged to omit in his report to the prefect of police, as unworthy ofofficial style. The processes of disinfection were, at that epoch,extremely rudimentary. Hardly had Bruneseau crossed the firstarticulations of that subterranean network, when eight laborers out ofthe twenty refused to go any further. The operation was complicated;the visit entailed the necessity of cleaning; hence it was necessary tocleanse and at the same time, to proceed; to note the entrances ofwater, to count the gratings and the vents, to lay out in detail thebranches, to indicate the currents at the point where they parted, todefine the respective bounds of the divers basins, to sound the smallsewers grafted on the principal sewer, to measure the height under thekey-stone of each drain, and the width, at the spring of the vaults aswell as at the bottom, in order to determine the arrangements withregard to the level of each water-entrance, either of the bottom of thearch, or on the soil of the street. They advanced with toil. Thelanterns pined away in the foul atmosphere. From time to time, afainting sewerman was carried out. At certain points, there wereprecipices. The soil had given away, the pavement had crumbled, thesewer had changed into a bottomless well; they found nothing solid; aman disappeared suddenly; they had great difficulty in getting him outagain. On the advice of Fourcroy, they lighted large cages filled withtow steeped in resin, from time to time, in spots which had beensufficiently disinfected. In some places, the wall was covered withmisshapen fungi,—one would have said tumors; the very stone seemeddiseased within this unbreathable atmosphere.
Bruneseau, in his exploration, proceeded down hill. At the point ofseparation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur, hedeciphered upon a projecting stone the date of 1550; this stoneindicated the limits where Philibert Delorme, charged by Henri II. withvisiting the subterranean drains of Paris, had halted. This stone wasthe mark of the sixteenth century on the sewer; Bruneseau found thehandiwork of the seventeenth century once more in the Ponceau drain ofthe old Rue Vieille-du-Temple, vaulted between 1600 and 1650; and thehandiwork of the eighteenth in the western section of the collectingcanal, walled and vaulted in 1740. These two vaults, especially theless ancient, that of 1740, were more cracked and decrepit than themasonry of the belt sewer, which dated from 1412, an epoch when thebrook of fresh water of Ménilmontant was elevated to the dignity of theGrand Sewer of Paris, an advancement analogous to that of a peasant whoshould become first _valet de chambre_ to the King; something likeGros-Jean transformed into Lebel.
Here and there, particularly beneath the Court-House, they thought theyrecognized the hollows of ancient dungeons, excavated in the very seweritself. Hideous _in-pace_. An iron neck-collar was hanging in one ofthese cells. They walled them all up. Some of their finds weresingular; among others, the skeleton of an ourang-outan, who haddisappeared from the Jardin des Plantes in 1800, a disappearanceprobably connected with the famous and indisputable apparition of thedevil in the Rue des Bernardins, in the last year of the eighteenthcentury. The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the sewer.
Beneath this long, arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion, aperfectly preserved rag-picker’s basket excited the admiration of allconnoisseurs. Everywhere, the mire, which the sewermen came to handlewith intrepidity, abounded in precious objects, jewels of gold andsilver, precious stones, coins. If a giant had filtered this cesspool,he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair. At the pointwhere the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoyeseparate, they picked up a singular Huguenot medal in copper, bearingon one side the pig hooded with a cardinal’s hat, and on the other, awolf with a tiara on his head.
The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer.This entrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothingbut the hinges remained. From one of these hinges hung a dirty andshapeless rag which, arrested there in its passage, no doubt, hadfloated there in the darkness and finished its process of being tornapart. Bruneseau held his lantern close to this rag and examined it. Itwas of very fine batiste, and in one of the corners, less frayed thanthe rest, they made out a heraldic coronet and embroidered above theseseven letters: LAVBESP. The crown was the coronet of a Marquis, and theseven letters signified _Laubespine_. They recognized the fact, thatwhat they had before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat.Marat in his youth had had amorous intrigues. This was when he was amember of the household of the Comte d’Artois, in the capacity ofphysician to the Stables. From these love affairs, historically proved,with a great lady, he had retained this sheet. As a waif or a souvenir.At his death, as this was the only linen of any fineness which he hadin his house, they buried him in it. Some old women had shrouded himfor the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend of thepeople had enjoyed voluptuousness. Bruneseau passed on. They left thatrag where it hung; they did not put the finishing touch to it. Did thisarise from scorn or from respect? Marat deserved both. And then,destiny was there sufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touchit. Besides, the things of the sepulchre must be left in the spot whichthey select. In short, the relic was a strange one. A Marquise hadslept in it; Marat had rotted in it; it had traversed the Pantheon toend with the rats of the sewer. This chamber rag, of which Watteauwould formerly have joyfully sketched every fold, had ended in becomingworthy of the fixed gaze of Dante.
The whole visit to the subterranean stream of filth of Paris lastedseven years, from 1805 to 1812. As he proceeded, Bruneseau drew,directed, and completed considerable works; in 1808 he lowered the archof the Ponceau, and, everywhere creating new lines, he pushed thesewer, in 1809, under the Rue Saint-Denis as far as the fountain of theInnocents; in 1810, under the Rue Froidmanteau and under theSalpêtrière; in 1811 under the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Pères, under theRue du Mail, under the Rue de l‘Écharpe, under the Place Royale; in1812, under the Rue de la Paix, and under the Chaussée d’Antin. At thesame time, he had the whole network disinfected and rendered healthful.In the second year of his work, Bruneseau engaged the assistance of hisson-in-law Nargaud.
It was thus that, at the beginning of the century, ancient societycleansed its double bottom, and performed the toilet of its sewer.There was that much clean, at all events.
Tortuous, cracked, unpaved, full of fissures, intersected by gullies,jolted by eccentric elbows, mounting and descending illogically, fetid,wild, fierce, submerged in obscurity, with cicatrices on its pavementsand scars on its walls, terrible,—such was, retrospectively viewed, theantique sewer of Paris. Ramifications in every direction, crossings, oftrenches, branches, goose-feet, stars, as in military mines, cœcum,blind alleys, vaults lined with saltpetre, pestiferous pools, scabbysweats, on the walls, drops dripping from the ceilings, darkness;nothing could equal the horror of this old, waste crypt, the digestiveapparatus of Babylon, a cavern, ditch, gulf pierced with streets, atitanic mole-burrow, where the mind seems to behold that enormous blindmole, the past, prowling through the shadows, in the filth which hasbeen splendor.
This, we repeat, was the sewer of the past.



CHAPTER V—PRESENT PROGRESS

To-day the sewer is clean, cold, straight, correct. It almost realizesthe ideal of what is understood in England by the word “respectable.”It is proper and grayish; laid out by rule and line; one might almostsay as though it came out of a bandbox. It resembles a tradesman whohas become a councillor of state. One can almost see distinctly there.The mire there comports itself with decency. At first, one mightreadily mistake it for one of those subterranean corridors, which wereso common in former days, and so useful in flights of monarchs andprinces, in those good old times, “when the people loved their kings.”The present sewer is a beautiful sewer; the pure style reigns there;the classical rectilinear alexandrine which, driven out of poetry,appears to have taken refuge in architecture, seems mingled with allthe stones of that long, dark and whitish vault; each outlet is anarcade; the Rue de Rivoli serves as pattern even in the sewer. However,if the geometrical line is in place anywhere, it is certainly in thedrainage trench of a great city. There, everything should besubordinated to the shortest road. The sewer has, nowadays, assumed acertain official aspect. The very police reports, of which it sometimesforms the subject, no longer are wanting in respect towards it. Thewords which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous anddignified. What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery; whatused to be called a hole is now called a surveying orifice. Villonwould no longer meet with his ancient temporary provisional lodging.This network of cellars has its immemorial population of prowlers,rodents, swarming in greater numbers than ever; from time to time, anaged and veteran rat risks his head at the window of the sewer andsurveys the Parisians; but even these vermin grow tame, so satisfiedare they with their subterranean palace. The cesspool no longer retainsanything of its primitive ferocity. The rain, which in former dayssoiled the sewer, now washes it. Nevertheless, do not trust yourselftoo much to it. Miasmas still inhabit it. It is more hypocritical thanirreproachable. The prefecture of police and the commission of healthhave done their best. But, in spite of all the processes ofdisinfection, it exhales, a vague, suspicious odor like Tartuffe afterconfession.
Let us confess, that, taking it all in all, this sweeping is a homagewhich the sewer pays to civilization, and as, from this point of view,Tartuffe’s conscience is a progress over the Augean stables, it iscertain that the sewers of Paris have been improved.
It is more than progress; it is transmutation. Between the ancient andthe present sewer there is a revolution. What has effected thisrevolution?
The man whom all the world forgets, and whom we have mentioned,Bruneseau.



CHAPTER VI—FUTURE PROGRESS

The excavation of the sewer of Paris has been no slight task. The lastten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to atermination, any more than they have been able to finish Paris. Thesewer, in fact, receives all the counter-shocks of the growth of Paris.Within the bosom of the earth, it is a sort of mysterious polyp with athousand antennæ, which expands below as the city expands above. Everytime that the city cuts a street, the sewer stretches out an arm. Theold monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three hundredmetres of sewers; that was where Paris stood in this respect on thefirst of January, 1806. Beginning with this epoch, of which we shallshortly speak, the work was usefully and energetically resumed andprosecuted; Napoleon built—the figures are curious—four thousand eighthundred and four metres; Louis XVIII., five thousand seven hundred andnine; Charles X., ten thousand eight hundred and thirty-six;Louis-Philippe, eighty-nine thousand and twenty; the Republic of 1848,twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one; the presentgovernment, seventy thousand five hundred; in all, at the present time,two hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres; sixtyleagues of sewers; the enormous entrails of Paris. An obscureramification ever at work; a construction which is immense and ignored.
As the reader sees, the subterranean labyrinth of Paris is to-day morethan ten times what it was at the beginning of the century. It isdifficult to form any idea of all the perseverance and the effortswhich have been required to bring this cesspool to the point ofrelative perfection in which it now is. It was with great difficultythat the ancient monarchical provostship and, during the last ten yearsof the eighteenth century, the revolutionary mayoralty, had succeededin perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to1806. All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation, some peculiar tothe soil, others inherent in the very prejudices of the laboriouspopulation of Paris. Paris is built upon a soil which is singularlyrebellious to the pick, the hoe, the bore, and to human manipulation.There is nothing more difficult to pierce and to penetrate than thegeological formation upon which is superposed the marvellous historicalformation called Paris; as soon as work in any form whatsoever is begunand adventures upon this stretch of alluvium, subterranean resistancesabound. There are liquid clays, springs, hard rocks, and those soft anddeep quagmires which special science calls _moutardes_.59 The pickadvances laboriously through the calcareous layers alternating withvery slender threads of clay, and schistose beds in plates incrustedwith oyster-shells, the contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans.Sometimes a rivulet suddenly bursts through a vault that has beenbegun, and inundates the laborers; or a layer of marl is laid bare, androlls down with the fury of a cataract, breaking the stoutestsupporting beams like glass. Quite recently, at Villette, when itbecame necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martincanal without interrupting navigation or emptying the canal, a fissureappeared in the basin of the canal, water suddenly became abundant inthe subterranean tunnel, which was beyond the power of the pumpingengines; it was necessary to send a diver to explore the fissure whichhad been made in the narrow entrance of the grand basin, and it was notwithout great difficulty that it was stopped up. Elsewhere near theSeine, and even at a considerable distance from the river, as forinstance, at Belleville, Grand-Rue and Lumière Passage, quicksands areencountered in which one sticks fast, and in which a man sinks visibly.Add suffocation by miasmas, burial by slides, and sudden crumbling ofthe earth. Add the typhus, with which the workmen become slowlyimpregnated. In our own day, after having excavated the gallery ofClichy, with a banquette to receive the principal water-conduit ofOurcq, a piece of work which was executed in a trench ten metres deep;after having, in the midst of land-slides, and with the aid ofexcavations often putrid, and of shoring up, vaulted the Bièvre fromthe Boulevard de l’Hôpital, as far as the Seine; after having, in orderto deliver Paris from the floods of Montmartre and in order to providean outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in extent, whichcrouched near the Barrière des Martyrs, after having, let us state,constructed the line of sewers from the Barrière Blanche to the road ofAubervilliers, in four months, working day and night, at a depth ofeleven metres; after having—a thing heretofore unseen—made asubterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec, without a trench, sixmetres below the surface, the superintendent, Monnot, died. Afterhaving vaulted three thousand metres of sewer in all quarters of thecity, from the Rue Traversière-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l’Ourcine,after having freed the Carrefour Censier-Mouffetard from inundations ofrain by means of the branch of the Arbalète, after having built theSaint-Georges sewer, on rock and concrete in the fluid sands, afterhaving directed the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vaulttimber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch, Duleau the engineer died.There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these, which aremore useful, nevertheless, than the brutal slaughter of the field ofbattle.
The sewers of Paris in 1832 were far from being what they are to-day.Bruneseau had given the impulse, but the cholera was required to bringabout the vast reconstruction which took place later on. It issurprising to say, for example, that in 1821, a part of the belt sewer,called the Grand Canal, as in Venice, still stood stagnating uncoveredto the sky, in the Rue des Gourdes. It was only in 1821 that the cityof Paris found in its pocket the two hundred and sixty-thousand eightyfrancs and six centimes required for covering this mass of filth. Thethree absorbing wells, of the Combat, the Cunette, and Saint-Mandé,with their discharging mouths, their apparatus, their cesspools, andtheir depuratory branches, only date from 1836. The intestinal sewer ofParis has been made over anew, and, as we have said, it has beenextended more than tenfold within the last quarter of a century.
Thirty years ago, at the epoch of the insurrection of the 5th and 6thof June, it was still, in many localities, nearly the same ancientsewer. A very great number of streets which are now convex were thensunken causeways. At the end of a slope, where the tributaries of astreet or crossroads ended, there were often to be seen large, squaregratings with heavy bars, whose iron, polished by the footsteps of thethrong, gleamed dangerous and slippery for vehicles, and caused horsesto fall. The official language of the Roads and Bridges gave to thesegratings the expressive name of _Cassis_.60
In 1832, in a number of streets, in the Rue de l‘Étoile, the RueSaint-Louis, the Rue du Temple, the Rue Vieille-du-Temple, the RueNotre-Dame de Nazareth, the Rue Folie-Méricourt, the Quai aux Fleurs,the Rue du Petit-Musc, the Rue du Normandie, the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches,the Rue des Marais, the Faubourg Saint-Martin, the Rue Notre Damedes-Victoires, the Faubourg Montmartre, the Rue Grange-Batelière, inthe Champs-Élysées, the Rue Jacob, the Rue de Tournon, the ancientgothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw. It consisted ofenormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stoneposts, with monumental effrontery.
Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in1663; five thousand three hundred fathoms. After Bruneseau, on the 1stof January, 1832, it had forty thousand three hundred metres. Between1806 and 1831, there had been built, on an average, seven hundred andfifty metres annually, afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres ofgalleries were constructed every year, in masonry, of small stones,with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water, on a cementfoundation. At two hundred francs the metre, the sixty leagues ofParis’ sewers of the present day represent forty-eight millions.
In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at thebeginning, grave problems of public hygiene are connected with thatimmense question: the sewers of Paris.
Paris is the centre of two sheets, a sheet of water and a sheet of air.The sheet of water, lying at a tolerably great depth underground, butalready sounded by two bores, is furnished by the layer of green claysituated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone; this layer maybe represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference; amultitude of rivers and brooks ooze there; one drinks the Seine, theMarne, the Yonne, the Oise, the Aisne, the Cher, the Vienne and theLoire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle. The sheet of wateris healthy, it comes from heaven in the first place and next from theearth; the sheet of air is unhealthy, it comes from the sewer. All themiasms of the cesspool are mingled with the breath of the city; hencethis bad breath. The air taken from above a dung-heap, as has beenscientifically proved, is purer than the air taken from above Paris. Ina given time, with the aid of progress, mechanisms become perfected,and as light increases, the sheet of water will be employed to purifythe sheet of air; that is to say, to wash the sewer. The reader knows,that by “washing the sewer” we mean: the restitution of the filth tothe earth; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the fields.Through this simple act, the entire social community will experience adiminution of misery and an augmentation of health. At the presenthour, the radiation of diseases from Paris extends to fifty leaguesaround the Louvre, taken as the hub of this pestilential wheel.
We might say that, for ten centuries, the cesspool has been the diseaseof Paris. The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood. Thepopular instinct has never been deceived in it. The occupation ofsewermen was formerly almost as perilous, and almost as repugnant tothe people, as the occupation of knacker, which was so long held inhorror and handed over to the executioner. High wages were necessary toinduce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine; the ladder of thecesspool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it; it was said, inproverbial form: “to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave;” andall sorts of hideous legends, as we have said, covered this colossalsink with terror; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of therevolutions of the globe as of the revolutions of man, and where are tobe found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge tothe rag of Marat.



BOOK THIRD—MUD BUT THE SOUL



CHAPTER I—THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES

It was in the sewers of Paris that Jean Valjean found himself.
Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea. As in the ocean,the diver may disappear there.
The transition was an unheard-of one. In the very heart of the city,Jean Valjean had escaped from the city, and, in the twinkling of aneye, in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it, he hadpassed from broad daylight to complete obscurity, from midday tomidnight, from tumult to silence, from the whirlwind of thunders to thestagnation of the tomb, and, by a vicissitude far more tremendous eventhan that of the Rue Polonceau, from the most extreme peril to the mostabsolute obscurity.
An abrupt fall into a cavern; a disappearance into the secret trap-doorof Paris; to quit that street where death was on every side, for thatsort of sepulchre where there was life, was a strange instant. Heremained for several seconds as though bewildered; listening,stupefied. The waste-trap of safety had suddenly yawned beneath him.Celestial goodness had, in a manner, captured him by treachery.Adorable ambuscades of providence!
Only, the wounded man did not stir, and Jean Valjean did not knowwhether that which he was carrying in that grave was a living being ora dead corpse.
His first sensation was one of blindness. All of a sudden, he could seenothing. It seemed to him too, that, in one instant, he had becomedeaf. He no longer heard anything. The frantic storm of murder whichhad been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him, thanksto the thickness of the earth which separated him from it, as we havesaid, otherwise than faintly and indistinctly, and like a rumbling, inthe depths. He felt that the ground was solid under his feet; that wasall; but that was enough. He extended one arm and then the other,touched the walls on both sides, and perceived that the passage wasnarrow; he slipped, and thus perceived that the pavement was wet. Hecautiously put forward one foot, fearing a hole, a sink, some gulf; hediscovered that the paving continued. A gust of fetidness informed himof the place in which he stood.
After the lapse of a few minutes, he was no longer blind. A littlelight fell through the man-hole through which he had descended, and hiseyes became accustomed to this cavern. He began to distinguishsomething. The passage in which he had burrowed—no other word canbetter express the situation—was walled in behind him. It was one ofthose blind alleys, which the special jargon terms branches. In frontof him there was another wall, a wall like night. The light of theair-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjeanstood, and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp wallsof the sewer. Beyond, the opaqueness was massive; to penetrate thitherseemed horrible, an entrance into it appeared like an engulfment. A mancould, however, plunge into that wall of fog and it was necessary so todo. Haste was even requisite. It occurred to Jean Valjean that thegrating which he had caught sight of under the flag-stones might alsocatch the eye of the soldiery, and that everything hung upon thischance. They also might descend into that well and search it. There wasnot a minute to be lost. He had deposited Marius on the ground, hepicked him up again,—that is the real word for it,—placed him on hisshoulders once more, and set out. He plunged resolutely into the gloom.
The truth is, that they were less safe than Jean Valjean fancied.Perils of another sort and no less serious were awaiting them,perchance. After the lightning-charged whirlwind of the combat, thecavern of miasmas and traps; after chaos, the sewer. Jean Valjean hadfallen from one circle of hell into another.
When he had advanced fifty paces, he was obliged to halt. A problempresented itself. The passage terminated in another gut which heencountered across his path. There two ways presented themselves. Whichshould he take? Ought he to turn to the left or to the right? How washe to find his bearings in that black labyrinth? This labyrinth, towhich we have already called the reader’s attention, has a clue, whichis its slope. To follow to the slope is to arrive at the river.
This Jean Valjean instantly comprehended.
He said to himself that he was probably in the sewer des Halles; thatif he were to choose the path to the left and follow the slope, hewould arrive, in less than a quarter of an hour, at some mouth on theSeine between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf, that is to say, hewould make his appearance in broad daylight on the most densely peopledspot in Paris. Perhaps he would come out on some man-hole at theintersection of streets. Amazement of the passers-by at beholding twobleeding men emerge from the earth at their feet. Arrival of thepolice, a call to arms of the neighboring post of guards. Thus theywould be seized before they had even got out. It would be better toplunge into that labyrinth, to confide themselves to that black gloom,and to trust to Providence for the outcome.
He ascended the incline, and turned to the right.
When he had turned the angle of the gallery, the distant glimmer of anair-hole disappeared, the curtain of obscurity fell upon him once more,and he became blind again. Nevertheless, he advanced as rapidly aspossible. Marius’ two arms were passed round his neck, and the former’sfeet dragged behind him. He held both these arms with one hand, andgroped along the wall with the other. Marius’ cheek touched his, andclung there, bleeding. He felt a warm stream which came from Mariustrickling down upon him and making its way under his clothes. But ahumid warmth near his ear, which the mouth of the wounded man touched,indicated respiration, and consequently, life. The passage along whichJean Valjean was now proceeding was not so narrow as the first. JeanValjean walked through it with considerable difficulty. The rain of thepreceding day had not, as yet, entirely run off, and it created alittle torrent in the centre of the bottom, and he was forced to hugthe wall in order not to have his feet in the water.
Thus he proceeded in the gloom. He resembled the beings of the nightgroping in the invisible and lost beneath the earth in veins of shadow.
Still, little by little, whether it was that the distant air-holesemitted a little wavering light in this opaque gloom, or whether hiseyes had become accustomed to the obscurity, some vague vision returnedto him, and he began once more to gain a confused idea, now of the wallwhich he touched, now of the vault beneath which he was passing. Thepupil dilates in the dark, and the soul dilates in misfortune and endsby finding God there.
It was not easy to direct his course.
The line of the sewer re-echoes, so to speak, the line of the streetswhich lie above it. There were then in Paris two thousand two hundredstreets. Let the reader imagine himself beneath that forest of gloomybranches which is called the sewer. The system of sewers existing atthat epoch, placed end to end, would have given a length of elevenleagues. We have said above, that the actual network, thanks to thespecial activity of the last thirty years, was no less than sixtyleagues in extent.
Jean Valjean began by committing a blunder. He thought that he wasbeneath the Rue Saint-Denis, and it was a pity that it was not so.Under the Rue Saint-Denis there is an old stone sewer which dates fromLouis XIII. and which runs straight to the collecting sewer, called theGrand Sewer, with but a single elbow, on the right, on the elevation ofthe ancient Cour des Miracles, and a single branch, the Saint-Martinsewer, whose four arms describe a cross. But the gut of thePetite-Truanderie the entrance to which was in the vicinity of theCorinthe wine-shop has never communicated with the sewer of the RueSaint-Denis; it ended at the Montmartre sewer, and it was in this thatJean Valjean was entangled. There opportunities of losing oneselfabound. The Montmartre sewer is one of the most labyrinthine of theancient network. Fortunately, Jean Valjean had left behind him thesewer of the markets whose geometrical plan presents the appearance ofa multitude of parrots’ roosts piled on top of each other; but he hadbefore him more than one embarrassing encounter and more than onestreet corner—for they are streets—presenting itself in the gloom likean interrogation point; first, on his left, the vast sewer of thePlâtrière, a sort of Chinese puzzle, thrusting out and entangling itschaos of Ts and Zs under the Post-Office and under the rotunda of theWheat Market, as far as the Seine, where it terminates in a Y;secondly, on his right, the curving corridor of the Rue du Cadran withits three teeth, which are also blind courts; thirdly, on his left, thebranch of the Mail, complicated, almost at its inception, with a sortof fork, and proceeding from zig-zag to zig-zag until it ends in thegrand crypt of the outlet of the Louvre, truncated and ramified inevery direction; and lastly, the blind alley of a passage of the Ruedes Jeûneurs, without counting little ducts here and there, beforereaching the belt sewer, which alone could conduct him to some issuesufficiently distant to be safe.
Had Jean Valjean had any idea of all that we have here pointed out, hewould speedily have perceived, merely by feeling the wall, that he wasnot in the subterranean gallery of the Rue Saint-Denis. Instead of theancient stone, instead of the antique architecture, haughty and royaleven in the sewer, with pavement and string courses of granite andmortar costing eight hundred livres the fathom, he would have feltunder his hand contemporary cheapness, economical expedients, porousstone filled with mortar on a concrete foundation, which costs twohundred francs the metre, and the bourgeoise masonry known as _à petitsmatériaux_—small stuff; but of all this he knew nothing.
He advanced with anxiety, but with calmness, seeing nothing, knowingnothing, buried in chance, that is to say, engulfed in providence.
By degrees, we will admit, a certain horror seized upon him. The gloomwhich enveloped him penetrated his spirit. He walked in an enigma. Thisaqueduct of the sewer is formidable; it interlaces in a dizzy fashion.It is a melancholy thing to be caught in this Paris of shadows. JeanValjean was obliged to find and even to invent his route without seeingit. In this unknown, every step that he risked might be his last. Howwas he to get out? should he find an issue? should he find it in time?would that colossal subterranean sponge with its stone cavities, allowitself to be penetrated and pierced? should he there encounter someunexpected knot in the darkness? should he arrive at the inextricableand the impassable? would Marius die there of hemorrhage and he ofhunger? should they end by both getting lost, and by furnishing twoskeletons in a nook of that night? He did not know. He put all thesequestions to himself without replying to them. The intestines of Parisform a precipice. Like the prophet, he was in the belly of the monster.
All at once, he had a surprise. At the most unforeseen moment, andwithout having ceased to walk in a straight line, he perceived that hewas no longer ascending; the water of the rivulet was beating againsthis heels, instead of meeting him at his toes. The sewer was nowdescending. Why? Was he about to arrive suddenly at the Seine? Thisdanger was a great one, but the peril of retreating was still greater.He continued to advance.
It was not towards the Seine that he was proceeding. The ridge whichthe soil of Paris forms on its right bank empties one of its watershedsinto the Seine and the other into the Grand Sewer. The crest of thisridge which determines the division of the waters describes a verycapricious line. The culminating point, which is the point ofseparation of the currents, is in the Sainte-Avoye sewer, beyond theRue Michel-le-Comte, in the sewer of the Louvre, near the boulevards,and in the Montmartre sewer, near the Halles. It was this culminatingpoint that Jean Valjean had reached. He was directing his coursetowards the belt sewer; he was on the right path. But he did not knowit.
Every time that he encountered a branch, he felt of its angles, and ifhe found that the opening which presented itself was smaller than thepassage in which he was, he did not enter but continued his route,rightly judging that every narrower way must needs terminate in a blindalley, and could only lead him further from his goal, that is to say,the outlet. Thus he avoided the quadruple trap which was set for him inthe darkness by the four labyrinths which we have just enumerated.
At a certain moment, he perceived that he was emerging from beneath theParis which was petrified by the uprising, where the barricades hadsuppressed circulation, and that he was entering beneath the living andnormal Paris. Overhead he suddenly heard a noise as of thunder, distantbut continuous. It was the rumbling of vehicles.
He had been walking for about half an hour, at least according to thecalculation which he made in his own mind, and he had not yet thoughtof rest; he had merely changed the hand with which he was holdingMarius. The darkness was more profound than ever, but its very depthreassured him.
All at once, he saw his shadow in front of him. It was outlined on afaint, almost indistinct reddish glow, which vaguely empurpled theflooring vault underfoot, and the vault overhead, and gilded to hisright and to his left the two viscous walls of the passage. Stupefied,he turned round.
Behind him, in the portion of the passage which he had just passedthrough, at a distance which appeared to him immense, piercing thedense obscurity, flamed a sort of horrible star which had the air ofsurveying him.
It was the gloomy star of the police which was rising in the sewer.
In the rear of that star eight or ten forms were moving about in aconfused way, black, upright, indistinct, horrible.



CHAPTER II—EXPLANATION

On the day of the sixth of June, a battue of the sewers had beenordered. It was feared that the vanquished might have taken to them forrefuge, and Prefect Gisquet was to search occult Paris while GeneralBugeaud swept public Paris; a double and connected operation whichexacted a double strategy on the part of the public force, representedabove by the army and below by the police. Three squads of agents andsewermen explored the subterranean drain of Paris, the first on theright bank, the second on the left bank, the third in the city. Theagents of police were armed with carabines, with bludgeons, swords andpoignards.
That which was directed at Jean Valjean at that moment, was the lanternof the patrol of the right bank.
This patrol had just visited the curving gallery and the three blindalleys which lie beneath the Rue du Cadran. While they were passingtheir lantern through the depths of these blind alleys, Jean Valjeanhad encountered on his path the entrance to the gallery, had perceivedthat it was narrower than the principal passage and had not penetratedthither. He had passed on. The police, on emerging from the gallery duCadran, had fancied that they heard the sound of footsteps in thedirection of the belt sewer. They were, in fact, the steps of JeanValjean. The sergeant in command of the patrol had raised his lantern,and the squad had begun to gaze into the mist in the direction whencethe sound proceeded.
This was an indescribable moment for Jean Valjean.
Happily, if he saw the lantern well, the lantern saw him but ill. Itwas light and he was shadow. He was very far off, and mingled with thedarkness of the place. He hugged the wall and halted. Moreover, he didnot understand what it was that was moving behind him. The lack ofsleep and food, and his emotions had caused him also to pass into thestate of a visionary. He beheld a gleam, and around that gleam, forms.What was it? He did not comprehend.
Jean Valjean having paused, the sound ceased.
The men of the patrol listened, and heard nothing, they looked and sawnothing. They held a consultation.
There existed at that epoch at this point of the Montmartre sewer asort of crossroads called _de service_, which was afterwardssuppressed, on account of the little interior lake which formed there,swallowing up the torrent of rain in heavy storms. The patrol couldform a cluster in this open space. Jean Valjean saw these spectres forma sort of circle. These bull-dogs’ heads approached each other closelyand whispered together.
The result of this council held by the watch dogs was, that they hadbeen mistaken, that there had been no noise, that it was useless to getentangled in the belt sewer, that it would only be a waste of time, butthat they ought to hasten towards Saint-Merry; that if there wasanything to do, and any “bousingot” to track out, it was in thatquarter.
From time to time, parties re-sole their old insults. In 1832, the wordbousingot formed the interim between the word jacobin, which had becomeobsolete, and the word demagogue which has since rendered suchexcellent service.
The sergeant gave orders to turn to the left, towards the watershed ofthe Seine.
If it had occurred to them to separate into two squads, and to go inboth directions, Jean Valjean would have been captured. All hung onthat thread. It is probable that the instructions of the prefecture,foreseeing a possibility of combat and insurgents in force, hadforbidden the patrol to part company. The patrol resumed its march,leaving Jean Valjean behind it. Of all this movement, Jean Valjeanperceived nothing, except the eclipse of the lantern which suddenlywheeled round.
Before taking his departure, the sergeant, in order to acquit hispoliceman’s conscience, discharged his gun in the direction of JeanValjean. The detonation rolled from echo to echo in the crypt, like therumbling of that titanic entrail. A bit of plaster which fell into thestream and splashed up the water a few paces away from Jean Valjean,warned him that the ball had struck the arch over his head.
Slow and measured steps resounded for some time on the timber work,gradually dying away as they retreated to a greater distance; the groupof black forms vanished, a glimmer of light oscillated and floated,communicating to the vault a reddish glow which grew fainter, thendisappeared; the silence became profound once more, the obscuritybecame complete, blindness and deafness resumed possession of theshadows; and Jean Valjean, not daring to stir as yet, remained for along time leaning with his back against the wall, with straining ears,and dilated pupils, watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol.



CHAPTER III—THE “SPUN” MAN

This justice must be rendered to the police of that period, that evenin the most serious public junctures, it imperturbably fulfilled itsduties connected with the sewers and surveillance. A revolt was, in itseyes, no pretext for allowing malefactors to take the bit in their ownmouths, and for neglecting society for the reason that the governmentwas in peril. The ordinary service was performed correctly in companywith the extraordinary service, and was not troubled by the latter. Inthe midst of an incalculable political event already begun, under thepressure of a possible revolution, a police agent, “spun” a thiefwithout allowing himself to be distracted by insurrection andbarricades.
It was something precisely parallel which took place on the afternoonof the 6th of June on the banks of the Seine, on the slope of the rightshore, a little beyond the Pont des Invalides.
There is no longer any bank there now. The aspect of the locality haschanged.
On that bank, two men, separated by a certain distance, seemed to bewatching each other while mutually avoiding each other. The one who wasin advance was trying to get away, the one in the rear was trying toovertake the other.
It was like a game of checkers played at a distance and in silence.Neither seemed to be in any hurry, and both walked slowly, as thougheach of them feared by too much haste to make his partner redouble hispace.
One would have said that it was an appetite following its prey, andpurposely without wearing the air of doing so. The prey was crafty andon its guard.
The proper relations between the hunted pole-cat and the hunting dogwere observed. The one who was seeking to escape had an insignificantmien and not an impressive appearance; the one who was seeking to seizehim was rude of aspect, and must have been rude to encounter.
The first, conscious that he was the more feeble, avoided the second;but he avoided him in a manner which was deeply furious; any one whocould have observed him would have discerned in his eyes the sombrehostility of flight, and all the menace that fear contains.
The shore was deserted; there were no passers-by; not even a boatmannor a lighter-man was in the skiffs which were moored here and there.
It was not easy to see these two men, except from the quay opposite,and to any person who had scrutinized them at that distance, the manwho was in advance would have appeared like a bristling, tattered, andequivocal being, who was uneasy and trembling beneath a ragged blouse,and the other like a classic and official personage, wearing thefrock-coat of authority buttoned to the chin.
Perchance the reader might recognize these two men, if he were to seethem closer at hand.
What was the object of the second man?
Probably to succeed in clothing the first more warmly.
When a man clothed by the state pursues a man in rags, it is in orderto make of him a man who is also clothed by the state. Only, the wholequestion lies in the color. To be dressed in blue is glorious; to bedressed in red is disagreeable.
There is a purple from below.
It is probably some unpleasantness and some purple of this sort whichthe first man is desirous of shirking.
If the other allowed him to walk on, and had not seized him as yet, itwas, judging from all appearances, in the hope of seeing him lead up tosome significant meeting-place and to some group worth catching. Thisdelicate operation is called “spinning.”

What renders this conjecture entirely probable is that the buttoned-upman, on catching sight from the shore of a hackney-coach on the quay asit was passing along empty, made a sign to the driver; the driverunderstood, evidently recognized the person with whom he had to deal,turned about and began to follow the two men at the top of the quay, ata foot-pace. This was not observed by the slouching and tatteredpersonage who was in advance.
The hackney-coach rolled along the trees of the Champs-Élysées. Thebust of the driver, whip in hand, could be seen moving along above theparapet.
One of the secret instructions of the police authorities to theiragents contains this article: “Always have on hand a hackney-coach, incase of emergency.”

While these two men were manœuvring, each on his own side, withirreproachable strategy, they approached an inclined plane on the quaywhich descended to the shore, and which permitted cab-drivers arrivingfrom Passy to come to the river and water their horses. This inclinedplane was suppressed later on, for the sake of symmetry; horses may dieof thirst, but the eye is gratified.
It is probable that the man in the blouse had intended to ascend thisinclined plane, with a view to making his escape into theChamps-Élysées, a place ornamented with trees, but, in return, muchinfested with policemen, and where the other could easily exerciseviolence.
This point on the quay is not very far distant from the house broughtto Paris from Moret in 1824, by Colonel Brack, and designated as “thehouse of François I.” A guard house is situated close at hand.
To the great surprise of his watcher, the man who was being tracked didnot mount by the inclined plane for watering. He continued to advancealong the quay on the shore.
His position was visibly becoming critical.
What was he intending to do, if not to throw himself into the Seine?
Henceforth, there existed no means of ascending to the quay; there wasno other inclined plane, no staircase; and they were near the spot,marked by the bend in the Seine towards the Pont de Jéna, where thebank, growing constantly narrower, ended in a slender tongue, and waslost in the water. There he would inevitably find himself blockedbetween the perpendicular wall on his right, the river on his left andin front of him, and the authorities on his heels.
It is true that this termination of the shore was hidden from sight bya heap of rubbish six or seven feet in height, produced by somedemolition or other. But did this man hope to conceal himselfeffectually behind that heap of rubbish, which one need but skirt? Theexpedient would have been puerile. He certainly was not dreaming ofsuch a thing. The innocence of thieves does not extend to that point.
The pile of rubbish formed a sort of projection at the water’s edge,which was prolonged in a promontory as far as the wall of the quay.
The man who was being followed arrived at this little mound and wentround it, so that he ceased to be seen by the other.
The latter, as he did not see, could not be seen; he took advantage ofthis fact to abandon all dissimulation and to walk very rapidly. In afew moments, he had reached the rubbish heap and passed round it. Therehe halted in sheer amazement. The man whom he had been pursuing was nolonger there.
Total eclipse of the man in the blouse.
The shore, beginning with the rubbish heap, was only about thirty paceslong, then it plunged into the water which beat against the wall of thequay. The fugitive could not have thrown himself into the Seine withoutbeing seen by the man who was following him. What had become of him?
The man in the buttoned-up coat walked to the extremity of the shore,and remained there in thought for a moment, his fists clenched, hiseyes searching. All at once he smote his brow. He had just perceived,at the point where the land came to an end and the water began, a largeiron grating, low, arched, garnished with a heavy lock and with threemassive hinges. This grating, a sort of door pierced at the base of thequay, opened on the river as well as on the shore. A blackish streampassed under it. This stream discharged into the Seine.
Beyond the heavy, rusty iron bars, a sort of dark and vaulted corridorcould be descried. The man folded his arms and stared at the gratingwith an air of reproach.
As this gaze did not suffice, he tried to thrust it aside; he shook it,it resisted solidly. It is probable that it had just been opened,although no sound had been heard, a singular circumstance in so rusty agrating; but it is certain that it had been closed again. Thisindicated that the man before whom that door had just opened had not ahook but a key.
This evidence suddenly burst upon the mind of the man who was trying tomove the grating, and evoked from him this indignant ejaculation:
“That is too much! A government key!”

Then, immediately regaining his composure, he expressed a whole worldof interior ideas by this outburst of monosyllables accented almostironically: “Come! Come! Come! Come!”

That said, and in the hope of something or other, either that he shouldsee the man emerge or other men enter, he posted himself on the watchbehind a heap of rubbish, with the patient rage of a pointer.
The hackney-coach, which regulated all its movements on his, had, inits turn, halted on the quay above him, close to the parapet. Thecoachman, foreseeing a prolonged wait, encased his horses’ muzzles inthe bag of oats which is damp at the bottom, and which is so familiarto Parisians, to whom, be it said in parenthesis, the Governmentsometimes applies it. The rare passers-by on the Pont de Jéna turnedtheir heads, before they pursued their way, to take a momentary glanceat these two motionless items in the landscape, the man on the shore,the carriage on the quay.



CHAPTER IV—HE ALSO BEARS HIS CROSS

Jean Valjean had resumed his march and had not again paused.
This march became more and more laborious. The level of these vaultsvaries; the average height is about five feet, six inches, and has beencalculated for the stature of a man; Jean Valjean was forced to bendover, in order not to strike Marius against the vault; at every step hehad to bend, then to rise, and to feel incessantly of the wall. Themoisture of the stones, and the viscous nature of the timber frameworkfurnished but poor supports to which to cling, either for hand or foot.He stumbled along in the hideous dung-heap of the city. Theintermittent gleams from the air-holes only appeared at very longintervals, and were so wan that the full sunlight seemed like the lightof the moon; all the rest was mist, miasma, opaqueness, blackness. JeanValjean was both hungry and thirsty; especially thirsty; and this, likethe sea, was a place full of water where a man cannot drink. Hisstrength, which was prodigious, as the reader knows, and which had beenbut little decreased by age, thanks to his chaste and sober life, beganto give way, nevertheless. Fatigue began to gain on him; and as hisstrength decreased, it made the weight of his burden increase. Marius,who was, perhaps, dead, weighed him down as inert bodies weigh. JeanValjean held him in such a manner that his chest was not oppressed, andso that respiration could proceed as well as possible. Between his legshe felt the rapid gliding of the rats. One of them was frightened tosuch a degree that he bit him. From time to time, a breath of fresh airreached him through the vent-holes of the mouths of the sewer, andreanimated him.
It might have been three hours past midday when he reached thebelt-sewer.
He was, at first, astonished at this sudden widening. He found himself,all at once, in a gallery where his outstretched hands could not reachthe two walls, and beneath a vault which his head did not touch. TheGrand Sewer is, in fact, eight feet wide and seven feet high.
At the point where the Montmartre sewer joins the Grand Sewer, twoother subterranean galleries, that of the Rue de Provence, and that ofthe Abattoir, form a square. Between these four ways, a less sagaciousman would have remained undecided. Jean Valjean selected the broadest,that is to say, the belt-sewer. But here the question again cameup—should he descend or ascend? He thought that the situation requiredhaste, and that he must now gain the Seine at any risk. In other terms,he must descend. He turned to the left.
It was well that he did so, for it is an error to suppose that thebelt-sewer has two outlets, the one in the direction of Bercy, theother towards Passy, and that it is, as its name indicates, thesubterranean girdle of the Paris on the right bank. The Grand Sewer,which is, it must be remembered, nothing else than the old brook ofMénilmontant, terminates, if one ascends it, in a blind sack, that isto say, at its ancient point of departure which was its source, at thefoot of the knoll of Ménilmontant. There is no direct communicationwith the branch which collects the waters of Paris beginning with theQuartier Popincourt, and which falls into the Seine through the Amelotsewer above the ancient Isle Louviers. This branch, which completes thecollecting sewer, is separated from it, under the Rue Ménilmontantitself, by a pile which marks the dividing point of the waters, betweenupstream and downstream. If Jean Valjean had ascended the gallery hewould have arrived, after a thousand efforts, and broken down withfatigue, and in an expiring condition, in the gloom, at a wall. Hewould have been lost.
In case of necessity, by retracing his steps a little way, and enteringthe passage of the Filles-du-Calvaire, on condition that he did nothesitate at the subterranean crossing of the Carrefour Boucherat, andby taking the corridor Saint-Louis, then the Saint-Gilles gut on theleft, then turning to the right and avoiding the Saint-Sebastiangallery, he might have reached the Amelot sewer, and thence, providedthat he did not go astray in the sort of F which lies under theBastille, he might have attained the outlet on the Seine near theArsenal. But in order to do this, he must have been thoroughly familiarwith the enormous madrepore of the sewer in all its ramifications andin all its openings. Now, we must again insist that he knew nothing ofthat frightful drain which he was traversing; and had any one asked himin what he was, he would have answered: “In the night.”

His instinct served him well. To descend was, in fact, possible safety.
He left on his right the two narrow passages which branch out in theform of a claw under the Rue Laffitte and the Rue Saint-Georges and thelong, bifurcated corridor of the Chaussée d’Antin.
A little beyond an affluent, which was, probably, the Madeleine branch,he halted. He was extremely weary. A passably large air-hole, probablythe man-hole in the Rue d’Anjou, furnished a light that was almostvivid. Jean Valjean, with the gentleness of movement which a brotherwould exercise towards his wounded brother, deposited Marius on thebanquette of the sewer. Marius’ blood-stained face appeared under thewan light of the air-hole like the ashes at the bottom of a tomb. Hiseyes were closed, his hair was plastered down on his temples like apainter’s brushes dried in red wash; his hands hung limp and dead. Aclot of blood had collected in the knot of his cravat; his limbs werecold, and blood was clotted at the corners of his mouth; his shirt hadthrust itself into his wounds, the cloth of his coat was chafing theyawning gashes in the living flesh. Jean Valjean, pushing aside thegarments with the tips of his fingers, laid his hand upon Marius’breast; his heart was still beating. Jean Valjean tore up his shirt,bandaged the young man’s wounds as well as he was able and stopped theflowing blood; then bending over Marius, who still lay unconscious andalmost without breathing, in that half light, he gazed at him withinexpressible hatred.
On disarranging Marius’ garments, he had found two things in hispockets, the roll which had been forgotten there on the precedingevening, and Marius’ pocketbook. He ate the roll and opened thepocketbook. On the first page he found the four lines written byMarius. The reader will recall them:
“My name is Marius Pontmercy. Carry my body to my grandfather, M.Gillenormand, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the Marais.”

Jean Valjean read these four lines by the light of the air-hole, andremained for a moment as though absorbed in thought, repeating in a lowtone: “Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, number 6, Monsieur Gillenormand.” Hereplaced the pocketbook in Marius’ pocket. He had eaten, his strengthhad returned to him; he took Marius up once more upon his back, placedthe latter’s head carefully on his right shoulder, and resumed hisdescent of the sewer.
The Grand Sewer, directed according to the course of the valley ofMénilmontant, is about two leagues long. It is paved throughout anotable portion of its extent.
This torch of the names of the streets of Paris, with which we areilluminating for the reader Jean Valjean’s subterranean march, JeanValjean himself did not possess. Nothing told him what zone of the cityhe was traversing, nor what way he had made. Only the growing pallor ofthe pools of light which he encountered from time to time indicated tohim that the sun was withdrawing from the pavement, and that the daywould soon be over; and the rolling of vehicles overhead, having becomeintermittent instead of continuous, then having almost ceased, heconcluded that he was no longer under central Paris, and that he wasapproaching some solitary region, in the vicinity of the outerboulevards, or the extreme outer quays. Where there are fewer housesand streets, the sewer has fewer air-holes. The gloom deepened aroundJean Valjean. Nevertheless, he continued to advance, groping his way inthe dark.
Suddenly this darkness became terrible.



CHAPTER V—IN THE CASE OF SAND AS IN THAT OF WOMAN, THERE IS A FINENESSWHICH IS TREACHEROUS

He felt that he was entering the water, and that he no longer had apavement under his feet, but only mud.
It sometimes happens, that on certain shores of Bretagne or Scotland aman, either a traveller or a fisherman, while walking at low tide onthe beach far from shore, suddenly notices that for several minutespast, he has been walking with some difficulty. The beach under foot islike pitch; his soles stick fast to it; it is no longer sand, it isbird-lime. The strand is perfectly dry, but at every step that hetakes, as soon as the foot is raised, the print is filled with water.The eye, however, has perceived no change; the immense beach is smoothand tranquil, all the sand has the same aspect, nothing distinguishesthe soil that is solid from that which is not solid; the joyous littlecloud of sand-lice continues to leap tumultuously under the feet of thepasser-by.
The man pursues his way, he walks on, turns towards the land, endeavorsto approach the shore. He is not uneasy. Uneasy about what? Only he isconscious that the heaviness of his feet seems to be increasing atevery step that he takes. All at once he sinks in. He sinks in two orthree inches. Decidedly, he is not on the right road; he halts to gethis bearings. Suddenly he glances at his feet; his feet havedisappeared. The sand has covered them. He draws his feet out of thesand, he tries to retrace his steps, he turns back, he sinks in moredeeply than before. The sand is up to his ankles, he tears himself freefrom it and flings himself to the left, the sand reaches to mid-leg, heflings himself to the right, the sand comes up to his knees. Then, withindescribable terror, he recognizes the fact that he is caught in aquicksand, and that he has beneath him that frightful medium in whichneither man can walk nor fish can swim. He flings away his burden, ifhe have one, he lightens himself, like a ship in distress; it is toolate, the sand is above his knees.
He shouts, he waves his hat, or his handkerchief, the sand continuallygains on him; if the beach is deserted, if the land is too far away, ifthe bank of sand is too ill-famed, there is no hero in theneighborhood, all is over, he is condemned to be engulfed. He iscondemned to that terrible interment, long, infallible, implacable,which it is impossible to either retard or hasten, which lasts forhours, which will not come to an end, which seizes you erect, free, inthe flush of health, which drags you down by the feet, which, at everyeffort that you attempt, at every shout that you utter, draws you alittle lower, which has the air of punishing you for your resistance bya redoubled grasp, which forces a man to return slowly to earth, whileleaving him time to survey the horizon, the trees, the verdant country,the smoke of the villages on the plain, the sails of the ships on thesea, the birds which fly and sing, the sun and the sky. This engulfmentis the sepulchre which assumes a tide, and which mounts from the depthsof the earth towards a living man. Each minute is an inexorablelayer-out of the dead. The wretched man tries to sit down, to lie down,to climb; every movement that he makes buries him deeper; hestraightens himself up, he sinks; he feels that he is being swallowedup; he shrieks, implores, cries to the clouds, wrings his hands, growsdesperate. Behold him in the sand up to his belly, the sand reaches tohis breast, he is only a bust now. He uplifts his hands, utters furiousgroans, clenches his nails on the beach, tries to cling fast to thatashes, supports himself on his elbows in order to raise himself fromthat soft sheath, and sobs frantically; the sand mounts higher. Thesand has reached his shoulders, the sand reaches to his throat; onlyhis face is visible now. His mouth cries aloud, the sand fills it;silence. His eyes still gaze forth, the sand closes them, night. Thenhis brow decreases, a little hair quivers above the sand; a handprojects, pierces the surface of the beach, waves and disappears.Sinister obliteration of a man.
Sometimes a rider is engulfed with his horse; sometimes the carter isswallowed up with his cart; all founders in that strand. It isshipwreck elsewhere than in the water. It is the earth drowning a man.The earth, permeated with the ocean, becomes a pitfall. It presentsitself in the guise of a plain, and it yawns like a wave. The abyss issubject to these treacheries.
This melancholy fate, always possible on certain sea beaches, was alsopossible, thirty years ago, in the sewers of Paris.
Before the important works, undertaken in 1833, the subterranean drainof Paris was subject to these sudden slides.
The water filtered into certain subjacent strata, which wereparticularly friable; the foot-way, which was of flag-stones, as in theancient sewers, or of cement on concrete, as in the new galleries,having no longer an underpinning, gave way. A fold in a flooring ofthis sort means a crack, means crumbling. The framework crumbled awayfor a certain length. This crevice, the hiatus of a gulf of mire, wascalled a _fontis_, in the special tongue. What is a _fontis?_ It is thequicksands of the seashore suddenly encountered under the surface ofthe earth; it is the beach of Mont Saint-Michel in a sewer. The soakedsoil is in a state of fusion, as it were; all its molecules are insuspension in soft medium; it is not earth and it is not water. Thedepth is sometimes very great. Nothing can be more formidable than suchan encounter. If the water predominates, death is prompt, the man isswallowed up; if earth predominates, death is slow.
Can any one picture to himself such a death? If being swallowed by theearth is terrible on the seashore, what is it in a cesspool? Instead ofthe open air, the broad daylight, the clear horizon, those vast sounds,those free clouds whence rains life, instead of those barks descried inthe distance, of that hope under all sorts of forms, of probablepassers-by, of succor possible up to the very last moment,—instead ofall this, deafness, blindness, a black vault, the inside of a tombalready prepared, death in the mire beneath a cover! slow suffocationby filth, a stone box where asphyxia opens its claw in the mire andclutches you by the throat; fetidness mingled with the death-rattle;slime instead of the strand, sulfuretted hydrogen in place of thehurricane, dung in place of the ocean! And to shout, to gnash one’steeth, and to writhe, and to struggle, and to agonize, with thatenormous city which knows nothing of it all, over one’s head!
Inexpressible is the horror of dying thus! Death sometimes redeems hisatrocity by a certain terrible dignity. On the funeral pile, inshipwreck, one can be great; in the flames as in the foam, a superbattitude is possible; one there becomes transfigured as one perishes.But not here. Death is filthy. It is humiliating to expire. The supremefloating visions are abject. Mud is synonymous with shame. It is petty,ugly, infamous. To die in a butt of Malvoisie, like Clarence, ispermissible; in the ditch of a scavenger, like Escoubleau, is horrible.To struggle therein is hideous; at the same time that one is goingthrough the death agony, one is floundering about. There are shadowsenough for hell, and mire enough to render it nothing but a slough, andthe dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming aspectre or a frog.
Everywhere else the sepulchre is sinister; here it is deformed.
The depth of the _fontis_ varied, as well as their length and theirdensity, according to the more or less bad quality of the sub-soil.Sometimes a _fontis_ was three or four feet deep, sometimes eight orten; sometimes the bottom was unfathomable. Here the mire was almostsolid, there almost liquid. In the Lunière fontis, it would have takena man a day to disappear, while he would have been devoured in fiveminutes by the Philippeaux slough. The mire bears up more or less,according to its density. A child can escape where a man will perish.The first law of safety is to get rid of every sort of load. Everysewerman who felt the ground giving way beneath him began by flingingaway his sack of tools, or his back-basket, or his hod.
The fontis were due to different causes: the friability of the soil;some landslip at a depth beyond the reach of man; the violent summerrains; the incessant flooding of winter; long, drizzling showers.Sometimes the weight of the surrounding houses on a marly or sandy soilforced out the vaults of the subterranean galleries and caused them tobend aside, or it chanced that a flooring vault burst and split underthis crushing thrust. In this manner, the heaping up of the Parthénon,obliterated, a century ago, a portion of the vaults of Saint-Genevièvehill. When a sewer was broken in under the pressure of the houses, themischief was sometimes betrayed in the street above by a sort of space,like the teeth of a saw, between the paving-stones; this crevice wasdeveloped in an undulating line throughout the entire length of thecracked vault, and then, the evil being visible, the remedy could bepromptly applied. It also frequently happened, that the interiorravages were not revealed by any external scar, and in that case, woeto the sewermen. When they entered without precaution into the sewer,they were liable to be lost. Ancient registers make mention of severalscavengers who were buried in fontis in this manner. They give manynames; among others, that of the sewerman who was swallowed up in aquagmire under the man-hole of the Rue Carême-Prenant, a certain BlaisePoutrain; this Blaise Poutrain was the brother of Nicholas Poutrain,who was the last grave-digger of the cemetery called the Charnier desInnocents, in 1785, the epoch when that cemetery expired.
There was also that young and charming Vicomte d’Escoubleau, of whom wehave just spoken, one of the heroes of the siege of Lérida, where theydelivered the assault in silk stockings, with violins at their head.D’Escoubleau, surprised one night at his cousin’s, the Duchesse deSourdis’, was drowned in a quagmire of the Beautreillis sewer, in whichhe had taken refuge in order to escape from the Duke. Madame deSourdis, when informed of his death, demanded her smelling-bottle, andforgot to weep, through sniffling at her salts. In such cases, there isno love which holds fast; the sewer extinguishes it. Hero refuses towash the body of Leander. Thisbe stops her nose in the presence ofPyramus and says: “Phew!”




CHAPTER VI—THE FONTIS

Jean Valjean found himself in the presence of a fontis.
This sort of quagmire was common at that period in the subsoil of theChamps-Élysées, difficult to handle in the hydraulic works and a badpreservative of the subterranean constructions, on account of itsexcessive fluidity. This fluidity exceeds even the inconsistency of thesands of the Quartier Saint-Georges, which could only be conquered by astone construction on a concrete foundation, and the clayey strata,infected with gas, of the Quartier des Martyrs, which are so liquidthat the only way in which a passage was effected under the gallery desMartyrs was by means of a cast-iron pipe. When, in 1836, the old stonesewer beneath the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, in which we now see JeanValjean, was demolished for the purpose of reconstructing it, thequicksand, which forms the subsoil of the Champs-Élysées as far as theSeine, presented such an obstacle, that the operation lasted nearly sixmonths, to the great clamor of the dwellers on the riverside,particularly those who had hotels and carriages. The work was more thanunhealthy; it was dangerous. It is true that they had four months and ahalf of rain, and three floods of the Seine.
The fontis which Jean Valjean had encountered was caused by thedownpour of the preceding day. The pavement, badly sustained by thesubjacent sand, had given way and had produced a stoppage of the water.Infiltration had taken place, a slip had followed. The dislocatedbottom had sunk into the ooze. To what extent? Impossible to say. Theobscurity was more dense there than elsewhere. It was a pit of mire ina cavern of night.
Jean Valjean felt the pavement vanishing beneath his feet. He enteredthis slime. There was water on the surface, slime at the bottom. Hemust pass it. To retrace his steps was impossible. Marius was dying,and Jean Valjean exhausted. Besides, where was he to go? Jean Valjeanadvanced. Moreover, the pit seemed, for the first few steps, not to bevery deep. But in proportion as he advanced, his feet plunged deeper.Soon he had the slime up to his calves and water above his knees. Hewalked on, raising Marius in his arms, as far above the water as hecould. The mire now reached to his knees, and the water to his waist.He could no longer retreat. This mud, dense enough for one man, couldnot, obviously, uphold two. Marius and Jean Valjean would have stood achance of extricating themselves singly. Jean Valjean continued toadvance, supporting the dying man, who was, perhaps, a corpse.
The water came up to his arm-pits; he felt that he was sinking; it wasonly with difficulty that he could move in the depth of ooze which hehad now reached. The density, which was his support, was also anobstacle. He still held Marius on high, and with an unheard-ofexpenditure of force, he advanced still; but he was sinking. He hadonly his head above the water now and his two arms holding up Marius.In the old paintings of the deluge there is a mother holding her childthus.
He sank still deeper, he turned his face to the rear, to escape thewater, and in order that he might be able to breathe; anyone who hadseen him in that gloom would have thought that what he beheld was amask floating on the shadows; he caught a faint glimpse above him ofthe drooping head and livid face of Marius; he made a desperate effortand launched his foot forward; his foot struck something solid; a pointof support. It was high time.
He straightened himself up, and rooted himself upon that point ofsupport with a sort of fury. This produced upon him the effect of thefirst step in a staircase leading back to life.
The point of support, thus encountered in the mire at the suprememoment, was the beginning of the other watershed of the pavement, whichhad bent but had not given way, and which had curved under the waterlike a plank and in a single piece. Well built pavements form a vaultand possess this sort of firmness. This fragment of the vaulting,partly submerged, but solid, was a veritable inclined plane, and, onceon this plane, he was safe. Jean Valjean mounted this inclined planeand reached the other side of the quagmire.
As he emerged from the water, he came in contact with a stone and fellupon his knees. He reflected that this was but just, and he remainedthere for some time, with his soul absorbed in words addressed to God.
He rose to his feet, shivering, chilled, foul-smelling, bowed beneaththe dying man whom he was dragging after him, all dripping with slime,and his soul filled with a strange light.



CHAPTER VII—ONE SOMETIMES RUNS AGROUND WHEN ONE FANCIES THAT ONE ISDISEMBARKING

He set out on his way once more.
However, although he had not left his life in the fontis, he seemed tohave left his strength behind him there. That supreme effort hadexhausted him. His lassitude was now such that he was obliged to pausefor breath every three or four steps, and lean against the wall. Oncehe was forced to seat himself on the banquette in order to alterMarius’ position, and he thought that he should have to remain there.But if his vigor was dead, his energy was not. He rose again.
He walked on desperately, almost fast, proceeded thus for a hundredpaces, almost without drawing breath, and suddenly came in contact withthe wall. He had reached an elbow of the sewer, and, arriving at theturn with head bent down, he had struck the wall. He raised his eyes,and at the extremity of the vault, far, very far away in front of him,he perceived a light. This time it was not that terrible light; it wasgood, white light. It was daylight. Jean Valjean saw the outlet.
A damned soul, who, in the midst of the furnace, should suddenlyperceive the outlet of Gehenna, would experience what Jean Valjeanfelt. It would fly wildly with the stumps of its burned wings towardsthat radiant portal. Jean Valjean was no longer conscious of fatigue,he no longer felt Marius’ weight, he found his legs once more of steel,he ran rather than walked. As he approached, the outlet became more andmore distinctly defined. It was a pointed arch, lower than the vault,which gradually narrowed, and narrower than the gallery, which closedin as the vault grew lower. The tunnel ended like the interior of afunnel; a faulty construction, imitated from the wickets ofpenitentiaries, logical in a prison, illogical in a sewer, and whichhas since been corrected.
Jean Valjean reached the outlet.
There he halted.
It certainly was the outlet, but he could not get out.
The arch was closed by a heavy grating, and the grating, which, to allappearance, rarely swung on its rusty hinges, was clamped to its stonejamb by a thick lock, which, red with rust, seemed like an enormousbrick. The keyhole could be seen, and the robust latch, deeply sunk inthe iron staple. The door was plainly double-locked. It was one ofthose prison locks which old Paris was so fond of lavishing.
Beyond the grating was the open air, the river, the daylight, theshore, very narrow but sufficient for escape. The distant quays, Paris,that gulf in which one so easily hides oneself, the broad horizon,liberty. On the right, downstream, the bridge of Jéna was discernible,on the left, upstream, the bridge of the Invalides; the place wouldhave been a propitious one in which to await the night and to escape.It was one of the most solitary points in Paris; the shore which facesthe Grand-Caillou. Flies were entering and emerging through the bars ofthe grating.
It might have been half-past eight o’clock in the evening. The day wasdeclining.
Jean Valjean laid Marius down along the wall, on the dry portion of thevaulting, then he went to the grating and clenched both fists round thebars; the shock which he gave it was frenzied, but it did not move. Thegrating did not stir. Jean Valjean seized the bars one after the other,in the hope that he might be able to tear away the least solid, and tomake of it a lever wherewith to raise the door or to break the lock.Not a bar stirred. The teeth of a tiger are not more firmly fixed intheir sockets. No lever; no prying possible. The obstacle wasinvincible. There was no means of opening the gate.
Must he then stop there? What was he to do? What was to become of him?He had not the strength to retrace his steps, to recommence the journeywhich he had already taken. Besides, how was he to again traverse thatquagmire whence he had only extricated himself as by a miracle? Andafter the quagmire, was there not the police patrol, which assuredlycould not be twice avoided? And then, whither was he to go? Whatdirection should he pursue? To follow the incline would not conduct himto his goal. If he were to reach another outlet, he would find itobstructed by a plug or a grating. Every outlet was, undoubtedly,closed in that manner. Chance had unsealed the grating through which hehad entered, but it was evident that all the other sewer mouths werebarred. He had only succeeded in escaping into a prison.
All was over. Everything that Jean Valjean had done was useless.Exhaustion had ended in failure.
They were both caught in the immense and gloomy web of death, and JeanValjean felt the terrible spider running along those black strands andquivering in the shadows. He turned his back to the grating, and fellupon the pavement, hurled to earth rather than seated, close to Marius,who still made no movement, and with his head bent between his knees.This was the last drop of anguish.
Of what was he thinking during this profound depression? Neither ofhimself nor of Marius. He was thinking of Cosette.



CHAPTER VIII—THE TORN COAT-TAIL

In the midst of this prostration, a hand was laid on his shoulder, anda low voice said to him:
“Half shares.”

Some person in that gloom? Nothing so closely resembles a dream asdespair. Jean Valjean thought that he was dreaming. He had heard nofootsteps. Was it possible? He raised his eyes.
A man stood before him.
This man was clad in a blouse; his feet were bare; he held his shoes inhis left hand; he had evidently removed them in order to reach JeanValjean, without allowing his steps to be heard.
Jean Valjean did not hesitate for an instant. Unexpected as was thisencounter, this man was known to him. The man was Thénardier.
Although awakened, so to speak, with a start, Jean Valjean, accustomedto alarms, and steeled to unforeseen shocks that must be promptlyparried, instantly regained possession of his presence of mind.Moreover, the situation could not be made worse, a certain degree ofdistress is no longer capable of a crescendo, and Thénardier himselfcould add nothing to this blackness of this night.
A momentary pause ensued.
Thénardier, raising his right hand to a level with his forehead, formedwith it a shade, then he brought his eyelashes together, by screwing uphis eyes, a motion which, in connection with a slight contraction ofthe mouth, characterizes the sagacious attention of a man who isendeavoring to recognize another man. He did not succeed. Jean Valjean,as we have just stated, had his back turned to the light, and he was,moreover, so disfigured, so bemired, so bleeding that he would havebeen unrecognizable in full noonday. On the contrary, illuminated bythe light from the grating, a cellar light, it is true, livid, yetprecise in its lividness, Thénardier, as the energetic popular metaphorexpresses it, immediately “leaped into” Jean Valjean’s eyes. Thisinequality of conditions sufficed to assure some advantage to JeanValjean in that mysterious duel which was on the point of beginningbetween the two situations and the two men. The encounter took placebetween Jean Valjean veiled and Thénardier unmasked.
Jean Valjean immediately perceived that Thénardier did not recognizehim.
They surveyed each other for a moment in that half-gloom, as thoughtaking each other’s measure. Thénardier was the first to break thesilence.
“How are you going to manage to get out?”

Jean Valjean made no reply. Thénardier continued:
“It’s impossible to pick the lock of that gate. But still you must getout of this.”

“That is true,” said Jean Valjean.
“Well, half shares then.”

“What do you mean by that?”

“You have killed that man; that’s all right. I have the key.”

Thénardier pointed to Marius. He went on:
“I don’t know you, but I want to help you. You must be a friend.”

Jean Valjean began to comprehend. Thénardier took him for an assassin.
Thénardier resumed:
“Listen, comrade. You didn’t kill that man without looking to see whathe had in his pockets. Give me my half. I’ll open the door for you.”

And half drawing from beneath his tattered blouse a huge key, he added:
“Do you want to see how a key to liberty is made? Look here.”

Jean Valjean “remained stupid”—the expression belongs to the elderCorneille—to such a degree that he doubted whether what he beheld wasreal. It was Providence appearing in horrible guise, and his good angelspringing from the earth in the form of Thénardier.
Thénardier thrust his fist into a large pocket concealed under hisblouse, drew out a rope and offered it to Jean Valjean.
“Hold on,” said he, “I’ll give you the rope to boot.”

“What is the rope for?”

“You will need a stone also, but you can find one outside. There’s aheap of rubbish.”

“What am I to do with a stone?”

“Idiot, you’ll want to sling that stiff into the river, you’ll need astone and a rope, otherwise it would float on the water.”

Jean Valjean took the rope. There is no one who does not occasionallyaccept in this mechanical way.
Thénardier snapped his fingers as though an idea had suddenly occurredto him.
“Ah, see here, comrade, how did you contrive to get out of that sloughyonder? I haven’t dared to risk myself in it. Phew! you don’t smellgood.”

After a pause he added:
“I’m asking you questions, but you’re perfectly right not to answer.It’s an apprenticeship against that cursed quarter of an hour beforethe examining magistrate. And then, when you don’t talk at all, you runno risk of talking too loud. That’s no matter, as I can’t see your faceand as I don’t know your name, you are wrong in supposing that I don’tknow who you are and what you want. I twig. You’ve broken up thatgentleman a bit; now you want to tuck him away somewhere. The river,that great hider of folly, is what you want. I’ll get you out of yourscrape. Helping a good fellow in a pinch is what suits me to a hair.”

While expressing his approval of Jean Valjean’s silence, he endeavoredto force him to talk. He jostled his shoulder in an attempt to catch asight of his profile, and he exclaimed, without, however, raising histone:
“Apropos of that quagmire, you’re a hearty animal. Why didn’t you tossthe man in there?”

Jean Valjean preserved silence.
Thénardier resumed, pushing the rag which served him as a cravat to thelevel of his Adam’s apple, a gesture which completes the capable air ofa serious man:
“After all, you acted wisely. The workmen, when they come to-morrow tostop up that hole, would certainly have found the stiff abandonedthere, and it might have been possible, thread by thread, straw bystraw, to pick up the scent and reach you. Some one has passed throughthe sewer. Who? Where did he get out? Was he seen to come out? Thepolice are full of cleverness. The sewer is treacherous and tells talesof you. Such a find is a rarity, it attracts attention, very few peoplemake use of the sewers for their affairs, while the river belongs toeverybody. The river is the true grave. At the end of a month they fishup your man in the nets at Saint-Cloud. Well, what does one care forthat? It’s carrion! Who killed that man? Paris. And justice makes noinquiries. You have done well.”

The more loquacious Thénardier became, the more mute was Jean Valjean.
Again Thénardier shook him by the shoulder.
“Now let’s settle this business. Let’s go shares. You have seen my key,show me your money.”

Thénardier was haggard, fierce, suspicious, rather menacing, yetamicable.
There was one singular circumstance; Thénardier’s manners were notsimple; he had not the air of being wholly at his ease; while affectingan air of mystery, he spoke low; from time to time he laid his fingeron his mouth, and muttered, “hush!” It was difficult to divine why.There was no one there except themselves. Jean Valjean thought thatother ruffians might possibly be concealed in some nook, not very faroff, and that Thénardier did not care to share with them.
Thénardier resumed:
“Let’s settle up. How much did the stiff have in his bags?”

Jean Valjean searched his pockets.
It was his habit, as the reader will remember, to always have somemoney about him. The mournful life of expedients to which he had beencondemned imposed this as a law upon him. On this occasion, however, hehad been caught unprepared. When donning his uniform of a NationalGuardsman on the preceding evening, he had forgotten, dolefullyabsorbed as he was, to take his pocket-book. He had only some smallchange in his fob. He turned out his pocket, all soaked with ooze, andspread out on the banquette of the vault one louis d’or, two five-francpieces, and five or six large sous.
Thénardier thrust out his lower lip with a significant twist of theneck.
“You knocked him over cheap,” said he.
He set to feeling the pockets of Jean Valjean and Marius, with thegreatest familiarity. Jean Valjean, who was chiefly concerned inkeeping his back to the light, let him have his way.
While handling Marius’ coat, Thénardier, with the skill of apickpocket, and without being noticed by Jean Valjean, tore off a stripwhich he concealed under his blouse, probably thinking that this morselof stuff might serve, later on, to identify the assassinated man andthe assassin. However, he found no more than the thirty francs.
“That’s true,” said he, “both of you together have no more than that.”

And, forgetting his motto: “half shares,” he took all.
He hesitated a little over the large sous. After due reflection, hetook them also, muttering:
“Never mind! You cut folks’ throats too cheap altogether.”

That done, he once more drew the big key from under his blouse.
“Now, my friend, you must leave. It’s like the fair here, you pay whenyou go out. You have paid, now clear out.”

And he began to laugh.
Had he, in lending to this stranger the aid of his key, and in makingsome other man than himself emerge from that portal, the pure anddisinterested intention of rescuing an assassin? We may be permitted todoubt this.
Thénardier helped Jean Valjean to replace Marius on his shoulders, thenhe betook himself to the grating on tiptoe, and barefooted, making JeanValjean a sign to follow him, looked out, laid his finger on his mouth,and remained for several seconds, as though in suspense; his inspectionfinished, he placed the key in the lock. The bolt slipped back and thegate swung open. It neither grated nor squeaked. It moved very softly.
It was obvious that this gate and those hinges, carefully oiled, werein the habit of opening more frequently than was supposed. Thissoftness was suspicious; it hinted at furtive goings and comings,silent entrances and exits of nocturnal men, and the wolf-like tread ofcrime.
The sewer was evidently an accomplice of some mysterious band. Thistaciturn grating was a receiver of stolen goods.
Thénardier opened the gate a little way, allowing just sufficient spacefor Jean Valjean to pass out, closed the grating again, gave the key adouble turn in the lock and plunged back into the darkness, withoutmaking any more noise than a breath. He seemed to walk with the velvetpaws of a tiger.
A moment later, that hideous providence had retreated into theinvisibility.
Jean Valjean found himself in the open air.



CHAPTER IX—MARIUS PRODUCES ON SOME ONE WHO IS A JUDGE OF THE MATTER,THE EFFECT OF BEING DEAD

He allowed Marius to slide down upon the shore.
They were in the open air!
The miasmas, darkness, horror lay behind him. The pure, healthful,living, joyous air that was easy to breathe inundated him. Everywherearound him reigned silence, but that charming silence when the sun hasset in an unclouded azure sky. Twilight had descended; night wasdrawing on, the great deliverer, the friend of all those who need amantle of darkness that they may escape from an anguish. The skypresented itself in all directions like an enormous calm. The riverflowed to his feet with the sound of a kiss. The aerial dialogue of thenests bidding each other good night in the elms of the Champs-Élyséeswas audible. A few stars, daintily piercing the pale blue of thezenith, and visible to reverie alone, formed imperceptible littlesplendors amid the immensity. Evening was unfolding over the head ofJean Valjean all the sweetness of the infinite.
It was that exquisite and undecided hour which says neither yes nor no.Night was already sufficiently advanced to render it possible to loseoneself at a little distance and yet there was sufficient daylight topermit of recognition at close quarters.
For several seconds, Jean Valjean was irresistibly overcome by thataugust and caressing serenity; such moments of oblivion do come to men;suffering refrains from harassing the unhappy wretch; everything iseclipsed in the thoughts; peace broods over the dreamer like night;and, beneath the twilight which beams and in imitation of the sky whichis illuminated, the soul becomes studded with stars. Jean Valjean couldnot refrain from contemplating that vast, clear shadow which restedover him; thoughtfully he bathed in the sea of ecstasy and prayer inthe majestic silence of the eternal heavens. Then he bent down swiftlyto Marius, as though the sentiment of duty had returned to him, and,dipping up water in the hollow of his hand, he gently sprinkled a fewdrops on the latter’s face. Marius’ eyelids did not open; but hishalf-open mouth still breathed.
Jean Valjean was on the point of dipping his hand in the river oncemore, when, all at once, he experienced an indescribable embarrassment,such as a person feels when there is some one behind him whom he doesnot see.
We have already alluded to this impression, with which everyone isfamiliar.
He turned round.
Some one was, in fact, behind him, as there had been a short whilebefore.
A man of lofty stature, enveloped in a long coat, with folded arms, andbearing in his right fist a bludgeon of which the leaden head wasvisible, stood a few paces in the rear of the spot where Jean Valjeanwas crouching over Marius.
With the aid of the darkness, it seemed a sort of apparition. Anordinary man would have been alarmed because of the twilight, athoughtful man on account of the bludgeon. Jean Valjean recognizedJavert.
The reader has divined, no doubt, that Thénardier’s pursuer was noother than Javert. Javert, after his unlooked-for escape from thebarricade, had betaken himself to the prefecture of police, hadrendered a verbal account to the Prefect in person in a brief audience,had then immediately gone on duty again, which implied—the note, thereader will recollect, which had been captured on his person—a certainsurveillance of the shore on the right bank of the Seine near theChamps-Élysées, which had, for some time past, aroused the attention ofthe police. There he had caught sight of Thénardier and had followedhim. The reader knows the rest.
Thus it will be easily understood that that grating, so obliginglyopened to Jean Valjean, was a bit of cleverness on Thénardier’s part.Thénardier intuitively felt that Javert was still there; the man spiedupon has a scent which never deceives him; it was necessary to fling abone to that sleuth-hound. An assassin, what a godsend! Such anopportunity must never be allowed to slip. Thénardier, by putting JeanValjean outside in his stead, provided a prey for the police, forcedthem to relinquish his scent, made them forget him in a biggeradventure, repaid Javert for his waiting, which always flatters a spy,earned thirty francs, and counted with certainty, so far as he himselfwas concerned, on escaping with the aid of this diversion.
Jean Valjean had fallen from one danger upon another.
These two encounters, this falling one after the other, from Thénardierupon Javert, was a rude shock.
Javert did not recognize Jean Valjean, who, as we have stated, nolonger looked like himself. He did not unfold his arms, he made sure ofhis bludgeon in his fist, by an imperceptible movement, and said in acurt, calm voice:
“Who are you?”

“I.”

“Who is ‘I’?”

“Jean Valjean.”

Javert thrust his bludgeon between his teeth, bent his knees, inclinedhis body, laid his two powerful hands on the shoulders of Jean Valjean,which were clamped within them as in a couple of vices, scrutinizedhim, and recognized him. Their faces almost touched. Javert’s look wasterrible.
Jean Valjean remained inert beneath Javert’s grasp, like a lionsubmitting to the claws of a lynx.
“Inspector Javert,” said he, “you have me in your power. Moreover, Ihave regarded myself as your prisoner ever since this morning. I didnot give you my address with any intention of escaping from you. Takeme. Only grant me one favor.”

Javert did not appear to hear him. He kept his eyes riveted on JeanValjean. His chin being contracted, thrust his lips upwards towards hisnose, a sign of savage reverie. At length he released Jean Valjean,straightened himself stiffly up without bending, grasped his bludgeonagain firmly, and, as though in a dream, he murmured rather thanuttered this question:
“What are you doing here? And who is this man?”

He still abstained from addressing Jean Valjean as _thou_.
Jean Valjean replied, and the sound of his voice appeared to rouseJavert:
“It is with regard to him that I desire to speak to you. Dispose of meas you see fit; but first help me to carry him home. That is all that Iask of you.”

Javert’s face contracted as was always the case when any one seemed tothink him capable of making a concession. Nevertheless, he did not say“no.”

Again he bent over, drew from his pocket a handkerchief which hemoistened in the water and with which he then wiped Marius’blood-stained brow.
“This man was at the barricade,” said he in a low voice and as thoughspeaking to himself. “He is the one they called Marius.”

A spy of the first quality, who had observed everything, listened toeverything, and taken in everything, even when he thought that he wasto die; who had played the spy even in his agony, and who, with hiselbows leaning on the first step of the sepulchre, had taken notes.
He seized Marius’ hand and felt his pulse.
“He is wounded,” said Jean Valjean.
“He is a dead man,” said Javert.
Jean Valjean replied:
“No. Not yet.”

“So you have brought him thither from the barricade?” remarked Javert.
His preoccupation must indeed have been very profound for him not toinsist on this alarming rescue through the sewer, and for him not toeven notice Jean Valjean’s silence after his question.
Jean Valjean, on his side, seemed to have but one thought. He resumed:
“He lives in the Marais, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, with hisgrandfather. I do not recollect his name.”

Jean Valjean fumbled in Marius’ coat, pulled out his pocket-book,opened it at the page which Marius had pencilled, and held it out toJavert.
There was still sufficient light to admit of reading. Besides this,Javert possessed in his eye the feline phosphorescence of night birds.He deciphered the few lines written by Marius, and muttered:“Gillenormand, Rue des Filles-du Calvaire, No. 6.”

Then he exclaimed: “Coachman!”

The reader will remember that the hackney-coach was waiting in case ofneed.
Javert kept Marius’ pocket-book.
A moment later, the carriage, which had descended by the inclined planeof the watering-place, was on the shore. Marius was laid upon the backseat, and Javert seated himself on the front seat beside Jean Valjean.
The door slammed, and the carriage drove rapidly away, ascending thequays in the direction of the Bastille.
They quitted the quays and entered the streets. The coachman, a blackform on his box, whipped up his thin horses. A glacial silence reignedin the carriage. Marius, motionless, with his body resting in thecorner, and his head drooping on his breast, his arms hanging, his legsstiff, seemed to be awaiting only a coffin; Jean Valjean seemed made ofshadow, and Javert of stone, and in that vehicle full of night, whoseinterior, every time that it passed in front of a street lantern,appeared to be turned lividly wan, as by an intermittent flash oflightning, chance had united and seemed to be bringing face to face thethree forms of tragic immobility, the corpse, the spectre, and thestatue.



CHAPTER X—RETURN OF THE SON WHO WAS PRODIGAL OF HIS LIFE

At every jolt over the pavement, a drop of blood trickled from Marius’hair.
Night had fully closed in when the carriage arrived at No. 6, Rue desFilles-du-Calvaire.
Javert was the first to alight; he made sure with one glance of thenumber on the carriage gate, and, raising the heavy knocker of beateniron, embellished in the old style, with a male goat and a satyrconfronting each other, he gave a violent peal. The gate opened alittle way and Javert gave it a push. The porter half made hisappearance yawning, vaguely awake, and with a candle in his hand.
Everyone in the house was asleep. People go to bed betimes in theMarais, especially on days when there is a revolt. This good, oldquarter, terrified at the Revolution, takes refuge in slumber, aschildren, when they hear the Bugaboo coming, hide their heads hastilyunder their coverlet.
In the meantime Jean Valjean and the coachman had taken Marius out ofthe carriage, Jean Valjean supporting him under the armpits, and thecoachman under the knees.
As they thus bore Marius, Jean Valjean slipped his hand under thelatter’s clothes, which were broadly rent, felt his breast, and assuredhimself that his heart was still beating. It was even beating a littleless feebly, as though the movement of the carriage had brought about acertain fresh access of life.
Javert addressed the porter in a tone befitting the government, and thepresence of the porter of a factious person.
“Some person whose name is Gillenormand?”

“Here. What do you want with him?”

“His son is brought back.”

“His son?” said the porter stupidly.
“He is dead.”

Jean Valjean, who, soiled and tattered, stood behind Javert, and whomthe porter was surveying with some horror, made a sign to him with hishead that this was not so.
The porter did not appear to understand either Javert’s words or JeanValjean’s sign.
Javert continued:
“He went to the barricade, and here he is.”

“To the barricade?” ejaculated the porter.
“He has got himself killed. Go waken his father.”

The porter did not stir.
“Go along with you!” repeated Javert.
And he added:
“There will be a funeral here to-morrow.”

For Javert, the usual incidents of the public highway werecategorically classed, which is the beginning of foresight andsurveillance, and each contingency had its own compartment; allpossible facts were arranged in drawers, as it were, whence theyemerged on occasion, in variable quantities; in the street, uproar,revolt, carnival, and funeral.
The porter contented himself with waking Basque. Basque woke Nicolette;Nicolette roused great-aunt Gillenormand.
As for the grandfather, they let him sleep on, thinking that he wouldhear about the matter early enough in any case.
Marius was carried up to the first floor, without any one in the otherparts of the house being aware of the fact, and deposited on an oldsofa in M. Gillenormand’s antechamber; and while Basque went in searchof a physician, and while Nicolette opened the linen-presses, JeanValjean felt Javert touch him on the shoulder. He understood anddescended the stairs, having behind him the step of Javert who wasfollowing him.
The porter watched them take their departure as he had watched theirarrival, in terrified somnolence.
They entered the carriage once more, and the coachman mounted his box.
“Inspector Javert,” said Jean, “grant me yet another favor.”

“What is it?” demanded Javert roughly.
“Let me go home for one instant. Then you shall do whatever you likewith me.”

Javert remained silent for a few moments, with his chin drawn back intothe collar of his great-coat, then he lowered the glass and front:
“Driver,” said he, “Rue de l’Homme Armé, No. 7.”




CHAPTER XI—CONCUSSION IN THE ABSOLUTE

They did not open their lips again during the whole space of theirride.
What did Jean Valjean want? To finish what he had begun; to warnCosette, to tell her where Marius was, to give her, possibly, someother useful information, to take, if he could, certain final measures.As for himself, so far as he was personally concerned, all was over; hehad been seized by Javert and had not resisted; any other man thanhimself in like situation would, perhaps, have had some vague thoughtsconnected with the rope which Thénardier had given him, and of the barsof the first cell that he should enter; but, let us impress it upon thereader, after the Bishop, there had existed in Jean Valjean a profoundhesitation in the presence of any violence, even when directed againsthimself.
Suicide, that mysterious act of violence against the unknown which maycontain, in a measure, the death of the soul, was impossible to JeanValjean.
At the entrance to the Rue de l’Homme Armé, the carriage halted, theway being too narrow to admit of the entrance of vehicles. Javert andJean Valjean alighted.
The coachman humbly represented to “monsieur l’Inspecteur,” that theUtrecht velvet of his carriage was all spotted with the blood of theassassinated man, and with mire from the assassin. That is the way heunderstood it. He added that an indemnity was due him. At the sametime, drawing his certificate book from his pocket, he begged theinspector to have the goodness to write him “a bit of an attestation.”

Javert thrust aside the book which the coachman held out to him, andsaid:
“How much do you want, including your time of waiting and the drive?”

“It comes to seven hours and a quarter,” replied the man, “and myvelvet was perfectly new. Eighty francs, Mr. Inspector.”

Javert drew four napoleons from his pocket and dismissed the carriage.
Jean Valjean fancied that it was Javert’s intention to conduct him onfoot to the post of the Blancs-Manteaux or to the post of the Archives,both of which are close at hand.
They entered the street. It was deserted as usual. Javert followed JeanValjean. They reached No. 7. Jean Valjean knocked. The door opened.
“It is well,” said Javert. “Go upstairs.”

He added with a strange expression, and as though he were exerting aneffort in speaking in this manner:
“I will wait for you here.”

Jean Valjean looked at Javert. This mode of procedure was but little inaccord with Javert’s habits. However, he could not be greatly surprisedthat Javert should now have a sort of haughty confidence in him, theconfidence of the cat which grants the mouse liberty to the length ofits claws, seeing that Jean Valjean had made up his mind to surrenderhimself and to make an end of it. He pushed open the door, entered thehouse, called to the porter who was in bed and who had pulled the cordfrom his couch: “It is I!” and ascended the stairs.
On arriving at the first floor, he paused. All sorrowful roads havetheir stations. The window on the landing-place, which was asash-window, was open. As in many ancient houses, the staircase got itslight from without and had a view on the street. The street-lantern,situated directly opposite, cast some light on the stairs, and thuseffected some economy in illumination.
Jean Valjean, either for the sake of getting the air, or mechanically,thrust his head out of this window. He leaned out over the street. Itis short, and the lantern lighted it from end to end. Jean Valjean wasoverwhelmed with amazement; there was no longer any one there.
Javert had taken his departure.



CHAPTER XII—THE GRANDFATHER

Basque and the porter had carried Marius into the drawing-room, as hestill lay stretched out, motionless, on the sofa upon which he had beenplaced on his arrival. The doctor who had been sent for had hastenedthither. Aunt Gillenormand had risen.
Aunt Gillenormand went and came, in affright, wringing her hands andincapable of doing anything but saying: “Heavens! is it possible?” Attimes she added: “Everything will be covered with blood.” When herfirst horror had passed off, a certain philosophy of the situationpenetrated her mind, and took form in the exclamation: “It was bound toend in this way!” She did not go so far as: “I told you so!” which iscustomary on this sort of occasion. At the physician’s orders, a campbed had been prepared beside the sofa. The doctor examined Marius, andafter having found that his pulse was still beating, that the woundedman had no very deep wound on his breast, and that the blood on thecorners of his lips proceeded from his nostrils, he had him placed flaton the bed, without a pillow, with his head on the same level as hisbody, and even a trifle lower, and with his bust bare in order tofacilitate respiration. Mademoiselle Gillenormand, on perceiving thatthey were undressing Marius, withdrew. She set herself to telling herbeads in her own chamber.
The trunk had not suffered any internal injury; a bullet, deadened bythe pocket-book, had turned aside and made the tour of his ribs with ahideous laceration, which was of no great depth, and consequently, notdangerous. The long, underground journey had completed the dislocationof the broken collar-bone, and the disorder there was serious. The armshad been slashed with sabre cuts. Not a single scar disfigured hisface; but his head was fairly covered with cuts; what would be theresult of these wounds on the head? Would they stop short at the hairycuticle, or would they attack the brain? As yet, this could not bedecided. A grave symptom was that they had caused a swoon, and thatpeople do not always recover from such swoons. Moreover, the woundedman had been exhausted by hemorrhage. From the waist down, thebarricade had protected the lower part of the body from injury.
Basque and Nicolette tore up linen and prepared bandages; Nicolettesewed them, Basque rolled them. As lint was lacking, the doctor, forthe time being, arrested the bleeding with layers of wadding. Besidethe bed, three candles burned on a table where the case of surgicalinstruments lay spread out. The doctor bathed Marius’ face and hairwith cold water. A full pail was reddened in an instant. The porter,candle in hand, lighted them.
The doctor seemed to be pondering sadly. From time to time, he made anegative sign with his head, as though replying to some question whichhe had inwardly addressed to himself.
A bad sign for the sick man are these mysterious dialogues of thedoctor with himself.
At the moment when the doctor was wiping Marius’ face, and lightlytouching his still closed eyes with his finger, a door opened at theend of the drawing-room, and a long, pallid figure made its appearance.
This was the grandfather.
The revolt had, for the past two days, deeply agitated, enraged andengrossed the mind of M. Gillenormand. He had not been able to sleep onthe previous night, and he had been in a fever all day long. In theevening, he had gone to bed very early, recommending that everything inthe house should be well barred, and he had fallen into a doze throughsheer fatigue.
Old men sleep lightly; M. Gillenormand’s chamber adjoined thedrawing-room, and in spite of all the precautions that had been taken,the noise had awakened him. Surprised at the rift of light which he sawunder his door, he had risen from his bed, and had groped his waythither.
He stood astonished on the threshold, one hand on the handle of thehalf-open door, with his head bent a little forward and quivering, hisbody wrapped in a white dressing-gown, which was straight and asdestitute of folds as a winding-sheet; and he had the air of a phantomwho is gazing into a tomb.
He saw the bed, and on the mattress that young man, bleeding, whitewith a waxen whiteness, with closed eyes and gaping mouth, and pallidlips, stripped to the waist, slashed all over with crimson wounds,motionless and brilliantly lighted up.
The grandfather trembled from head to foot as powerfully as ossifiedlimbs can tremble, his eyes, whose corneæ were yellow on account of hisgreat age, were veiled in a sort of vitreous glitter, his whole faceassumed in an instant the earthy angles of a skull, his arms fellpendent, as though a spring had broken, and his amazement was betrayedby the outspreading of the fingers of his two aged hands, whichquivered all over, his knees formed an angle in front, allowing,through the opening in his dressing-gown, a view of his poor bare legs,all bristling with white hairs, and he murmured:
“Marius!”

“Sir,” said Basque, “Monsieur has just been brought back. He went tothe barricade, and....”

“He is dead!” cried the old man in a terrible voice. “Ah! The rascal!”

Then a sort of sepulchral transformation straightened up thiscentenarian as erect as a young man.
“Sir,” said he, “you are the doctor. Begin by telling me one thing. Heis dead, is he not?”

The doctor, who was at the highest pitch of anxiety, remained silent.
M. Gillenormand wrung his hands with an outburst of terrible laughter.
“He is dead! He is dead! He is dead! He has got himself killed on thebarricades! Out of hatred to me! He did that to spite me! Ah! Youblood-drinker! This is the way he returns to me! Misery of my life, heis dead!”

He went to the window, threw it wide open as though he were stifling,and, erect before the darkness, he began to talk into the street, tothe night:
“Pierced, sabred, exterminated, slashed, hacked in pieces! Just look atthat, the villain! He knew well that I was waiting for him, and that Ihad had his room arranged, and that I had placed at the head of my bedhis portrait taken when he was a little child! He knew well that he hadonly to come back, and that I had been recalling him for years, andthat I remained by my fireside, with my hands on my knees, not knowingwhat to do, and that I was mad over it! You knew well, that you had butto return and to say: ‘It is I,’ and you would have been the master ofthe house, and that I should have obeyed you, and that you could havedone whatever you pleased with your old numskull of a grandfather! youknew that well, and you said:
“No, he is a Royalist, I will not go! And you went to the barricades,and you got yourself killed out of malice! To revenge yourself for whatI said to you about Monsieur le Duc de Berry. It is infamous! Go to bedthen and sleep tranquilly! he is dead, and this is my awakening.”

The doctor, who was beginning to be uneasy in both quarters, quittedMarius for a moment, went to M. Gillenormand, and took his arm. Thegrandfather turned round, gazed at him with eyes which seemedexaggerated in size and bloodshot, and said to him calmly:
“I thank you, sir. I am composed, I am a man, I witnessed the death ofLouis XVI., I know how to bear events. One thing is terrible and thatis to think that it is your newspapers which do all the mischief. Youwill have scribblers, chatterers, lawyers, orators, tribunes,discussions, progress, enlightenment, the rights of man, the liberty ofthe press, and this is the way that your children will be brought hometo you. Ah! Marius! It is abominable! Killed! Dead before me! Abarricade! Ah, the scamp! Doctor, you live in this quarter, I believe?Oh! I know you well. I see your cabriolet pass my window. I am going totell you. You are wrong to think that I am angry. One does not fly intoa rage against a dead man. That would be stupid. This is a child whom Ihave reared. I was already old while he was very young. He played inthe Tuileries garden with his little shovel and his little chair, andin order that the inspectors might not grumble, I stopped up the holesthat he made in the earth with his shovel, with my cane. One day heexclaimed: Down with Louis XVIII.! and off he went. It was no fault ofmine. He was all rosy and blond. His mother is dead. Have you evernoticed that all little children are blond? Why is it so? He is the sonof one of those brigands of the Loire, but children are innocent oftheir fathers’ crimes. I remember when he was no higher than that. Hecould not manage to pronounce his Ds. He had a way of talking that wasso sweet and indistinct that you would have thought it was a birdchirping. I remember that once, in front of the Hercules Farnese,people formed a circle to admire him and marvel at him, he was sohandsome, was that child! He had a head such as you see in pictures. Italked in a deep voice, and I frightened him with my cane, but he knewvery well that it was only to make him laugh. In the morning, when heentered my room, I grumbled, but he was like the sunlight to me, allthe same. One cannot defend oneself against those brats. They take holdof you, they hold you fast, they never let you go again. The truth is,that there never was a cupid like that child. Now, what can you say foryour Lafayettes, your Benjamin Constants, and your Tirecuir deCorcelles who have killed him? This cannot be allowed to pass in thisfashion.”

He approached Marius, who still lay livid and motionless, and to whomthe physician had returned, and began once more to wring his hands. Theold man’s pallid lips moved as though mechanically, and permitted thepassage of words that were barely audible, like breaths in the deathagony:
“Ah! heartless lad! Ah! clubbist! Ah! wretch! Ah! Septembrist!”

Reproaches in the low voice of an agonizing man, addressed to a corpse.
Little by little, as it is always indispensable that internal eruptionsshould come to the light, the sequence of words returned, but thegrandfather appeared no longer to have the strength to utter them, hisvoice was so weak, and extinct, that it seemed to come from the otherside of an abyss:
“It is all the same to me, I am going to die too, that I am. And tothink that there is not a hussy in Paris who would not have beendelighted to make this wretch happy! A scamp who, instead of amusinghimself and enjoying life, went off to fight and get himself shot downlike a brute! And for whom? Why? For the Republic! Instead of going todance at the Chaumière, as it is the duty of young folks to do! What’sthe use of being twenty years old? The Republic, a cursed pretty folly!Poor mothers, beget fine boys, do! Come, he is dead. That will make twofunerals under the same carriage gate. So you have got yourselfarranged like this for the sake of General Lamarque’s handsome eyes!What had that General Lamarque done to you? A slasher! A chatter-box!To get oneself killed for a dead man! If that isn’t enough to drive anyone mad! Just think of it! At twenty! And without so much as turninghis head to see whether he was not leaving something behind him! That’sthe way poor, good old fellows are forced to die alone, nowadays.Perish in your corner, owl! Well, after all, so much the better, thatis what I was hoping for, this will kill me on the spot. I am too old,I am a hundred years old, I am a hundred thousand years old, I ought,by rights, to have been dead long ago. This blow puts an end to it. Soall is over, what happiness! What is the good of making him inhaleammonia and all that parcel of drugs? You are wasting your trouble, youfool of a doctor! Come, he’s dead, completely dead. I know all aboutit, I am dead myself too. He hasn’t done things by half. Yes, this ageis infamous, infamous and that’s what I think of you, of your ideas, ofyour systems, of your masters, of your oracles, of your doctors, ofyour scape-graces of writers, of your rascally philosophers, and of allthe revolutions which, for the last sixty years, have been frighteningthe flocks of crows in the Tuileries! But you were pitiless in gettingyourself killed like this, I shall not even grieve over your death, doyou understand, you assassin?”

At that moment, Marius slowly opened his eyes, and his glance, stilldimmed by lethargic wonder, rested on M. Gillenormand.
“Marius!” cried the old man. “Marius! My little Marius! my child! mywell-beloved son! You open your eyes, you gaze upon me, you are alive,thanks!”

And he fell fainting.



BOOK FOURTH—JAVERT DERAILED



CHAPTER I

Javert passed slowly down the Rue de l’Homme Armé.
He walked with drooping head for the first time in his life, andlikewise, for the first time in his life, with his hands behind hisback.
Up to that day, Javert had borrowed from Napoleon’s attitudes, onlythat which is expressive of resolution, with arms folded across thechest; that which is expressive of uncertainty—with the hands behindthe back—had been unknown to him. Now, a change had taken place; hiswhole person, slow and sombre, was stamped with anxiety.
He plunged into the silent streets.
Nevertheless, he followed one given direction.
He took the shortest cut to the Seine, reached the Quai des Ormes,skirted the quay, passed the Grève, and halted at some distance fromthe post of the Place du Châtelet, at the angle of the Pont Notre-Dame.There, between the Notre-Dame and the Pont au Change on the one hand,and the Quai de la Mégisserie and the Quai aux Fleurs on the other, theSeine forms a sort of square lake, traversed by a rapid.
This point of the Seine is dreaded by mariners. Nothing is moredangerous than this rapid, hemmed in, at that epoch, and irritated bythe piles of the mill on the bridge, now demolished. The two bridges,situated thus close together, augment the peril; the water hurries informidable wise through the arches. It rolls in vast and terriblewaves; it accumulates and piles up there; the flood attacks the pilesof the bridges as though in an effort to pluck them up with greatliquid ropes. Men who fall in there never reappear; the best ofswimmers are drowned there.
Javert leaned both elbows on the parapet, his chin resting in bothhands, and, while his nails were mechanically twined in the abundanceof his whiskers, he meditated.
A novelty, a revolution, a catastrophe had just taken place in thedepths of his being; and he had something upon which to examinehimself.
Javert was undergoing horrible suffering.
For several hours, Javert had ceased to be simple. He was troubled;that brain, so limpid in its blindness, had lost its transparency; thatcrystal was clouded. Javert felt duty divided within his conscience,and he could not conceal the fact from himself. When he had sounexpectedly encountered Jean Valjean on the banks of the Seine, therehad been in him something of the wolf which regains his grip on hisprey, and of the dog who finds his master again.
He beheld before him two paths, both equally straight, but he beheldtwo; and that terrified him; him, who had never in all his life knownmore than one straight line. And, the poignant anguish lay in this,that the two paths were contrary to each other. One of these straightlines excluded the other. Which of the two was the true one?
His situation was indescribable.
To owe his life to a malefactor, to accept that debt and to repay it;to be, in spite of himself, on a level with a fugitive from justice,and to repay his service with another service; to allow it to be saidto him, “Go,” and to say to the latter in his turn: “Be free”; tosacrifice to personal motives duty, that general obligation, and to beconscious, in those personal motives, of something that was alsogeneral, and, perchance, superior, to betray society in order to remaintrue to his conscience; that all these absurdities should be realizedand should accumulate upon him,—this was what overwhelmed him.
One thing had amazed him,—this was that Jean Valjean should have donehim a favor, and one thing petrified him,—that he, Javert, should havedone Jean Valjean a favor.
Where did he stand? He sought to comprehend his position, and could nolonger find his bearings.
What was he to do now? To deliver up Jean Valjean was bad; to leaveJean Valjean at liberty was bad. In the first case, the man ofauthority fell lower than the man of the galleys, in the second, aconvict rose above the law, and set his foot upon it. In both cases,dishonor for him, Javert. There was disgrace in any resolution at whichhe might arrive. Destiny has some extremities which riseperpendicularly from the impossible, and beyond which life is no longeranything but a precipice. Javert had reached one of those extremities.
One of his anxieties consisted in being constrained to think. The veryviolence of all these conflicting emotions forced him to it. Thoughtwas something to which he was unused, and which was peculiarly painful.
In thought there always exists a certain amount of internal rebellion;and it irritated him to have that within him.
Thought on any subject whatever, outside of the restricted circle ofhis functions, would have been for him in any case useless and afatigue; thought on the day which had just passed was a torture.Nevertheless, it was indispensable that he should take a look into hisconscience, after such shocks, and render to himself an account ofhimself.
What he had just done made him shudder. He, Javert, had seen fit todecide, contrary to all the regulations of the police, contrary to thewhole social and judicial organization, contrary to the entire code,upon a release; this had suited him; he had substituted his own affairsfor the affairs of the public; was not this unjustifiable? Every timethat he brought himself face to face with this deed without a namewhich he had committed, he trembled from head to foot. Upon what shouldhe decide? One sole resource remained to him; to return in all haste tothe Rue de l’Homme Armé, and commit Jean Valjean to prison. It wasclear that that was what he ought to do. He could not.
Something barred his way in that direction.
Something? What? Is there in the world, anything outside of thetribunals, executory sentences, the police and the authorities? Javertwas overwhelmed.
A galley-slave sacred! A convict who could not be touched by the law!And that the deed of Javert!
Was it not a fearful thing that Javert and Jean Valjean, the man madeto proceed with vigor, the man made to submit,—that these two men whowere both the things of the law, should have come to such a pass, thatboth of them had set themselves above the law? What then! suchenormities were to happen and no one was to be punished! Jean Valjean,stronger than the whole social order, was to remain at liberty, and he,Javert, was to go on eating the government’s bread!
His reverie gradually became terrible.
He might, athwart this reverie, have also reproached himself on thesubject of that insurgent who had been taken to the Rue desFilles-du-Calvaire; but he never even thought of that. The lesser faultwas lost in the greater. Besides, that insurgent was, obviously, a deadman, and, legally, death puts an end to pursuit.
Jean Valjean was the load which weighed upon his spirit.
Jean Valjean disconcerted him. All the axioms which had served him aspoints of support all his life long, had crumbled away in the presenceof this man. Jean Valjean’s generosity towards him, Javert, crushedhim. Other facts which he now recalled, and which he had formerlytreated as lies and folly, now recurred to him as realities. M.Madeleine reappeared behind Jean Valjean, and the two figures weresuperposed in such fashion that they now formed but one, which wasvenerable. Javert felt that something terrible was penetrating hissoul—admiration for a convict. Respect for a galley-slave—is that apossible thing? He shuddered at it, yet could not escape from it. Invain did he struggle, he was reduced to confess, in his inmost heart,the sublimity of that wretch. This was odious.
A benevolent malefactor, merciful, gentle, helpful, clement, a convict,returning good for evil, giving back pardon for hatred, preferring pityto vengeance, preferring to ruin himself rather than to ruin his enemy,saving him who had smitten him, kneeling on the heights of virtue, morenearly akin to an angel than to a man. Javert was constrained to admitto himself that this monster existed.
Things could not go on in this manner.
Certainly, and we insist upon this point, he had not yielded withoutresistance to that monster, to that infamous angel, to that hideoushero, who enraged almost as much as he amazed him. Twenty times, as hesat in that carriage face to face with Jean Valjean, the legal tigerhad roared within him. A score of times he had been tempted to flinghimself upon Jean Valjean, to seize him and devour him, that is to say,to arrest him. What more simple, in fact? To cry out at the first postthat they passed:—“Here is a fugitive from justice, who has broken hisban!” to summon the gendarmes and say to them: “This man is yours!”then to go off, leaving that condemned man there, to ignore the restand not to meddle further in the matter. This man is forever a prisonerof the law; the law may do with him what it will. What could be morejust? Javert had said all this to himself; he had wished to passbeyond, to act, to apprehend the man, and then, as at present, he hadnot been able to do it; and every time that his arm had been raisedconvulsively towards Jean Valjean’s collar, his hand had fallen backagain, as beneath an enormous weight, and in the depths of his thoughthe had heard a voice, a strange voice crying to him:—“It is well.Deliver up your savior. Then have the basin of Pontius Pilate broughtand wash your claws.”

Then his reflections reverted to himself and beside Jean Valjeanglorified he beheld himself, Javert, degraded.
A convict was his benefactor!
But then, why had he permitted that man to leave him alive? He had theright to be killed in that barricade. He should have asserted thatright. It would have been better to summon the other insurgents to hissuccor against Jean Valjean, to get himself shot by force.
His supreme anguish was the loss of certainty. He felt that he had beenuprooted. The code was no longer anything more than a stump in hishand. He had to deal with scruples of an unknown species. There hadtaken place within him a sentimental revelation entirely distinct fromlegal affirmation, his only standard of measurement hitherto. To remainin his former uprightness did not suffice. A whole order of unexpectedfacts had cropped up and subjugated him. A whole new world was dawningon his soul: kindness accepted and repaid, devotion, mercy, indulgence,violences committed by pity on austerity, respect for persons, no moredefinitive condemnation, no more conviction, the possibility of a tearin the eye of the law, no one knows what justice according to God,running in inverse sense to justice according to men. He perceived amidthe shadows the terrible rising of an unknown moral sun; it horrifiedand dazzled him. An owl forced to the gaze of an eagle.
He said to himself that it was true that there were exceptional cases,that authority might be put out of countenance, that the rule might beinadequate in the presence of a fact, that everything could not beframed within the text of the code, that the unforeseen compelledobedience, that the virtue of a convict might set a snare for thevirtue of the functionary, that destiny did indulge in such ambushes,and he reflected with despair that he himself had not even beenfortified against a surprise.
He was forced to acknowledge that goodness did exist. This convict hadbeen good. And he himself, unprecedented circumstance, had just beengood also. So he was becoming depraved.
He found that he was a coward. He conceived a horror of himself.
Javert’s ideal, was not to be human, to be grand, to be sublime; it wasto be irreproachable.
Now, he had just failed in this.
How had he come to such a pass? How had all this happened? He could nothave told himself. He clasped his head in both hands, but in spite ofall that he could do, he could not contrive to explain it to himself.
He had certainly always entertained the intention of restoring JeanValjean to the law of which Jean Valjean was the captive, and of whichhe, Javert, was the slave. Not for a single instant while he held himin his grasp had he confessed to himself that he entertained the ideaof releasing him. It was, in some sort, without his consciousness, thathis hand had relaxed and had let him go free.
All sorts of interrogation points flashed before his eyes. He putquestions to himself, and made replies to himself, and his repliesfrightened him. He asked himself: “What has that convict done, thatdesperate fellow, whom I have pursued even to persecution, and who hashad me under his foot, and who could have avenged himself, and who owedit both to his rancor and to his safety, in leaving me my life, inshowing mercy upon me? His duty? No. Something more. And I in showingmercy upon him in my turn—what have I done? My duty? No. Somethingmore. So there is something beyond duty?” Here he took fright; hisbalance became disjointed; one of the scales fell into the abyss, theother rose heavenward, and Javert was no less terrified by the onewhich was on high than by the one which was below. Without being in theleast in the world what is called Voltairian or a philosopher, orincredulous, being, on the contrary, respectful by instinct, towardsthe established church, he knew it only as an august fragment of thesocial whole; order was his dogma, and sufficed for him; ever since hehad attained to man’s estate and the rank of a functionary, he hadcentred nearly all his religion in the police. Being,—and here weemploy words without the least irony and in their most seriousacceptation, being, as we have said, a spy as other men are priests. Hehad a superior, M. Gisquet; up to that day he had never dreamed of thatother superior, God.
This new chief, God, he became unexpectedly conscious of, and he feltembarrassed by him. This unforeseen presence threw him off hisbearings; he did not know what to do with this superior, he, who wasnot ignorant of the fact that the subordinate is bound always to bow,that he must not disobey, nor find fault, nor discuss, and that, in thepresence of a superior who amazes him too greatly, the inferior has noother resource than that of handing in his resignation.
But how was he to set about handing in his resignation to God?
However things might stand,—and it was to this point that he revertedconstantly,—one fact dominated everything else for him, and that was,that he had just committed a terrible infraction of the law. He hadjust shut his eyes on an escaped convict who had broken his ban. He hadjust set a galley-slave at large. He had just robbed the laws of a manwho belonged to them. That was what he had done. He no longerunderstood himself. The very reasons for his action escaped him; onlytheir vertigo was left with him. Up to that moment he had lived withthat blind faith which gloomy probity engenders. This faith had quittedhim, this probity had deserted him. All that he had believed in meltedaway. Truths which he did not wish to recognize were besieging him,inexorably. Henceforth, he must be a different man. He was sufferingfrom the strange pains of a conscience abruptly operated on for thecataract. He saw that which it was repugnant to him to behold. He felthimself emptied, useless, put out of joint with his past life, turnedout, dissolved. Authority was dead within him. He had no longer anyreason for existing.
A terrible situation! to be touched.
To be granite and to doubt! to be the statue of Chastisement cast inone piece in the mould of the law, and suddenly to become aware of thefact that one cherishes beneath one’s breast of bronze something absurdand disobedient which almost resembles a heart! To come to the pass ofreturning good for good, although one has said to oneself up to thatday that that good is evil! to be the watch-dog, and to lick theintruder’s hand! to be ice and melt! to be the pincers and to turn intoa hand! to suddenly feel one’s fingers opening! to relax one’sgrip,—what a terrible thing!
The man-projectile no longer acquainted with his route and retreating!
To be obliged to confess this to oneself: infallibility is notinfallible, there may exist error in the dogma, all has not been saidwhen a code speaks, society is not perfect, authority is complicatedwith vacillation, a crack is possible in the immutable, judges are butmen, the law may err, tribunals may make a mistake! to behold a rift inthe immense blue pane of the firmament!
That which was passing in Javert was the Fampoux of a rectilinearconscience, the derailment of a soul, the crushing of a probity whichhad been irresistibly launched in a straight line and was breakingagainst God. It certainly was singular that the stoker of order, thatthe engineer of authority, mounted on the blind iron horse with itsrigid road, could be unseated by a flash of light! that the immovable,the direct, the correct, the geometrical, the passive, the perfect,could bend! that there should exist for the locomotive a road toDamascus!
God, always within man, and refractory, He, the true conscience, to thefalse; a prohibition to the spark to die out; an order to the ray toremember the sun; an injunction to the soul to recognize the veritableabsolute when confronted with the fictitious absolute, humanity whichcannot be lost; the human heart indestructible; that splendidphenomenon, the finest, perhaps, of all our interior marvels, didJavert understand this? Did Javert penetrate it? Did Javert account forit to himself? Evidently he did not. But beneath the pressure of thatincontestable incomprehensibility he felt his brain bursting.
He was less the man transfigured than the victim of this prodigy. Inall this he perceived only the tremendous difficulty of existence. Itseemed to him that, henceforth, his respiration was repressed forever.He was not accustomed to having something unknown hanging over hishead.
Up to this point, everything above him had been, to his gaze, merely asmooth, limpid and simple surface; there was nothing incomprehensible,nothing obscure; nothing that was not defined, regularly disposed,linked, precise, circumscribed, exact, limited, closed, fully providedfor; authority was a plane surface; there was no fall in it, nodizziness in its presence. Javert had never beheld the unknown exceptfrom below. The irregular, the unforeseen, the disordered opening ofchaos, the possible slip over a precipice—this was the work of thelower regions, of rebels, of the wicked, of wretches. Now Javert threwhimself back, and he was suddenly terrified by this unprecedentedapparition: a gulf on high.
What! one was dismantled from top to bottom! one was disconcerted,absolutely! In what could one trust! That which had been agreed uponwas giving way! What! the defect in society’s armor could be discoveredby a magnanimous wretch! What! an honest servitor of the law couldsuddenly find himself caught between two crimes—the crime of allowing aman to escape and the crime of arresting him! everything was notsettled in the orders given by the State to the functionary! Theremight be blind alleys in duty! What,—all this was real! was it truethat an ex-ruffian, weighed down with convictions, could rise erect andend by being in the right? Was this credible? were there cases in whichthe law should retire before transfigured crime, and stammer itsexcuses?—Yes, that was the state of the case! and Javert saw it! andJavert had touched it! and not only could he not deny it, but he hadtaken part in it. These were realities. It was abominable that actualfacts could reach such deformity. If facts did their duty, they wouldconfine themselves to being proofs of the law; facts—it is God whosends them. Was anarchy, then, on the point of now descending from onhigh?
Thus,—and in the exaggeration of anguish, and the optical illusion ofconsternation, all that might have corrected and restrained thisimpression was effaced, and society, and the human race, and theuniverse were, henceforth, summed up in his eyes, in one simple andterrible feature,—thus the penal laws, the thing judged, the force dueto legislation, the decrees of the sovereign courts, the magistracy,the government, prevention, repression, official cruelty, wisdom, legalinfallibility, the principle of authority, all the dogmas on which restpolitical and civil security, sovereignty, justice, public truth, allthis was rubbish, a shapeless mass, chaos; he himself, Javert, the spyof order, incorruptibility in the service of the police, the bull-dogprovidence of society, vanquished and hurled to earth; and, erect, atthe summit of all that ruin, a man with a green cap on his head and ahalo round his brow; this was the astounding confusion to which he hadcome; this was the fearful vision which he bore within his soul.
Was this to be endured? No.
A violent state, if ever such existed. There were only two ways ofescaping from it. One was to go resolutely to Jean Valjean, and restoreto his cell the convict from the galleys. The other....
Javert quitted the parapet, and, with head erect this time, betookhimself, with a firm tread, towards the station-house indicated by alantern at one of the corners of the Place du Châtelet.
On arriving there, he saw through the window a sergeant of police, andhe entered. Policemen recognize each other by the very way in whichthey open the door of a station-house. Javert mentioned his name,showed his card to the sergeant, and seated himself at the table of thepost on which a candle was burning. On a table lay a pen, a leadeninkstand and paper, provided in the event of possible reports and theorders of the night patrols. This table, still completed by itsstraw-seated chair, is an institution; it exists in all policestations; it is invariably ornamented with a box-wood saucer filledwith sawdust and a wafer box of cardboard filled with red wafers, andit forms the lowest stage of official style. It is there that theliterature of the State has its beginning.
Javert took a pen and a sheet of paper, and began to write. This iswhat he wrote:
A FEW OBSERVATIONS FOR THE GOOD OF THE SERVICE.
“In the first place:  I beg Monsieur le Préfet to cast his eyes onthis.
“Secondly:  prisoners, on arriving after examination, take off theirshoes and stand barefoot on the flagstones while they are beingsearched.  Many of them cough on their return to prison. This entailshospital expenses.
“Thirdly:  the mode of keeping track of a man with relays of policeagents from distance to distance, is good, but, on important occasions,it is requisite that at least two agents should never lose sight ofeach other, so that, in case one agent should, for any cause, grow weakin his service, the other may supervise him and take his place.
“Fourthly:  it is inexplicable why the special regulation of the prisonof the Madelonettes interdicts the prisoner from having a chair, evenby paying for it.
“Fifthly:  in the Madelonettes there are only two bars to the canteen,so that the canteen woman can touch the prisoners with her hand.
“Sixthly:  the prisoners called barkers, who summon the other prisonersto the parlor, force the prisoner to pay them two sous to call his namedistinctly.  This is a theft.
“Seventhly:  for a broken thread ten sous are withheld in the weavingshop; this is an abuse of the contractor, since the cloth is none theworse for it.
“Eighthly:  it is annoying for visitors to La Force to be obliged totraverse the boys’ court in order to reach the parlor ofSainte-Marie-l‘Égyptienne.
“Ninthly:  it is a fact that any day gendarmes can be overheardrelating in the court-yard of the prefecture the interrogations put bythe magistrates to prisoners.  For a gendarme, who should be sworn tosecrecy, to repeat what he has heard in the examination room is a gravedisorder.
“Tenthly:  Mme. Henry is an honest woman; her canteen is very neat; butit is bad to have a woman keep the wicket to the mouse-trap of thesecret cells.  This is unworthy of the Conciergerie of a greatcivilization.”

Javert wrote these lines in his calmest and most correct chirography,not omitting a single comma, and making the paper screech under hispen. Below the last line he signed:
“JAVERT,
“Inspector of the 1st class.
“The Post of the Place du Châtelet.
“June 7th, 1832, about one o’clock in the morning.”


Javert dried the fresh ink on the paper, folded it like a letter,sealed it, wrote on the back: _Note for the administration_, left it onthe table, and quitted the post. The glazed and grated door fell tobehind him.
Again he traversed the Place du Châtelet diagonally, regained the quay,and returned with automatic precision to the very point which he hadabandoned a quarter of an hour previously, leaned on his elbows andfound himself again in the same attitude on the same paving-stone ofthe parapet. He did not appear to have stirred.
The darkness was complete. It was the sepulchral moment which followsmidnight. A ceiling of clouds concealed the stars. Not a single lightburned in the houses of the city; no one was passing; all of thestreets and quays which could be seen were deserted; Notre-Dame and thetowers of the Court-House seemed features of the night. A streetlantern reddened the margin of the quay. The outlines of the bridgeslay shapeless in the mist one behind the other. Recent rains hadswollen the river.
The spot where Javert was leaning was, it will be remembered, situatedprecisely over the rapids of the Seine, perpendicularly above thatformidable spiral of whirlpools which loose and knot themselves againlike an endless screw.
Javert bent his head and gazed. All was black. Nothing was to bedistinguished. A sound of foam was audible; but the river could not beseen. At moments, in that dizzy depth, a gleam of light appeared, andundulated vaguely, water possessing the power of taking light, no oneknows whence, and converting it into a snake. The light vanished, andall became indistinct once more. Immensity seemed thrown open there.What lay below was not water, it was a gulf. The wall of the quay,abrupt, confused, mingled with the vapors, instantly concealed fromsight, produced the effect of an escarpment of the infinite. Nothingwas to be seen, but the hostile chill of the water and the stale odorof the wet stones could be felt. A fierce breath rose from this abyss.The flood in the river, divined rather than perceived, the tragicwhispering of the waves, the melancholy vastness of the arches of thebridge, the imaginable fall into that gloomy void, into all that shadowwas full of horror.
Javert remained motionless for several minutes, gazing at this openingof shadow; he considered the invisible with a fixity that resembledattention. The water roared. All at once he took off his hat and placedit on the edge of the quay. A moment later, a tall black figure, whicha belated passer-by in the distance might have taken for a phantom,appeared erect upon the parapet of the quay, bent over towards theSeine, then drew itself up again, and fell straight down into theshadows; a dull splash followed; and the shadow alone was in the secretof the convulsions of that obscure form which had disappeared beneaththe water.



BOOK FIFTH—GRANDSON AND GRANDFATHER



CHAPTER I—IN WHICH THE TREE WITH THE ZINC PLASTER APPEARS AGAIN

Some time after the events which we have just recorded, SieurBoulatruelle experienced a lively emotion.
Sieur Boulatruelle was that road-mender of Montfermeil whom the readerhas already seen in the gloomy parts of this book.
Boulatruelle, as the reader may, perchance, recall, was a man who wasoccupied with divers and troublesome matters. He broke stones anddamaged travellers on the highway.
Road-mender and thief as he was, he cherished one dream; he believed inthe treasures buried in the forest of Montfermeil. He hoped some day tofind the money in the earth at the foot of a tree; in the meanwhile, helived to search the pockets of passers-by.
Nevertheless, for an instant, he was prudent. He had just escapedneatly. He had been, as the reader is aware, picked up in Jondrette’sgarret in company with the other ruffians. Utility of a vice: hisdrunkenness had been his salvation. The authorities had never been ableto make out whether he had been there in the quality of a robber or aman who had been robbed. An order of _nolle prosequi_, founded on hiswell authenticated state of intoxication on the evening of the ambush,had set him at liberty. He had taken to his heels. He had returned tohis road from Gagny to Lagny, to make, under administrativesupervision, broken stone for the good of the state, with downcastmien, in a very pensive mood, his ardor for theft somewhat cooled; buthe was addicted nonetheless tenderly to the wine which had recentlysaved him.
As for the lively emotion which he had experienced a short time afterhis return to his road-mender’s turf-thatched cot, here it is:
One morning, Boulatruelle, while on his way as was his wont, to hiswork, and possibly also to his ambush, a little before daybreak caughtsight, through the branches of the trees, of a man, whose back alone hesaw, but the shape of whose shoulders, as it seemed to him at thatdistance and in the early dusk, was not entirely unfamiliar to him.Boulatruelle, although intoxicated, had a correct and lucid memory, adefensive arm that is indispensable to any one who is at all inconflict with legal order.
“Where the deuce have I seen something like that man yonder?” he saidto himself. But he could make himself no answer, except that the manresembled some one of whom his memory preserved a confused trace.
However, apart from the identity which he could not manage to catch,Boulatruelle put things together and made calculations. This man didnot belong in the country-side. He had just arrived there. On foot,evidently. No public conveyance passes through Montfermeil at thathour. He had walked all night. Whence came he? Not from a very greatdistance; for he had neither haversack, nor bundle. From Paris, nodoubt. Why was he in these woods? why was he there at such an hour?what had he come there for?
Boulatruelle thought of the treasure. By dint of ransacking his memory,he recalled in a vague way that he had already, many years before, hada similar alarm in connection with a man who produced on him the effectthat he might well be this very individual.
“By the deuce,” said Boulatruelle, “I’ll find him again. I’ll discoverthe parish of that parishioner. This prowler of Patron-Minette has areason, and I’ll know it. People can’t have secrets in my forest if Idon’t have a finger in the pie.”

He took his pick-axe which was very sharply pointed.
“There now,” he grumbled, “is something that will search the earth anda man.”

And, as one knots one thread to another thread, he took up the line ofmarch at his best pace in the direction which the man must follow, andset out across the thickets.
When he had compassed a hundred strides, the day, which was alreadybeginning to break, came to his assistance. Footprints stamped in thesand, weeds trodden down here and there, heather crushed, youngbranches in the brushwood bent and in the act of straighteningthemselves up again with the graceful deliberation of the arms of apretty woman who stretches herself when she wakes, pointed out to him asort of track. He followed it, then lost it. Time was flying. Heplunged deeper into the woods and came to a sort of eminence. An earlyhuntsman who was passing in the distance along a path, whistling theair of Guillery, suggested to him the idea of climbing a tree. Old ashe was, he was agile. There stood close at hand a beech-tree of greatsize, worthy of Tityrus and of Boulatruelle. Boulatruelle ascended thebeech as high as he was able.
The idea was a good one. On scrutinizing the solitary waste on the sidewhere the forest is thoroughly entangled and wild, Boulatruellesuddenly caught sight of his man.
Hardly had he got his eye upon him when he lost sight of him.
The man entered, or rather, glided into, an open glade, at aconsiderable distance, masked by large trees, but with whichBoulatruelle was perfectly familiar, on account of having noticed, neara large pile of porous stones, an ailing chestnut-tree bandaged with asheet of zinc nailed directly upon the bark. This glade was the onewhich was formerly called the Blaru-bottom. The heap of stones,destined for no one knows what employment, which was visible therethirty years ago, is doubtless still there. Nothing equals a heap ofstones in longevity, unless it is a board fence. They are temporaryexpedients. What a reason for lasting!
Boulatruelle, with the rapidity of joy, dropped rather than descendedfrom the tree. The lair was unearthed, the question now was to seizethe beast. That famous treasure of his dreams was probably there.
It was no small matter to reach that glade. By the beaten paths, whichindulge in a thousand teasing zigzags, it required a good quarter of anhour. In a bee-line, through the underbrush, which is peculiarly dense,very thorny, and very aggressive in that locality, a full half hour wasnecessary. Boulatruelle committed the error of not comprehending this.He believed in the straight line; a respectable optical illusion whichruins many a man. The thicket, bristling as it was, struck him as thebest road.
“Let’s take to the wolves’ Rue de Rivoli,” said he.
Boulatruelle, accustomed to taking crooked courses, was on thisoccasion guilty of the fault of going straight.
He flung himself resolutely into the tangle of undergrowth.
He had to deal with holly bushes, nettles, hawthorns, eglantines,thistles, and very irascible brambles. He was much lacerated.
At the bottom of the ravine he found water which he was obliged totraverse.
At last he reached the Blaru-bottom, after the lapse of forty minutes,sweating, soaked, breathless, scratched, and ferocious.
There was no one in the glade. Boulatruelle rushed to the heap ofstones. It was in its place. It had not been carried off.
As for the man, he had vanished in the forest. He had made his escape.Where? in what direction? into what thicket? Impossible to guess.
And, heartrending to say, there, behind the pile of stones, in front ofthe tree with the sheet of zinc, was freshly turned earth, a pick-axe,abandoned or forgotten, and a hole.
The hole was empty.
“Thief!” shrieked Boulatruelle, shaking his fist at the horizon.



CHAPTER II—MARIUS, EMERGING FROM CIVIL WAR, MAKES READY FOR DOMESTICWAR

For a long time, Marius was neither dead nor alive. For many weeks helay in a fever accompanied by delirium, and by tolerably grave cerebralsymptoms, caused more by the shocks of the wounds on the head than bythe wounds themselves.
He repeated Cosette’s name for whole nights in the melancholy loquacityof fever, and with the sombre obstinacy of agony. The extent of some ofthe lesions presented a serious danger, the suppuration of large woundsbeing always liable to become re-absorbed, and consequently, to killthe sick man, under certain atmospheric conditions; at every change ofweather, at the slightest storm, the physician was uneasy.
“Above all things,” he repeated, “let the wounded man be subjected tono emotion.” The dressing of the wounds was complicated and difficult,the fixation of apparatus and bandages by cerecloths not having beeninvented as yet, at that epoch. Nicolette used up a sheet “as big asthe ceiling,” as she put it, for lint. It was not without difficultythat the chloruretted lotions and the nitrate of silver overcame thegangrene. As long as there was any danger, M. Gillenormand, seated indespair at his grandson’s pillow, was, like Marius, neither alive nordead.
Every day, sometimes twice a day, a very well dressed gentleman withwhite hair,—such was the description given by the porter,—came toinquire about the wounded man, and left a large package of lint for thedressings.
Finally, on the 7th of September, four months to a day, after thesorrowful night when he had been brought back to his grandfather in adying condition, the doctor declared that he would answer for Marius.Convalescence began. But Marius was forced to remain for two monthsmore stretched out on a long chair, on account of the results called upby the fracture of his collar-bone. There always is a last wound likethat which will not close, and which prolongs the dressingsindefinitely, to the great annoyance of the sick person.
However, this long illness and this long convalescence saved him fromall pursuit. In France, there is no wrath, not even of a publiccharacter, which six months will not extinguish. Revolts, in thepresent state of society, are so much the fault of every one, that theyare followed by a certain necessity of shutting the eyes.
Let us add, that the inexcusable Gisquet order, which enjoined doctorsto lodge information against the wounded, having outraged publicopinion, and not opinion alone, but the King first of all, the woundedwere covered and protected by this indignation; and, with the exceptionof those who had been made prisoners in the very act of combat, thecouncils of war did not dare to trouble any one. So Marius was left inpeace.
M. Gillenormand first passed through all manner of anguish, and thenthrough every form of ecstasy. It was found difficult to prevent hispassing every night beside the wounded man; he had his big armchaircarried to Marius’ bedside; he required his daughter to take the finestlinen in the house for compresses and bandages. MademoiselleGillenormand, like a sage and elderly person, contrived to spare thefine linen, while allowing the grandfather to think that he was obeyed.M. Gillenormand would not permit any one to explain to him, that forthe preparation of lint batiste is not nearly so good as coarse linen,nor new linen as old linen. He was present at all the dressings of thewounds from which Mademoiselle Gillenormand modestly absented herself.When the dead flesh was cut away with scissors, he said: “Aïe! aïe!”Nothing was more touching than to see him with his gentle, senilepalsy, offer the wounded man a cup of his cooling-draught. Heoverwhelmed the doctor with questions. He did not observe that he askedthe same ones over and over again.
On the day when the doctor announced to him that Marius was out ofdanger, the good man was in a delirium. He made his porter a present ofthree louis. That evening, on his return to his own chamber, he danceda gavotte, using his thumb and forefinger as castanets, and he sang thefollowing song:
“Jeanne est née à Fougère     “Amour, tu vis en elle;Vrai nid d’une bergère;       Car c’est dans sa prunelleJ’adore son jupon,            Que tu mets ton carquois.Fripon.                       Narquois!
“Moi, je la chante, et j’aime,Plus que Diane même,Jeanne et ses durs tetonsBretons."61

Then he knelt upon a chair, and Basque, who was watching him throughthe half-open door, made sure that he was praying.
Up to that time, he had not believed in God.
At each succeeding phase of improvement, which became more and morepronounced, the grandfather raved. He executed a multitude ofmechanical actions full of joy; he ascended and descended the stairs,without knowing why. A pretty female neighbor was amazed one morning atreceiving a big bouquet; it was M. Gillenormand who had sent it to her.The husband made a jealous scene. M. Gillenormand tried to drawNicolette upon his knees. He called Marius, “M. le Baron.” He shouted:“Long live the Republic!”

Every moment, he kept asking the doctor: “Is he no longer in danger?”He gazed upon Marius with the eyes of a grandmother. He brooded overhim while he ate. He no longer knew himself, he no longer renderedhimself an account of himself. Marius was the master of the house,there was abdication in his joy, he was the grandson of his grandson.
In the state of joy in which he then was, he was the most venerable ofchildren. In his fear lest he might fatigue or annoy the convalescent,he stepped behind him to smile. He was content, joyous, delighted,charming, young. His white locks added a gentle majesty to the gayradiance of his visage. When grace is mingled with wrinkles, it isadorable. There is an indescribable aurora in beaming old age.
As for Marius, as he allowed them to dress his wounds and care for him,he had but one fixed idea: Cosette.
After the fever and delirium had left him, he did not again pronounceher name, and it might have been supposed that he no longer thought ofher. He held his peace, precisely because his soul was there.
He did not know what had become of Cosette; the whole affair of the Ruede la Chanvrerie was like a cloud in his memory; shadows that werealmost indistinct, floated through his mind, Éponine, Gavroche, Mabeuf,the Thénardiers, all his friends gloomily intermingled with the smokeof the barricade; the strange passage of M. Fauchelevent through thatadventure produced on him the effect of a puzzle in a tempest; heunderstood nothing connected with his own life, he did not know how norby whom he had been saved, and no one of those around him knew this;all that they had been able to tell him was, that he had been broughthome at night in a hackney-coach, to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire;past, present, future were nothing more to him than the mist of a vagueidea; but in that fog there was one immovable point, one clear andprecise outline, something made of granite, a resolution, a will; tofind Cosette once more. For him, the idea of life was not distinct fromthe idea of Cosette. He had decreed in his heart that he would notaccept the one without the other, and he was immovably resolved toexact of any person whatever, who should desire to force him tolive,—from his grandfather, from fate, from hell,—the restitution ofhis vanished Eden.
He did not conceal from himself the fact that obstacles existed.
Let us here emphasize one detail, he was not won over and was butlittle softened by all the solicitude and tenderness of hisgrandfather. In the first place, he was not in the secret; then, in hisreveries of an invalid, which were still feverish, possibly, hedistrusted this tenderness as a strange and novel thing, which had forits object his conquest. He remained cold. The grandfather absolutelywasted his poor old smile. Marius said to himself that it was all rightso long as he, Marius, did not speak, and let things take their course;but that when it became a question of Cosette, he would find anotherface, and that his grandfather’s true attitude would be unmasked. Thenthere would be an unpleasant scene; a recrudescence of familyquestions, a confrontation of positions, every sort of sarcasm and allmanner of objections at one and the same time, Fauchelevent,Coupelevent, fortune, poverty, a stone about his neck, the future.Violent resistance; conclusion: a refusal. Marius stiffened himself inadvance.
And then, in proportion as he regained life, the old ulcers of hismemory opened once more, he reflected again on the past, ColonelPontmercy placed himself once more between M. Gillenormand and him,Marius, he told himself that he had no true kindness to expect from aperson who had been so unjust and so hard to his father. And withhealth, there returned to him a sort of harshness towards hisgrandfather. The old man was gently pained by this. M. Gillenormand,without however allowing it to appear, observed that Marius, ever sincethe latter had been brought back to him and had regained consciousness,had not once called him father. It is true that he did not say“monsieur” to him; but he contrived not to say either the one or theother, by means of a certain way of turning his phrases. Obviously, acrisis was approaching.
As almost always happens in such cases, Marius skirmished before givingbattle, by way of proving himself. This is called “feeling the ground.”One morning it came to pass that M. Gillenormand spoke slightingly ofthe Convention, apropos of a newspaper which had fallen into his hands,and gave vent to a Royalist harangue on Danton, Saint-Juste andRobespierre.—“The men of ’93 were giants,” said Marius with severity.The old man held his peace, and uttered not a sound during theremainder of that day.
Marius, who had always present to his mind the inflexible grandfatherof his early years, interpreted this silence as a profoundconcentration of wrath, augured from it a hot conflict, and augmentedhis preparations for the fray in the inmost recesses of his mind.
He decided that, in case of a refusal, he would tear off his bandages,dislocate his collar-bone, that he would lay bare all the wounds whichhe had left, and would reject all food. His wounds were his munitionsof war. He would have Cosette or die.
He awaited the propitious moment with the crafty patience of the sick.
That moment arrived.



CHAPTER III—MARIUS ATTACKED

One day, M. Gillenormand, while his daughter was putting in order thephials and cups on the marble of the commode, bent over Marius and saidto him in his tenderest accents: “Look here, my little Marius, if Iwere in your place, I would eat meat now in preference to fish. A friedsole is excellent to begin a convalescence with, but a good cutlet isneeded to put a sick man on his feet.”

Marius, who had almost entirely recovered his strength, collected thewhole of it, drew himself up into a sitting posture, laid his twoclenched fists on the sheets of his bed, looked his grandfather in theface, assumed a terrible air, and said:
“This leads me to say something to you.”

“What is it?”

“That I wish to marry.”

“Agreed,” said his grandfather.—And he burst out laughing.
“How agreed?”

“Yes, agreed. You shall have your little girl.”

Marius, stunned and overwhelmed with the dazzling shock, trembled inevery limb.
M. Gillenormand went on:
“Yes, you shall have her, that pretty little girl of yours. She comesevery day in the shape of an old gentleman to inquire after you. Eversince you were wounded, she has passed her time in weeping and makinglint. I have made inquiries. She lives in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, No.7. Ah! There we have it! Ah! so you want her! Well, you shall have her.You’re caught. You had arranged your little plot, you had said toyourself:—‘I’m going to signify this squarely to my grandfather, tothat mummy of the Regency and of the Directory, to that ancient beau,to that Dorante turned Géronte; he has indulged in his frivolitiesalso, that he has, and he has had his love affairs, and his grisettesand his Cosettes; he has made his rustle, he has had his wings, he haseaten of the bread of spring; he certainly must remember it.’ Ah! youtake the cockchafer by the horns. That’s good. I offer you a cutlet andyou answer me: ‘By the way, I want to marry.’ There’s a transition foryou! Ah! you reckoned on a bickering! You do not know that I am an oldcoward. What do you say to that? You are vexed? You did not expect tofind your grandfather still more foolish than yourself, you are wastingthe discourse which you meant to bestow upon me, Mr. Lawyer, and that’svexatious. Well, so much the worse, rage away. I’ll do whatever youwish, and that cuts you short, imbecile! Listen. I have made myinquiries, I’m cunning too; she is charming, she is discreet, it is nottrue about the lancer, she has made heaps of lint, she’s a jewel, sheadores you, if you had died, there would have been three of us, hercoffin would have accompanied mine. I have had an idea, ever since youhave been better, of simply planting her at your bedside, but it isonly in romances that young girls are brought to the bedsides ofhandsome young wounded men who interest them. It is not done. Whatwould your aunt have said to it? You were nude three quarters of thetime, my good fellow. Ask Nicolette, who has not left you for a moment,if there was any possibility of having a woman here. And then, whatwould the doctor have said? A pretty girl does not cure a man of fever.In short, it’s all right, let us say no more about it, all’s said,all’s done, it’s all settled, take her. Such is my ferocity. You see, Iperceived that you did not love me. I said to myself: ‘Here now, I havemy little Cosette right under my hand, I’m going to give her to him, hewill be obliged to love me a little then, or he must tell the reasonwhy.’ Ah! so you thought that the old man was going to storm, to put ona big voice, to shout no, and to lift his cane at all that aurora. Nota bit of it. Cosette, so be it; love, so be it; I ask nothing better.Pray take the trouble of getting married, sir. Be happy, mywell-beloved child.”

That said, the old man burst forth into sobs.
And he seized Marius’ head, and pressed it with both arms against hisbreast, and both fell to weeping. This is one of the forms of supremehappiness.
“Father!” cried Marius.
“Ah, so you love me!” said the old man.
An ineffable moment ensued. They were choking and could not speak.
At length the old man stammered:
“Come! his mouth is unstopped at last. He has said: ‘Father’ to me.”

Marius disengaged his head from his grandfather’s arms, and saidgently:
“But, father, now that I am quite well, it seems to me that I might seeher.”

“Agreed again, you shall see her to-morrow.”

“Father!”

“What?”

“Why not to-day?”

“Well, to-day then. Let it be to-day. You have called me ‘father’ threetimes, and it is worth it. I will attend to it. She shall be broughthither. Agreed, I tell you. It has already been put into verse. This isthe ending of the elegy of the ‘Jeune Malade’ by André Chénier, byAndré Chénier whose throat was cut by the ras . . . by the giants of’93.”

M. Gillenormand fancied that he detected a faint frown on the part ofMarius, who, in truth, as we must admit, was no longer listening tohim, and who was thinking far more of Cosette than of 1793.
The grandfather, trembling at having so inopportunely introduced AndréChénier, resumed precipitately:
“Cut his throat is not the word. The fact is that the greatrevolutionary geniuses, who were not malicious, that is incontestable,who were heroes, pardi! found that André Chénier embarrassed themsomewhat, and they had him guillot . . . that is to say, those greatmen on the 7th of Thermidor, besought André Chénier, in the interestsof public safety, to be so good as to go....”

M. Gillenormand, clutched by the throat by his own phrase, could notproceed. Being able neither to finish it nor to retract it, while hisdaughter arranged the pillow behind Marius, who was overwhelmed with somany emotions, the old man rushed headlong, with as much rapidity ashis age permitted, from the bed-chamber, shut the door behind him, and,purple, choking and foaming at the mouth, his eyes starting from hishead, he found himself nose to nose with honest Basque, who wasblacking boots in the anteroom. He seized Basque by the collar, andshouted full in his face in fury:—“By the hundred thousand Javottes ofthe devil, those ruffians did assassinate him!”

“Who, sir?”

“André Chénier!”

“Yes, sir,” said Basque in alarm.



CHAPTER IV—MADEMOISELLE GILLENORMAND ENDS BY NO LONGER THINKING IT ABAD THING THAT M. FAUCHELEVENT SHOULD HAVE ENTERED WITH SOMETHING UNDERHIS ARM

Cosette and Marius beheld each other once more.
What that interview was like we decline to say. There are things whichone must not attempt to depict; the sun is one of them.
The entire family, including Basque and Nicolette, were assembled inMarius’ chamber at the moment when Cosette entered it.
Precisely at that moment, the grandfather was on the point of blowinghis nose; he stopped short, holding his nose in his handkerchief, andgazing over it at Cosette.
She appeared on the threshold; it seemed to him that she was surroundedby a glory.
“Adorable!” he exclaimed.
Then he blew his nose noisily.
Cosette was intoxicated, delighted, frightened, in heaven. She was asthoroughly alarmed as any one can be by happiness. She stammered allpale, yet flushed, she wanted to fling herself into Marius’ arms, anddared not. Ashamed of loving in the presence of all these people.People are pitiless towards happy lovers; they remain when the lattermost desire to be left alone. Lovers have no need of any peoplewhatever.
With Cosette, and behind her, there had entered a man with white hairwho was grave yet smiling, though with a vague and heartrending smile.It was “Monsieur Fauchelevent”; it was Jean Valjean.
He was very well dressed, as the porter had said, entirely in black, inperfectly new garments, and with a white cravat.
The porter was a thousand leagues from recognizing in this correctbourgeois, in this probable notary, the fear-inspiring bearer of thecorpse, who had sprung up at his door on the night of the 7th of June,tattered, muddy, hideous, haggard, his face masked in blood and mire,supporting in his arms the fainting Marius; still, his porter’s scentwas aroused. When M. Fauchelevent arrived with Cosette, the porter hadnot been able to refrain from communicating to his wife this aside: “Idon’t know why it is, but I can’t help fancying that I’ve seen thatface before.”

M. Fauchelevent in Marius’ chamber, remained apart near the door. Hehad under his arm, a package which bore considerable resemblance to anoctavo volume enveloped in paper. The enveloping paper was of agreenish hue, and appeared to be mouldy.
“Does the gentleman always have books like that under his arm?”Mademoiselle Gillenormand, who did not like books, demanded in a lowtone of Nicolette.
“Well,” retorted M. Gillenormand, who had overheard her, in the sametone, “he’s a learned man. What then? Is that his fault? MonsieurBoulard, one of my acquaintances, never walked out without a book underhis arm either, and he always had some old volume hugged to his heartlike that.”

And, with a bow, he said aloud:
“Monsieur Tranchelevent....”

Father Gillenormand did not do it intentionally, but inattention toproper names was an aristocratic habit of his.
“Monsieur Tranchelevent, I have the honor of asking you, on behalf ofmy grandson, Baron Marius Pontmercy, for the hand of Mademoiselle.”

Monsieur Tranchelevent bowed.
“That’s settled,” said the grandfather.
And, turning to Marius and Cosette, with both arms extended inblessing, he cried:
“Permission to adore each other!”

They did not require him to repeat it twice. So much the worse! thechirping began. They talked low. Marius, resting on his elbow on hisreclining chair, Cosette standing beside him. “Oh, heavens!” murmuredCosette, “I see you once again! it is thou! it is you! The idea ofgoing and fighting like that! But why? It is horrible. I have been deadfor four months. Oh! how wicked it was of you to go to that battle!What had I done to you? I pardon you, but you will never do it again. Alittle while ago, when they came to tell us to come to you, I stillthought that I was about to die, but it was from joy. I was so sad! Ihave not taken the time to dress myself, I must frighten people with mylooks! What will your relatives say to see me in a crumpled collar? Dospeak! You let me do all the talking. We are still in the Rue del’Homme Armé. It seems that your shoulder was terrible. They told methat you could put your fist in it. And then, it seems that they cutyour flesh with the scissors. That is frightful. I have cried till Ihave no eyes left. It is queer that a person can suffer like that. Yourgrandfather has a very kindly air. Don’t disturb yourself, don’t riseon your elbow, you will injure yourself. Oh! how happy I am! So ourunhappiness is over! I am quite foolish. I had things to say to you,and I no longer know in the least what they were. Do you still love me?We live in the Rue de l’Homme Armé. There is no garden. I made lint allthe time; stay, sir, look, it is your fault, I have a callous on myfingers.”

“Angel!” said Marius.
_Angel_ is the only word in the language which cannot be worn out. Noother word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it.
Then as there were spectators, they paused and said not a word more,contenting themselves with softly touching each other’s hands.
M. Gillenormand turned towards those who were in the room and cried:
“Talk loud, the rest of you. Make a noise, you people behind thescenes. Come, a little uproar, the deuce! so that the children canchatter at their ease.”

And, approaching Marius and Cosette, he said to them in a very lowvoice:
“Call each other _thou_. Don’t stand on ceremony.”

Aunt Gillenormand looked on in amazement at this irruption of light inher elderly household. There was nothing aggressive about thisamazement; it was not the least in the world like the scandalized andenvious glance of an owl at two turtledoves, it was the stupid eye of apoor innocent seven and fifty years of age; it was a life which hadbeen a failure gazing at that triumph, love.
“Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior,” said her father to her, “I told youthat this is what would happen to you.”

He remained silent for a moment, and then added:
“Look at the happiness of others.”

Then he turned to Cosette.
“How pretty she is! how pretty she is! She’s a Greuze. So you are goingto have that all to yourself, you scamp! Ah! my rogue, you are gettingoff nicely with me, you are happy; if I were not fifteen years too old,we would fight with swords to see which of us should have her. Comenow! I am in love with you, mademoiselle. It’s perfectly simple. It isyour right. You are in the right. Ah! what a sweet, charming littlewedding this will make! Our parish is Saint-Denis du Saint Sacrament,but I will get a dispensation so that you can be married at Saint-Paul.The church is better. It was built by the Jesuits. It is morecoquettish. It is opposite the fountain of Cardinal de Birague. Themasterpiece of Jesuit architecture is at Namur. It is calledSaint-Loup. You must go there after you are married. It is worth thejourney. Mademoiselle, I am quite of your mind, I think girls ought tomarry; that is what they are made for. There is a certainSainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed.62 It’s afine thing to remain a spinster, but it is chilly. The Bible says:Multiply. In order to save the people, Jeanne d’Arc is needed; but inorder to make people, what is needed is Mother Goose. So, marry, mybeauties. I really do not see the use in remaining a spinster! I knowthat they have their chapel apart in the church, and that they fallback on the Society of the Virgin; but, sapristi, a handsome husband, afine fellow, and at the expiration of a year, a big, blond brat whonurses lustily, and who has fine rolls of fat on his thighs, and whomusses up your breast in handfuls with his little rosy paws, laughingthe while like the dawn,—that’s better than holding a candle atvespers, and chanting _Turris Eburnea!_”

The grandfather executed a pirouette on his eighty-year-old heels, andbegan to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more:
“Ainsi, bornant les cours de tes rêvasseries,Alcippe, il est donc vrai, dans peu tu te maries."63

“By the way!”

“What is it, father?”

“Have not you an intimate friend?”

“Yes, Courfeyrac.”

“What has become of him?”

“He is dead.”

“That is good.”

He seated himself near them, made Cosette sit down, and took their fourhands in his aged and wrinkled hands:
“She is exquisite, this darling. She’s a masterpiece, this Cosette! Sheis a very little girl and a very great lady. She will only be aBaroness, which is a come down for her; she was born a Marquise. Whateyelashes she has! Get it well fixed in your noddles, my children, thatyou are in the true road. Love each other. Be foolish about it. Love isthe folly of men and the wit of God. Adore each other. Only,” he added,suddenly becoming gloomy, “what a misfortune! It has just occurred tome! More than half of what I possess is swallowed up in an annuity; solong as I live, it will not matter, but after my death, a score ofyears hence, ah! my poor children, you will not have a sou! Yourbeautiful white hands, Madame la Baronne, will do the devil the honorof pulling him by the tail."64
At this point they heard a grave and tranquil voice say:
“Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent possesses six hundred thousandfrancs.”

It was the voice of Jean Valjean.
So far he had not uttered a single word, no one seemed to be aware thathe was there, and he had remained standing erect and motionless, behindall these happy people.
“What has Mademoiselle Euphrasie to do with the question?” inquired thestartled grandfather.
“I am she,” replied Cosette.
“Six hundred thousand francs?” resumed M. Gillenormand.
“Minus fourteen or fifteen thousand francs, possibly,” said JeanValjean.
And he laid on the table the package which Mademoiselle Gillenormandhad mistaken for a book.
Jean Valjean himself opened the package; it was a bundle of bank-notes.They were turned over and counted. There were five hundred notes for athousand francs each, and one hundred and sixty-eight of five hundred.In all, five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs.
“This is a fine book,” said M. Gillenormand.
“Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs!” murmured the aunt.
“This arranges things well, does it not, Mademoiselle Gillenormandsenior?” said the grandfather. “That devil of a Marius has ferreted outthe nest of a millionaire grisette in his tree of dreams! Just trust tothe love affairs of young folks now, will you! Students findstudentesses with six hundred thousand francs. Cherubino works betterthan Rothschild.”

“Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs!” repeated MademoiselleGillenormand, in a low tone. “Five hundred and eighty-four! one mightas well say six hundred thousand!”

As for Marius and Cosette, they were gazing at each other while thiswas going on; they hardly heeded this detail.



CHAPTER V—DEPOSIT YOUR MONEY IN A FOREST RATHER THAN WITH A NOTARY

The reader has, no doubt, understood, without necessitating a lengthyexplanation, that Jean Valjean, after the Champmathieu affair, had beenable, thanks to his first escape of a few days’ duration, to come toParis and to withdraw in season, from the hands of Laffitte, the sumearned by him, under the name of Monsieur Madeleine, atMontreuil-sur-Mer; and that fearing that he might be recaptured,—whicheventually happened—he had buried and hidden that sum in the forest ofMontfermeil, in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom. The sum, sixhundred and thirty thousand francs, all in bank-bills, was not verybulky, and was contained in a box; only, in order to preserve the boxfrom dampness, he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnutshavings. In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures, theBishop’s candlesticks. It will be remembered that he had carried offthe candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil-sur-Mer. Theman seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle, was JeanValjean. Later on, every time that Jean Valjean needed money, he wentto get it in the Blaru-bottom. Hence the absences which we havementioned. He had a pickaxe somewhere in the heather, in a hiding-placeknown to himself alone. When he beheld Marius convalescent, feelingthat the hour was at hand, when that money might prove of service, hehad gone to get it; it was he again, whom Boulatruelle had seen in thewoods, but on this occasion, in the morning instead of in the evening.Boulatreulle inherited his pickaxe.
The actual sum was five hundred and eighty-four thousand, five hundredfrancs. Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself.—“Weshall see hereafter,” he thought.
The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousandfrancs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in tenyears, from 1823 to 1833. The five years of his stay in the convent hadcost only five thousand francs.
Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney-piece, where theyglittered to the great admiration of Toussaint.
Moreover, Jean Valjean knew that he was delivered from Javert. Thestory had been told in his presence, and he had verified the fact inthe _Moniteur_, how a police inspector named Javert had been founddrowned under a boat belonging to some laundresses, between the Pont auChange and the Pont-Neuf, and that a writing left by this man,otherwise irreproachable and highly esteemed by his superiors, pointedto a fit of mental aberration and a suicide.—“In fact,” thought JeanValjean, “since he left me at liberty, once having got me in his power,he must have been already mad.”




CHAPTER VI—THE TWO OLD MEN DO EVERYTHING, EACH ONE AFTER HIS OWNFASHION, TO RENDER COSETTE HAPPY

Everything was made ready for the wedding. The doctor, on beingconsulted, declared that it might take place in February. It was thenDecember. A few ravishing weeks of perfect happiness passed.
The grandfather was not the least happy of them all. He remained for aquarter of an hour at a time gazing at Cosette.
“The wonderful, beautiful girl!” he exclaimed. “And she has so sweetand good an air! she is, without exception, the most charming girl thatI have ever seen in my life. Later on, she’ll have virtues with an odorof violets. How graceful! one cannot live otherwise than nobly withsuch a creature. Marius, my boy, you are a Baron, you are rich, don’tgo to pettifogging, I beg of you.”

Cosette and Marius had passed abruptly from the sepulchre to paradise.The transition had not been softened, and they would have been stunned,had they not been dazzled by it.
“Do you understand anything about it?” said Marius to Cosette.
“No,” replied Cosette, “but it seems to me that the good God is caringfor us.”

Jean Valjean did everything, smoothed away every difficulty, arrangedeverything, made everything easy. He hastened towards Cosette’shappiness with as much ardor, and, apparently with as much joy, asCosette herself.
As he had been a mayor, he understood how to solve that delicateproblem, with the secret of which he alone was acquainted, Cosette’scivil status. If he were to announce her origin bluntly, it mightprevent the marriage, who knows? He extricated Cosette from alldifficulties. He concocted for her a family of dead people, a suremeans of not encountering any objections. Cosette was the only scion ofan extinct family; Cosette was not his own daughter, but the daughterof the other Fauchelevent. Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardenersto the convent of the Petit-Picpus. Inquiry was made at that convent;the very best information and the most respectable references abounded;the good nuns, not very apt and but little inclined to fathom questionsof paternity, and not attaching any importance to the matter, had neverunderstood exactly of which of the two Fauchelevents Cosette was thedaughter. They said what was wanted and they said it with zeal. An_acte de notoriété_ was drawn up. Cosette became in the eyes of thelaw, Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent. She was declared an orphan,both father and mother being dead. Jean Valjean so arranged it that hewas appointed, under the name of Fauchelevent, as Cosette’s guardian,with M. Gillenormand as supervising guardian over him.
As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs, they constituted alegacy bequeathed to Cosette by a dead person, who desired to remainunknown. The original legacy had consisted of five hundred andninety-four thousand francs; but ten thousand francs had been expendedon the education of Mademoiselle Euphrasie, five thousand francs ofthat amount having been paid to the convent. This legacy, deposited inthe hands of a third party, was to be turned over to Cosette at hermajority, or at the date of her marriage. This, taken as a whole, wasvery acceptable, as the reader will perceive, especially when the sumdue was half a million. There were some peculiarities here and there,it is true, but they were not noticed; one of the interested partieshad his eyes blindfolded by love, the others by the six hundredthousand francs.
Cosette learned that she was not the daughter of that old man whom shehad so long called father. He was merely a kinsman; anotherFauchelevent was her real father. At any other time this would havebroken her heart. But at the ineffable moment which she was thenpassing through, it cast but a slight shadow, a faint cloud, and shewas so full of joy that the cloud did not last long. She had Marius.The young man arrived, the old man was effaced; such is life.
And then, Cosette had, for long years, been habituated to seeingenigmas around her; every being who has had a mysterious childhood isalways prepared for certain renunciations.
Nevertheless, she continued to call Jean Valjean: Father.
Cosette, happy as the angels, was enthusiastic over FatherGillenormand. It is true that he overwhelmed her with gallantcompliments and presents. While Jean Valjean was building up forCosette a normal situation in society and an unassailable status, M.Gillenormand was superintending the basket of wedding gifts. Nothing soamused him as being magnificent. He had given to Cosette a robe ofBinche guipure which had descended to him from his own grandmother.
“These fashions come up again,” said he, “ancient things are the rage,and the young women of my old age dress like the old women of mychildhood.”

He rifled his respectable chests of drawers in Coromandel lacquer, withswelling fronts, which had not been opened for years.—“Let us hear theconfession of these dowagers,” he said, “let us see what they have intheir paunches.” He noisily violated the pot-bellied drawers of all hiswives, of all his mistresses and of all his grandmothers. Pekins,damasks, lampas, painted moires, robes of shot gros de Tours, Indiakerchiefs embroidered in gold that could be washed, dauphines without aright or wrong side, in the piece, Genoa and Alençon point lace,parures in antique goldsmith’s work, ivory bon-bon boxes ornamentedwith microscopic battles, gewgaws and ribbons—he lavished everything onCosette. Cosette, amazed, desperately in love with Marius, and wildwith gratitude towards M. Gillenormand, dreamed of a happiness withoutlimit clothed in satin and velvet. Her wedding basket seemed to her tobe upheld by seraphim. Her soul flew out into the azure depths, withwings of Mechlin lace.
The intoxication of the lovers was only equalled, as we have alreadysaid, by the ecstasy of the grandfather. A sort of flourish of trumpetswent on in the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire.
Every morning, a fresh offering of bric-à-brac from the grandfather toCosette. All possible knickknacks glittered around her.
One day Marius, who was fond of talking gravely in the midst of hisbliss, said, apropos of I know not what incident:
“The men of the revolution are so great, that they have the prestige ofthe ages, like Cato and like Phocion, and each one of them seems to mean antique memory.”

“Moire antique!” exclaimed the old gentleman. “Thanks, Marius. That isprecisely the idea of which I was in search.”

And on the following day, a magnificent dress of tea-rose colored moireantique was added to Cosette’s wedding presents.
From these fripperies, the grandfather extracted a bit of wisdom.
“Love is all very well; but there must be something else to go with it.The useless must be mingled with happiness. Happiness is only thenecessary. Season that enormously with the superfluous for me. A palaceand her heart. Her heart and the Louvre. Her heart and the grandwaterworks of Versailles. Give me my shepherdess and try to make her aduchess. Fetch me Phyllis crowned with corn-flowers, and add a hundredthousand francs income. Open for me a bucolic perspective as far as youcan see, beneath a marble colonnade. I consent to the bucolic and alsoto the fairy spectacle of marble and gold. Dry happiness resembles drybread. One eats, but one does not dine. I want the superfluous, theuseless, the extravagant, excess, that which serves no purpose. Iremember to have seen, in the Cathedral of Strasburg, a clock, as tallas a three-story house which marked the hours, which had the kindnessto indicate the hour, but which had not the air of being made for that;and which, after having struck midday, or midnight,—midday, the hour ofthe sun, or midnight, the hour of love,—or any other hour that youlike, gave you the moon and the stars, the earth and the sea, birds andfishes, Phœbus and Phœbe, and a host of things which emerged from aniche, and the twelve apostles, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, andÉponine, and Sabinus, and a throng of little gilded goodmen, who playedon the trumpet to boot. Without reckoning delicious chimes which itsprinkled through the air, on every occasion, without any one’s knowingwhy. Is a petty bald clock-face which merely tells the hour equal tothat? For my part, I am of the opinion of the big clock of Strasburg,and I prefer it to the cuckoo clock from the Black Forest.”

M. Gillenormand talked nonsense in connection with the wedding, and allthe fripperies of the eighteenth century passed pell-mell through hisdithyrambs.
“You are ignorant of the art of festivals. You do not know how toorganize a day of enjoyment in this age,” he exclaimed. “Yournineteenth century is weak. It lacks excess. It ignores the rich, itignores the noble. In everything it is clean-shaven. Your third estateis insipid, colorless, odorless, and shapeless. The dreams of yourbourgeois who set up, as they express it: a pretty boudoir freshlydecorated, violet, ebony and calico. Make way! Make way! the SieurCurmudgeon is marrying Mademoiselle Clutch-penny. Sumptuousness andsplendor. A louis d’or has been stuck to a candle. There’s the epochfor you. My demand is that I may flee from it beyond the Sarmatians.Ah! in 1787, I predict that all was lost, from the day when I beheldthe Duc de Rohan, Prince de Léon, Duc de Chabot, Duc de Montbazon,Marquis de Soubise, Vicomte de Thouars, peer of France, go toLongchamps in a tapecu! That has borne its fruits. In this century, menattend to business, they gamble on ‘Change, they win money, they arestingy. People take care of their surfaces and varnish them; every oneis dressed as though just out of a bandbox, washed, soaped, scraped,shaved, combed, waked, smoothed, rubbed, brushed, cleaned on theoutside, irreproachable, polished as a pebble, discreet, neat, and atthe same time, death of my life, in the depths of their consciencesthey have dung-heaps and cesspools that are enough to make a cow-herdwho blows his nose in his fingers, recoil. I grant to this age thedevice: ‘Dirty Cleanliness.’ Don’t be vexed, Marius, give me permissionto speak; I say no evil of the people as you see, I am always harpingon your people, but do look favorably on my dealing a bit of a slap tothe bourgeoisie. I belong to it. He who loves well lashes well.Thereupon, I say plainly, that nowadays people marry, but that they nolonger know how to marry. Ah! it is true, I regret the grace of theancient manners. I regret everything about them, their elegance, theirchivalry, those courteous and delicate ways, that joyous luxury whichevery one possessed, music forming part of the wedding, a symphonyabove stairs, a beating of drums below stairs, the dances, the joyousfaces round the table, the fine-spun gallant compliments, the songs,the fireworks, the frank laughter, the devil’s own row, the huge knotsof ribbon. I regret the bride’s garter. The bride’s garter is cousin tothe girdle of Venus. On what does the war of Troy turn? On Helen’sgarter, parbleu! Why did they fight, why did Diomed the divine breakover the head of Meriones that great brazen helmet of ten points? whydid Achilles and Hector hew each other up with vast blows of theirlances? Because Helen allowed Paris to take her garter. With Cosette’sgarter, Homer would construct the _Iliad_. He would put in his poem, aloquacious old fellow, like me, and he would call him Nestor. Myfriends, in bygone days, in those amiable days of yore, people marriedwisely; they had a good contract, and then they had a good carouse. Assoon as Cujas had taken his departure, Gamacho entered. But, in sooth!the stomach is an agreeable beast which demands its due, and whichwants to have its wedding also. People supped well, and had at table abeautiful neighbor without a guimpe so that her throat was onlymoderately concealed. Oh! the large laughing mouths, and how gay wewere in those days! youth was a bouquet; every young man terminated ina branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses; whether he was a shepherd or awarrior; and if, by chance, one was a captain of dragoons, one foundmeans to call oneself Florian. People thought much of looking well.They embroidered and tinted themselves. A bourgeois had the air of aflower, a Marquis had the air of a precious stone. People had no strapsto their boots, they had no boots. They were spruce, shining, waved,lustrous, fluttering, dainty, coquettish, which did not at all preventtheir wearing swords by their sides. The humming-bird has beak andclaws. That was the day of the _Galland Indies_. One of the sides ofthat century was delicate, the other was magnificent; and by the greencabbages! people amused themselves. To-day, people are serious. Thebourgeois is avaricious, the bourgeoise is a prude; your century isunfortunate. People would drive away the Graces as being too low in theneck. Alas! beauty is concealed as though it were ugliness. Since therevolution, everything, including the ballet-dancers, has had itstrousers; a mountebank dancer must be grave; your rigadoons aredoctrinarian. It is necessary to be majestic. People would be greatlyannoyed if they did not carry their chins in their cravats. The idealof an urchin of twenty when he marries, is to resemble M.Royer-Collard. And do you know what one arrives at with that majesty?at being petty. Learn this: joy is not only joyous; it is great. But bein love gayly then, what the deuce! marry, when you marry, with feverand giddiness, and tumult, and the uproar of happiness! Be grave inchurch, well and good. But, as soon as the mass is finished, sarpejou!you must make a dream whirl around the bride. A marriage should beroyal and chimerical; it should promenade its ceremony from thecathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup. I have a horror of apaltry wedding. Ventregoulette! be in Olympus for that one day, atleast. Be one of the gods. Ah! people might be sylphs. Games andLaughter, argiraspides; they are stupids. My friends, every recentlymade bridegroom ought to be Prince Aldobrandini. Profit by that uniqueminute in life to soar away to the empyrean with the swans and theeagles, even if you do have to fall back on the morrow into thebourgeoisie of the frogs. Don’t economize on the nuptials, do not prunethem of their splendors; don’t scrimp on the day when you beam. Thewedding is not the housekeeping. Oh! if I were to carry out my fancy,it would be gallant, violins would be heard under the trees. Here is myprogramme: sky-blue and silver. I would mingle with the festival therural divinities, I would convoke the Dryads and the Nereids. Thenuptials of Amphitrite, a rosy cloud, nymphs with well dressed locksand entirely naked, an Academician offering quatrains to the goddess, achariot drawn by marine monsters.
“Triton trottait devant, et tirait de sa conqueDes sons si ravissants qu’il ravissait quiconque!”65

—there’s a festive programme, there’s a good one, or else I knownothing of such matters, deuce take it!”

While the grandfather, in full lyrical effusion, was listening tohimself, Cosette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely ateach other.
Aunt Gillenormand surveyed all this with her imperturbable placidity.Within the last five or six months she had experienced a certain amountof emotions. Marius returned, Marius brought back bleeding, Mariusbrought back from a barricade, Marius dead, then living, Mariusreconciled, Marius betrothed, Marius wedding a poor girl, Mariuswedding a millionairess. The six hundred thousand francs had been herlast surprise. Then, her indifference of a girl taking her firstcommunion returned to her. She went regularly to service, told herbeads, read her euchology, mumbled _Aves_ in one corner of the house,while _I love you_ was being whispered in the other, and she beheldMarius and Cosette in a vague way, like two shadows. The shadow washerself.
There is a certain state of inert asceticism in which the soul,neutralized by torpor, a stranger to that which may be designated asthe business of living, receives no impressions, either human, orpleasant or painful, with the exception of earthquakes andcatastrophes. This devotion, as Father Gillenormand said to hisdaughter, corresponds to a cold in the head. You smell nothing of life.Neither any bad, nor any good odor.
Moreover, the six hundred thousand francs had settled the elderlyspinster’s indecision. Her father had acquired the habit of taking herso little into account, that he had not consulted her in the matter ofconsent to Marius’ marriage. He had acted impetuously, according to hiswont, having, a despot-turned slave, but a single thought,—to satisfyMarius. As for the aunt,—it had not even occurred to him that the auntexisted, and that she could have an opinion of her own, and, sheep asshe was, this had vexed her. Somewhat resentful in her inmost soul, butimpassible externally, she had said to herself: “My father has settledthe question of the marriage without reference to me; I shall settlethe question of the inheritance without consulting him.” She was rich,in fact, and her father was not. She had reserved her decision on thispoint. It is probable that, had the match been a poor one, she wouldhave left him poor. “So much the worse for my nephew! he is wedding abeggar, let him be a beggar himself!” But Cosette’s half-millionpleased the aunt, and altered her inward situation so far as this pairof lovers were concerned. One owes some consideration to six hundredthousand francs, and it was evident that she could not do otherwisethan leave her fortune to these young people, since they did not needit.
It was arranged that the couple should live with the grandfather—M.Gillenormand insisted on resigning to them his chamber, the finest inthe house. “That will make me young again,” he said. “It’s an old planof mine. I have always entertained the idea of having a wedding in mychamber.”

He furnished this chamber with a multitude of elegant trifles. He hadthe ceiling and walls hung with an extraordinary stuff, which he had byhim in the piece, and which he believed to have emanated from Utrechtwith a buttercup-colored satin ground, covered with velvet auriculablossoms.—“It was with that stuff,” said he, “that the bed of theDuchesse d’Anville at la Roche-Guyon was draped.”—On the chimney-piece,he set a little figure in Saxe porcelain, carrying a muff against hernude stomach.
M. Gillenormand’s library became the lawyer’s study, which Mariusneeded; a study, it will be remembered, being required by the councilof the order.



CHAPTER VII—THE EFFECTS OF DREAMS MINGLED WITH HAPPINESS

The lovers saw each other every day. Cosette came with M.Fauchelevent.—“This is reversing things,” said MademoiselleGillenormand, “to have the bride come to the house to do the courtinglike this.” But Marius’ convalescence had caused the habit to becomeestablished, and the armchairs of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire,better adapted to interviews than the straw chairs of the Rue del’Homme Armé, had rooted it. Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw each other,but did not address each other. It seemed as though this had beenagreed upon. Every girl needs a chaperon. Cosette could not have comewithout M. Fauchelevent. In Marius’ eyes, M. Fauchelevent was thecondition attached to Cosette. He accepted it. By dint of discussingpolitical matters, vaguely and without precision, from the point ofview of the general amelioration of the fate of all men, they came tosay a little more than “yes” and “no.” Once, on the subject ofeducation, which Marius wished to have free and obligatory, multipliedunder all forms lavished on every one, like the air and the sun in aword, respirable for the entire population, they were in unison, andthey almost conversed. M. Fauchelevent talked well, and even with acertain loftiness of language—still he lacked something indescribable.M. Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more, thana man of the world.
Marius, inwardly, and in the depths of his thought, surrounded with allsorts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent, who was to him simplybenevolent and cold. There were moments when doubts as to his ownrecollections occurred to him. There was a void in his memory, a blackspot, an abyss excavated by four months of agony.—Many things had beenlost therein. He had come to the point of asking himself whether itwere really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent, so serious and socalm a man, in the barricade.
This was not, however, the only stupor which the apparitions and thedisappearances of the past had left in his mind. It must not besupposed that he was delivered from all those obsessions of the memorywhich force us, even when happy, even when satisfied, to glance sadlybehind us. The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons thathave vanished contains neither thought nor love. At times, Mariusclasped his face between his hands, and the vague and tumultuous pasttraversed the twilight which reigned in his brain. Again he beheldMabeuf fall, he heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot, he feltbeneath his lips the cold brow of Éponine; Enjolras, Courfeyrac, JeanProuvaire, Combeferre, Bossuet, Grantaire, all his friends rose erectbefore him, then dispersed into thin air. Were all those dear,sorrowful, valiant, charming or tragic beings merely dreams? had theyactually existed? The revolt had enveloped everything in its smoke.These great fevers create great dreams. He questioned himself; he felthimself; all these vanished realities made him dizzy. Where were theyall then? was it really true that all were dead? A fall into theshadows had carried off all except himself. It all seemed to him tohave disappeared as though behind the curtain of a theatre. There arecurtains like this which drop in life. God passes on to the followingact.
And he himself—was he actually the same man? He, the poor man, wasrich; he, the abandoned, had a family; he, the despairing, was to marryCosette. It seemed to him that he had traversed a tomb, and that he hadentered into it black and had emerged from it white, and in that tombthe others had remained. At certain moments, all these beings of thepast, returned and present, formed a circle around him, andovershadowed him; then he thought of Cosette, and recovered hisserenity; but nothing less than this felicity could have sufficed toefface that catastrophe.
M. Fauchelevent almost occupied a place among these vanished beings.Marius hesitated to believe that the Fauchelevent of the barricade wasthe same as this Fauchelevent in flesh and blood, sitting so gravelybeside Cosette. The first was, probably, one of those nightmaresoccasioned and brought back by his hours of delirium. However, thenatures of both men were rigid, no question from Marius to M.Fauchelevent was possible. Such an idea had not even occurred to him.We have already indicated this characteristic detail.
Two men who have a secret in common, and who, by a sort of tacitagreement, exchange not a word on the subject, are less rare than iscommonly supposed.
Once only, did Marius make the attempt. He introduced into theconversation the Rue de la Chanvrerie, and, turning to M. Fauchelevent,he said to him:
“Of course, you are acquainted with that street?”

“What street?”

“The Rue de la Chanvrerie.”

“I have no idea of the name of that street,” replied M. Fauchelevent,in the most natural manner in the world.
The response which bore upon the name of the street and not upon thestreet itself, appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it reallywas.
“Decidedly,” thought he, “I have been dreaming. I have been subject toa hallucination. It was some one who resembled him. M. Fauchelevent wasnot there.”’



CHAPTER VIII—TWO MEN IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND

Marius’ enchantment, great as it was, could not efface from his mindother pre-occupations.
While the wedding was in preparation, and while awaiting the date fixedupon, he caused difficult and scrupulous retrospective researches to bemade.
He owed gratitude in various quarters; he owed it on his father’saccount, he owed it on his own.
There was Thénardier; there was the unknown man who had brought him,Marius, back to M. Gillenormand.
Marius endeavored to find these two men, not intending to marry, to behappy, and to forget them, and fearing that, were these debts ofgratitude not discharged, they would leave a shadow on his life, whichpromised so brightly for the future.
It was impossible for him to leave all these arrears of sufferingbehind him, and he wished, before entering joyously into the future, toobtain a quittance from the past.
That Thénardier was a villain detracted nothing from the fact that hehad saved Colonel Pontmercy. Thénardier was a ruffian in the eyes ofall the world except Marius.
And Marius, ignorant of the real scene in the battle field of Waterloo,was not aware of the peculiar detail, that his father, so far asThénardier was concerned was in the strange position of being indebtedto the latter for his life, without being indebted to him for anygratitude.
None of the various agents whom Marius employed succeeded indiscovering any trace of Thénardier. Obliteration appeared to becomplete in that quarter. Madame Thénardier had died in prison pendingthe trial. Thénardier and his daughter Azelma, the only two remainingof that lamentable group, had plunged back into the gloom. The gulf ofthe social unknown had silently closed above those beings. On thesurface there was not visible so much as that quiver, that trembling,those obscure concentric circles which announce that something hasfallen in, and that the plummet may be dropped.
Madame Thénardier being dead, Boulatruelle being eliminated from thecase, Claquesous having disappeared, the principal persons accusedhaving escaped from prison, the trial connected with the ambush in theGorbeau house had come to nothing.
That affair had remained rather obscure. The bench of Assizes had beenobliged to content themselves with two subordinates. Panchaud, aliasPrintanier, alias Bigrenaille, and Demi-Liard, alias Deux-Milliards,who had been inconsistently condemned, after a hearing of both sides ofthe case, to ten years in the galleys. Hard labor for life had been thesentence pronounced against the escaped and contumacious accomplices.
Thénardier, the head and leader, had been, through contumacy, likewisecondemned to death.
This sentence was the only information remaining about Thénardier,casting upon that buried name its sinister light like a candle beside abier.
Moreover, by thrusting Thénardier back into the very remotest depths,through a fear of being re-captured, this sentence added to the densityof the shadows which enveloped this man.
As for the other person, as for the unknown man who had saved Marius,the researches were at first to some extent successful, then came to anabrupt conclusion. They succeeded in finding the carriage which hadbrought Marius to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire on the evening of the6th of June.
The coachman declared that, on the 6th of June, in obedience to thecommands of a police-agent, he had stood from three o’clock in theafternoon until nightfall on the Quai des Champs-Élysées, above theoutlet of the Grand Sewer; that, towards nine o’clock in the evening,the grating of the sewer, which abuts on the bank of the river, hadopened; that a man had emerged therefrom, bearing on his shouldersanother man, who seemed to be dead; that the agent, who was on thewatch at that point, had arrested the living man and had seized thedead man; that, at the order of the police-agent, he, the coachman, hadtaken “all those folks” into his carriage; that they had first drivento the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire; that they had there deposited thedead man; that the dead man was Monsieur Marius, and that he, thecoachman, recognized him perfectly, although he was alive “this time”;that afterwards, they had entered the vehicle again, that he hadwhipped up his horses; a few paces from the gate of the Archives, theyhad called to him to halt; that there, in the street, they had paid himand left him, and that the police-agent had led the other man away;that he knew nothing more; that the night had been very dark.
Marius, as we have said, recalled nothing. He only remembered that hehad been seized from behind by an energetic hand at the moment when hewas falling backwards into the barricade; then, everything vanished sofar as he was concerned.
He had only regained consciousness at M. Gillenormand’s.
He was lost in conjectures.
He could not doubt his own identity. Still, how had it come to passthat, having fallen in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, he had been picked upby the police-agent on the banks of the Seine, near the Pont desInvalides?
Some one had carried him from the Quartier des Halles to theChamps-Élysées. And how? Through the sewer. Unheard-of devotion!
Some one? Who?
This was the man for whom Marius was searching.
Of this man, who was his savior, nothing; not a trace; not the faintestindication.
Marius, although forced to preserve great reserve, in that direction,pushed his inquiries as far as the prefecture of police. There, no morethan elsewhere, did the information obtained lead to any enlightenment.
The prefecture knew less about the matter than did thehackney-coachman. They had no knowledge of any arrest having been madeon the 6th of June at the mouth of the Grand Sewer.
No report of any agent had been received there upon this matter, whichwas regarded at the prefecture as a fable. The invention of this fablewas attributed to the coachman.
A coachman who wants a gratuity is capable of anything, even ofimagination. The fact was assured, nevertheless, and Marius could notdoubt it, unless he doubted his own identity, as we have just said.
Everything about this singular enigma was inexplicable.
What had become of that man, that mysterious man, whom the coachman hadseen emerge from the grating of the Grand Sewer bearing upon his backthe unconscious Marius, and whom the police-agent on the watch hadarrested in the very act of rescuing an insurgent? What had become ofthe agent himself?
Why had this agent preserved silence? Had the man succeeded in makinghis escape? Had he bribed the agent? Why did this man give no sign oflife to Marius, who owed everything to him? His disinterestedness wasno less tremendous than his devotion. Why had not that man appearedagain? Perhaps he was above compensation, but no one is abovegratitude. Was he dead? Who was the man? What sort of a face had he? Noone could tell him this.
The coachman answered: “The night was very dark.” Basque and Nicolette,all in a flutter, had looked only at their young master all coveredwith blood.
The porter, whose candle had lighted the tragic arrival of Marius, hadbeen the only one to take note of the man in question, and this is thedescription that he gave:
“That man was terrible.”

Marius had the blood-stained clothing which he had worn when he hadbeen brought back to his grandfather preserved, in the hope that itwould prove of service in his researches.
On examining the coat, it was found that one skirt had been torn in asingular way. A piece was missing.
One evening, Marius was speaking in the presence of Cosette and JeanValjean of the whole of that singular adventure, of the innumerableinquiries which he had made, and of the fruitlessness of his efforts.The cold countenance of “Monsieur Fauchelevent” angered him.
He exclaimed, with a vivacity which had something of wrath in it:
“Yes, that man, whoever he may have been, was sublime. Do you know whathe did, sir? He intervened like an archangel. He must have flunghimself into the midst of the battle, have stolen me away, have openedthe sewer, have dragged me into it and have carried me through it! Hemust have traversed more than a league and a half in those frightfulsubterranean galleries, bent over, weighed down, in the dark, in thecesspool,—more than a league and a half, sir, with a corpse upon hisback! And with what object? With the sole object of saving the corpse.And that corpse I was. He said to himself: ‘There may still be aglimpse of life there, perchance; I will risk my own existence for thatmiserable spark!’ And his existence he risked not once but twentytimes! And every step was a danger. The proof of it is, that onemerging from the sewer, he was arrested. Do you know, sir, that thatman did all this? And he had no recompense to expect. What was I? Aninsurgent. What was I? One of the conquered. Oh! if Cosette’s sixhundred thousand francs were mine….”

“They are yours,” interrupted Jean Valjean.
“Well,” resumed Marius, “I would give them all to find that man oncemore.”

Jean Valjean remained silent.



BOOK SIXTH—THE SLEEPLESS NIGHT



CHAPTER I—THE 16TH OF FEBRUARY, 1833

The night of the 16th to the 17th of February, 1833, was a blessednight. Above its shadows heaven stood open. It was the wedding night ofMarius and Cosette.
The day had been adorable.
It had not been the grand festival dreamed by the grandfather, a fairyspectacle, with a confusion of cherubim and Cupids over the heads ofthe bridal pair, a marriage worthy to form the subject of a painting tobe placed over a door; but it had been sweet and smiling.
The manner of marriage in 1833 was not the same as it is to-day. Francehad not yet borrowed from England that supreme delicacy of carrying offone’s wife, of fleeing, on coming out of church, of hiding oneself withshame from one’s happiness, and of combining the ways of a bankruptwith the delights of the Song of Songs. People had not yet grasped tothe full the chastity, exquisiteness, and decency of jolting theirparadise in a posting-chaise, of breaking up their mystery withclic-clacs, of taking for a nuptial bed the bed of an inn, and ofleaving behind them, in a commonplace chamber, at so much a night, themost sacred of the souvenirs of life mingled pell-mell with thetête-à-tête of the conductor of the diligence and the maid-servant ofthe inn.
In this second half of the nineteenth century in which we are nowliving, the mayor and his scarf, the priest and his chasuble, the lawand God no longer suffice; they must be eked out by the Postilion deLonjumeau; a blue waistcoat turned up with red, and with bell buttons,a plaque like a vantbrace, knee-breeches of green leather, oaths to theNorman horses with their tails knotted up, false galloons, varnishedhat, long powdered locks, an enormous whip and tall boots. France doesnot yet carry elegance to the length of doing like the Englishnobility, and raining down on the post-chaise of the bridal pair a hailstorm of slippers trodden down at heel and of worn-out shoes, in memoryof Churchill, afterwards Marlborough, or Malbrouck, who was assailed onhis wedding-day by the wrath of an aunt which brought him good luck.Old shoes and slippers do not, as yet, form a part of our nuptialcelebrations; but patience, as good taste continues to spread, we shallcome to that.
In 1833, a hundred years ago, marriage was not conducted at a fulltrot.
Strange to say, at that epoch, people still imagined that a wedding wasa private and social festival, that a patriarchal banquet does notspoil a domestic solemnity, that gayety, even in excess, provided it behonest, and decent, does happiness no harm, and that, in short, it is agood and a venerable thing that the fusion of these two destinieswhence a family is destined to spring, should begin at home, and thatthe household should thenceforth have its nuptial chamber as itswitness.
And people were so immodest as to marry in their own homes.
The marriage took place, therefore, in accordance with this nowsuperannuated fashion, at M. Gillenormand’s house.
Natural and commonplace as this matter of marrying is, the banns topublish, the papers to be drawn up, the mayoralty, and the churchproduce some complication. They could not get ready before the 16th ofFebruary.
Now, we note this detail, for the pure satisfaction of being exact, itchanced that the 16th fell on Shrove Tuesday. Hesitations, scruples,particularly on the part of Aunt Gillenormand.
“Shrove Tuesday!” exclaimed the grandfather, “so much the better. Thereis a proverb:
“‘Mariage un Mardi grasN’aura point enfants ingrats.‘66

Let us proceed. Here goes for the 16th! Do you want to delay, Marius?”

“No, certainly not!” replied the lover.
“Let us marry, then,” cried the grandfather.
Accordingly, the marriage took place on the 16th, notwithstanding thepublic merrymaking. It rained that day, but there is always in the skya tiny scrap of blue at the service of happiness, which lovers see,even when the rest of creation is under an umbrella.
On the preceding evening, Jean Valjean handed to Marius, in thepresence of M. Gillenormand, the five hundred and eighty-four thousandfrancs.
As the marriage was taking place under the régime of community ofproperty, the papers had been simple.
Henceforth, Toussaint was of no use to Jean Valjean; Cosette inheritedher and promoted her to the rank of lady’s maid.
As for Jean Valjean, a beautiful chamber in the Gillenormand house hadbeen furnished expressly for him, and Cosette had said to him in suchan irresistible manner: “Father, I entreat you,” that she had almostpersuaded him to promise that he would come and occupy it.
A few days before that fixed on for the marriage, an accident happenedto Jean Valjean; he crushed the thumb of his right hand. This was not aserious matter; and he had not allowed any one to trouble himself aboutit, nor to dress it, nor even to see his hurt, not even Cosette.Nevertheless, this had forced him to swathe his hand in a linenbandage, and to carry his arm in a sling, and had prevented hissigning. M. Gillenormand, in his capacity of Cosette’ssupervising-guardian, had supplied his place.
We will not conduct the reader either to the mayor’s office or to thechurch. One does not follow a pair of lovers to that extent, and one isaccustomed to turn one’s back on the drama as soon as it puts a weddingnosegay in its buttonhole. We will confine ourselves to noting anincident which, though unnoticed by the wedding party, marked thetransit from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire to the church ofSaint-Paul.
At that epoch, the northern extremity of the Rue Saint-Louis was inprocess of repaving. It was barred off, beginning with the Rue duParc-Royal. It was impossible for the wedding carriages to go directlyto Saint-Paul. They were obliged to alter their course, and thesimplest way was to turn through the boulevard. One of the invitedguests observed that it was Shrove Tuesday, and that there would be ajam of vehicles.—“Why?” asked M. Gillenormand—“Because of themaskers.”—“Capital,” said the grandfather, “let us go that way. Theseyoung folks are on the way to be married; they are about to enter theserious part of life. This will prepare them for seeing a bit of themasquerade.”

They went by way of the boulevard. The first wedding coach held Cosetteand Aunt Gillenormand, M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean. Marius, stillseparated from his betrothed according to usage, did not come until thesecond. The nuptial train, on emerging from the Rue desFilles-du-Calvaire, became entangled in a long procession of vehicleswhich formed an endless chain from the Madeleine to the Bastille, andfrom the Bastille to the Madeleine. Maskers abounded on the boulevard.In spite of the fact that it was raining at intervals, Merry-Andrew,Pantaloon and Clown persisted. In the good humor of that winter of1833, Paris had disguised itself as Venice. Such Shrove Tuesdays are nolonger to be seen nowadays. Everything which exists being a scatteredCarnival, there is no longer any Carnival.
The sidewalks were overflowing with pedestrians and the windows withcurious spectators. The terraces which crown the peristyles of thetheatres were bordered with spectators. Besides the maskers, theystared at that procession—peculiar to Shrove Tuesday as toLongchamps,—of vehicles of every description, citadines, tapissières,carioles, cabriolets marching in order, rigorously riveted to eachother by the police regulations, and locked into rails, as it were. Anyone in these vehicles is at once a spectator and a spectacle. Policesergeants maintained, on the sides of the boulevard, these twointerminable parallel files, moving in contrary directions, and saw toit that nothing interfered with that double current, those two brooksof carriages, flowing, the one downstream, the other upstream, the onetowards the Chaussée d’Antin, the other towards the FaubourgSaint-Antoine. The carriages of the peers of France and of theAmbassadors, emblazoned with coats of arms, held the middle of the way,going and coming freely. Certain joyous and magnificent trains, notablythat of the Bœuf Gras, had the same privilege. In this gayety of Paris,England cracked her whip; Lord Seymour’s post-chaise, harassed by anickname from the populace, passed with great noise.
In the double file, along which the municipal guards galloped likesheep-dogs, honest family coaches, loaded down with great-aunts andgrandmothers, displayed at their doors fresh groups of children indisguise, Clowns of seven years of age, Columbines of six, ravishinglittle creatures, who felt that they formed an official part of thepublic mirth, who were imbued with the dignity of their harlequinade,and who possessed the gravity of functionaries.
From time to time, a hitch arose somewhere in the procession ofvehicles; one or other of the two lateral files halted until the knotwas disentangled; one carriage delayed sufficed to paralyze the wholeline. Then they set out again on the march.
The wedding carriages were in the file proceeding towards the Bastille,and skirting the right side of the Boulevard. At the top of thePont-aux-Choux, there was a stoppage. Nearly at the same moment, theother file, which was proceeding towards the Madeleine, halted also. Atthat point of the file there was a carriage-load of maskers.
These carriages, or to speak more correctly, these wagon-loads ofmaskers are very familiar to Parisians. If they were missing on aShrove Tuesday, or at the Mid-Lent, it would be taken in bad part, andpeople would say: “There’s something behind that. Probably the ministryis about to undergo a change.” A pile of Cassandras, Harlequins andColumbines, jolted along high above the passers-by, all possiblegrotesquenesses, from the Turk to the savage, Hercules supportingMarquises, fishwives who would have made Rabelais stop up his ears justas the Mænads made Aristophanes drop his eyes, tow wigs, pink tights,dandified hats, spectacles of a grimacer, three-cornered hats of Janottormented with a butterfly, shouts directed at pedestrians, fists onhips, bold attitudes, bare shoulders, immodesty unchained; a chaos ofshamelessness driven by a coachman crowned with flowers; this is whatthat institution was like.
Greece stood in need of the chariot of Thespis, France stands in needof the hackney-coach of Vadé.
Everything can be parodied, even parody. The Saturnalia, that grimaceof antique beauty, ends, through exaggeration after exaggeration, inShrove Tuesday; and the Bacchanal, formerly crowned with sprays of vineleaves and grapes, inundated with sunshine, displaying her marblebreast in a divine semi-nudity, having at the present day lost hershape under the soaked rags of the North, has finally come to be calledthe Jack-pudding.
The tradition of carriage-loads of maskers runs back to the mostancient days of the monarchy. The accounts of Louis XI. allot to thebailiff of the palace “twenty sous, Tournois, for three coaches ofmascarades in the crossroads.” In our day, these noisy heaps ofcreatures are accustomed to have themselves driven in some ancientcuckoo carriage, whose imperial they load down, or they overwhelm ahired landau, with its top thrown back, with their tumultuous groups.Twenty of them ride in a carriage intended for six. They cling to theseats, to the rumble, on the cheeks of the hood, on the shafts. Theyeven bestride the carriage lamps. They stand, sit, lie, with theirknees drawn up in a knot, and their legs hanging. The women sit on themen’s laps. Far away, above the throng of heads, their wild pyramid isvisible. These carriage-loads form mountains of mirth in the midst ofthe rout. Collé, Panard and Piron flow from it, enriched with slang.This carriage which has become colossal through its freight, has an airof conquest. Uproar reigns in front, tumult behind. People vociferate,shout, howl, there they break forth and writhe with enjoyment; gayetyroars; sarcasm flames forth, joviality is flaunted like a red flag; twojades there drag farce blossomed forth into an apotheosis; it is thetriumphal car of laughter.
A laughter that is too cynical to be frank. In truth, this laughter issuspicious. This laughter has a mission. It is charged with proving theCarnival to the Parisians.
These fishwife vehicles, in which one feels one knows not what shadows,set the philosopher to thinking. There is government therein. There onelays one’s finger on a mysterious affinity between public men andpublic women.
It certainly is sad that turpitude heaped up should give a sum total ofgayety, that by piling ignominy upon opprobrium the people should beenticed, that the system of spying, and serving as caryatids toprostitution should amuse the rabble when it confronts them, that thecrowd loves to behold that monstrous living pile of tinsel rags, halfdung, half light, roll by on four wheels howling and laughing, thatthey should clap their hands at this glory composed of all shames, thatthere would be no festival for the populace, did not the policepromenade in their midst these sorts of twenty-headed hydras of joy.But what can be done about it? These be-ribboned and be-floweredtumbrils of mire are insulted and pardoned by the laughter of thepublic. The laughter of all is the accomplice of universal degradation.Certain unhealthy festivals disaggregate the people and convert theminto the populace. And populaces, like tyrants, require buffoons. TheKing has Roquelaure, the populace has the Merry-Andrew. Paris is agreat, mad city on every occasion that it is a great sublime city.There the Carnival forms part of politics. Paris,—let us confessit—willingly allows infamy to furnish it with comedy. She only demandsof her masters—when she has masters—one thing: “Paint me the mud.” Romewas of the same mind. She loved Nero. Nero was a titanic lighterman.
Chance ordained, as we have just said, that one of these shapelessclusters of masked men and women, dragged about on a vast calash,should halt on the left of the boulevard, while the wedding trainhalted on the right. The carriage-load of masks caught sight of thewedding carriage containing the bridal party opposite them on the otherside of the boulevard.
“Hullo!” said a masker, “here’s a wedding.”

“A sham wedding,” retorted another. “We are the genuine article.”

And, being too far off to accost the wedding party, and fearing also,the rebuke of the police, the two maskers turned their eyes elsewhere.
At the end of another minute, the carriage-load of maskers had theirhands full, the multitude set to yelling, which is the crowd’s caressto masquerades; and the two maskers who had just spoken had to face thethrong with their comrades, and did not find the entire repertory ofprojectiles of the fishmarkets too extensive to retort to the enormousverbal attacks of the populace. A frightful exchange of metaphors tookplace between the maskers and the crowd.
In the meanwhile, two other maskers in the same carriage, a Spaniardwith an enormous nose, an elderly air, and huge black moustache, and agaunt fishwife, who was quite a young girl, masked with a _loup_,67 hadalso noticed the wedding, and while their companions and the passers-bywere exchanging insults, they had held a dialogue in a low voice.
Their aside was covered by the tumult and was lost in it. The gusts ofrain had drenched the front of the vehicle, which was wide open; thebreezes of February are not warm; as the fishwife, clad in a low-neckedgown, replied to the Spaniard, she shivered, laughed and coughed.
Here is their dialogue:
“Say, now.”

“What, daddy?”

“Do you see that old cove?”

“What old cove?”

“Yonder, in the first wedding-cart, on our side.”

“The one with his arm hung up in a black cravat?”

“Yes.”

“Well?”

“I’m sure that I know him.”

“Ah!”

“I’m willing that they should cut my throat, and I’m ready to swearthat I never said either you, thou, or I, in my life, if I don’t knowthat Parisian.” [_pantinois_.]
“Paris in Pantin to-day.”

“Can you see the bride if you stoop down?”

“No.”

“And the bridegroom?”

“There’s no bridegroom in that trap.”

“Bah!”

“Unless it’s the old fellow.”

“Try to get a sight of the bride by stooping very low.”

“I can’t.”

“Never mind, that old cove who has something the matter with his paw Iknow, and that I’m positive.”

“And what good does it do to know him?”

“No one can tell. Sometimes it does!”

“I don’t care a hang for old fellows, that I don’t!”

“I know him.”

“Know him, if you want to.”

“How the devil does he come to be one of the wedding party?”

“We are in it, too.”

“Where does that wedding come from?”

“How should I know?”

“Listen.”

“Well, what?”

“There’s one thing you ought to do.”

“What’s that?”

“Get off of our trap and spin that wedding.”

“What for?”

“To find out where it goes, and what it is. Hurry up and jump down,trot, my girl, your legs are young.”

“I can’t quit the vehicle.”

“Why not?”

“I’m hired.”

“Ah, the devil!”

“I owe my fishwife day to the prefecture.”

“That’s true.”

“If I leave the cart, the first inspector who gets his eye on me willarrest me. You know that well enough.”

“Yes, I do.”

“I’m bought by the government for to-day.”

“All the same, that old fellow bothers me.”

“Do the old fellows bother you? But you’re not a young girl.”

“He’s in the first carriage.”

“Well?”

“In the bride’s trap.”

“What then?”

“So he is the father.”

“What concern is that of mine?”

“I tell you that he’s the father.”

“As if he were the only father.”

“Listen.”

“What?”

“I can’t go out otherwise than masked. Here I’m concealed, no one knowsthat I’m here. But to-morrow, there will be no more maskers. It’s AshWednesday. I run the risk of being nabbed. I must sneak back into myhole. But you are free.”

“Not particularly.”

“More than I am, at any rate.”

“Well, what of that?”

“You must try to find out where that wedding party went to.”

“Where it went?”

“Yes.”

“I know.”

“Where is it going then?”

“To the Cadran-Bleu.”

“In the first place, it’s not in that direction.”

“Well! to la Rapée.”

“Or elsewhere.”

“It’s free. Wedding parties are at liberty.”

“That’s not the point at all. I tell you that you must try to learn forme what that wedding is, who that old cove belongs to, and where thatwedding pair lives.”

“I like that! that would be queer. It’s so easy to find out a weddingparty that passed through the street on a Shrove Tuesday, a weekafterwards. A pin in a hay-mow! It ain’t possible!”

“That don’t matter. You must try. You understand me, Azelma.”

The two files resumed their movement on both sides of the boulevard, inopposite directions, and the carriage of the maskers lost sight of the“trap” of the bride.



CHAPTER II—JEAN VALJEAN STILL WEARS HIS ARM IN A SLING

To realize one’s dream. To whom is this accorded? There must beelections for this in heaven; we are all candidates, unknown toourselves; the angels vote. Cosette and Marius had been elected.
Cosette, both at the mayor’s office and at church, was dazzling andtouching. Toussaint, assisted by Nicolette, had dressed her.
Cosette wore over a petticoat of white taffeta, her robe of Bincheguipure, a veil of English point, a necklace of fine pearls, a wreathof orange flowers; all this was white, and, from the midst of thatwhiteness she beamed forth. It was an exquisite candor expanding andbecoming transfigured in the light. One would have pronounced her avirgin on the point of turning into a goddess.
Marius’ handsome hair was lustrous and perfumed; here and there,beneath the thick curls, pale lines—the scars of the barricade—werevisible.
The grandfather, haughty, with head held high, amalgamating more thanever in his toilet and his manners all the elegances of the epoch ofBarras, escorted Cosette. He took the place of Jean Valjean, who, onaccount of his arm being still in a sling, could not give his hand tothe bride.
Jean Valjean, dressed in black, followed them with a smile.
“Monsieur Fauchelevent,” said the grandfather to him, “this is a fineday. I vote for the end of afflictions and sorrows. Henceforth, theremust be no sadness anywhere. Pardieu, I decree joy! Evil has no rightto exist. That there should be any unhappy men is, in sooth, a disgraceto the azure of the sky. Evil does not come from man, who is good atbottom. All human miseries have for their capital and centralgovernment hell, otherwise, known as the Devil’s Tuileries. Good, hereI am uttering demagogical words! As far as I am concerned, I have nolonger any political opinions; let all men be rich, that is to say,mirthful, and I confine myself to that.”

When, at the conclusion of all the ceremonies, after having pronouncedbefore the mayor and before the priest all possible “yesses,” afterhaving signed the registers at the municipality and at the sacristy,after having exchanged their rings, after having knelt side by sideunder the pall of white moire in the smoke of the censer, they arrived,hand in hand, admired and envied by all, Marius in black, she in white,preceded by the suisse, with the epaulets of a colonel, tapping thepavement with his halberd, between two rows of astonished spectators,at the portals of the church, both leaves of which were thrown wideopen, ready to enter their carriage again, and all being finished,Cosette still could not believe that it was real. She looked at Marius,she looked at the crowd, she looked at the sky: it seemed as though shefeared that she should wake up from her dream. Her amazed and uneasyair added something indescribably enchanting to her beauty. Theyentered the same carriage to return home, Marius beside Cosette; M.Gillenormand and Jean Valjean sat opposite them; Aunt Gillenormand hadwithdrawn one degree, and was in the second vehicle.
“My children,” said the grandfather, “here you are, Monsieur le Baronand Madame la Baronne, with an income of thirty thousand livres.”

And Cosette, nestling close to Marius, caressed his ear with an angelicwhisper: “So it is true. My name is Marius. I am Madame Thou.”

These two creatures were resplendent. They had reached that irrevocableand irrecoverable moment, at the dazzling intersection of all youth andall joy. They realized the verses of Jean Prouvaire; they were fortyyears old taken together. It was marriage sublimated; these twochildren were two lilies. They did not see each other, they did notcontemplate each other. Cosette perceived Marius in the midst of aglory; Marius perceived Cosette on an altar. And on that altar, and inthat glory, the two apotheoses mingling, in the background, one knowsnot how, behind a cloud for Cosette, in a flash for Marius, there wasthe ideal thing, the real thing, the meeting of the kiss and the dream,the nuptial pillow. All the torments through which they had passed cameback to them in intoxication. It seemed to them that their sorrows,their sleepless nights, their tears, their anguish, their terrors,their despair, converted into caresses and rays of light, renderedstill more charming the charming hour which was approaching; and thattheir griefs were but so many handmaidens who were preparing the toiletof joy. How good it is to have suffered! Their unhappiness formed ahalo round their happiness. The long agony of their love wasterminating in an ascension.
It was the same enchantment in two souls, tinged with voluptuousness inMarius, and with modesty in Cosette. They said to each other in lowtones: “We will go back to take a look at our little garden in the RuePlumet.” The folds of Cosette’s gown lay across Marius.
Such a day is an ineffable mixture of dream and of reality. Onepossesses and one supposes. One still has time before one to divine.The emotion on that day, of being at midday and of dreaming of midnightis indescribable. The delights of these two hearts overflowed upon thecrowd, and inspired the passers-by with cheerfulness.
People halted in the Rue Saint-Antoine, in front of Saint-Paul, to gazethrough the windows of the carriage at the orange-flowers quivering onCosette’s head.
Then they returned home to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire. Marius,triumphant and radiant, mounted side by side with Cosette the staircaseup which he had been borne in a dying condition. The poor, who hadtrooped to the door, and who shared their purses, blessed them. Therewere flowers everywhere. The house was no less fragrant than thechurch; after the incense, roses. They thought they heard voicescarolling in the infinite; they had God in their hearts; destinyappeared to them like a ceiling of stars; above their heads they beheldthe light of a rising sun. All at once, the clock struck. Mariusglanced at Cosette’s charming bare arm, and at the rosy things whichwere vaguely visible through the lace of her bodice, and Cosette,intercepting Marius’ glance, blushed to her very hair.
Quite a number of old family friends of the Gillenormand family hadbeen invited; they pressed about Cosette. Each one vied with the restin saluting her as Madame la Baronne.
The officer, Théodule Gillenormand, now a captain, had come fromChartres, where he was stationed in garrison, to be present at thewedding of his cousin Pontmercy. Cosette did not recognize him.
He, on his side, habituated as he was to have women consider himhandsome, retained no more recollection of Cosette than of any otherwoman.
“How right I was not to believe in that story about the lancer!” saidFather Gillenormand, to himself.
Cosette had never been more tender with Jean Valjean. She was in unisonwith Father Gillenormand; while he erected joy into aphorisms andmaxims, she exhaled goodness like a perfume. Happiness desires that allthe world should be happy.
She regained, for the purpose of addressing Jean Valjean, inflectionsof voice belonging to the time when she was a little girl. She caressedhim with her smile.
A banquet had been spread in the dining-room.
Illumination as brilliant as the daylight is the necessary seasoning ofa great joy. Mist and obscurity are not accepted by the happy. They donot consent to be black. The night, yes; the shadows, no. If there isno sun, one must be made.
The dining-room was full of gay things. In the centre, above the whiteand glittering table, was a Venetian lustre with flat plates, with allsorts of colored birds, blue, violet, red, and green, perched amid thecandles; around the chandelier, girandoles, on the walls, sconces withtriple and quintuple branches; mirrors, silverware, glassware, plate,porcelain, faïence, pottery, gold and silversmith’s work, all wassparkling and gay. The empty spaces between the candelabra were filledin with bouquets, so that where there was not a light, there was aflower.
In the antechamber, three violins and a flute softly played quartettesby Haydn.
Jean Valjean had seated himself on a chair in the drawing-room, behindthe door, the leaf of which folded back upon him in such a manner as tonearly conceal him. A few moments before they sat down to table,Cosette came, as though inspired by a sudden whim, and made him a deepcourtesy, spreading out her bridal toilet with both hands, and with atenderly roguish glance, she asked him:
“Father, are you satisfied?”

“Yes,” said Jean Valjean, “I am content!”

“Well, then, laugh.”

Jean Valjean began to laugh.
A few moments later, Basque announced that dinner was served.
The guests, preceded by M. Gillenormand with Cosette on his arm,entered the dining-room, and arranged themselves in the proper orderaround the table.
Two large armchairs figured on the right and left of the bride, thefirst for M. Gillenormand, the other for Jean Valjean. M. Gillenormandtook his seat. The other armchair remained empty.
They looked about for M. Fauchelevent.
He was no longer there.
M. Gillenormand questioned Basque.
“Do you know where M. Fauchelevent is?”

“Sir,” replied Basque, “I do, precisely. M. Fauchelevent told me to sayto you, sir, that he was suffering, his injured hand was paining himsomewhat, and that he could not dine with Monsieur le Baron and Madamela Baronne. That he begged to be excused, that he would come to-morrow.He has just taken his departure.”

That empty armchair chilled the effusion of the wedding feast for amoment. But, if M. Fauchelevent was absent, M. Gillenormand waspresent, and the grandfather beamed for two. He affirmed that M.Fauchelevent had done well to retire early, if he were suffering, butthat it was only a slight ailment. This declaration sufficed. Moreover,what is an obscure corner in such a submersion of joy? Cosette andMarius were passing through one of those egotistical and blessedmoments when no other faculty is left to a person than that ofreceiving happiness. And then, an idea occurred to M.Gillenormand.—“Pardieu, this armchair is empty. Come hither, Marius.Your aunt will permit it, although she has a right to you. Thisarmchair is for you. That is legal and delightful. Fortunatus besideFortunata.”—Applause from the whole table. Marius took Jean Valjean’splace beside Cosette, and things fell out so that Cosette, who had, atfirst, been saddened by Jean Valjean’s absence, ended by beingsatisfied with it. From the moment when Marius took his place, and wasthe substitute, Cosette would not have regretted God himself. She sether sweet little foot, shod in white satin, on Marius’ foot.
The armchair being occupied, M. Fauchelevent was obliterated; andnothing was lacking.
And, five minutes afterward, the whole table from one end to the other,was laughing with all the animation of forgetfulness.
At dessert, M. Gillenormand, rising to his feet, with a glass ofchampagne in his hand—only half full so that the palsy of his eightyyears might not cause an overflow,—proposed the health of the marriedpair.
“You shall not escape two sermons,” he exclaimed. “This morning you hadone from the curé, this evening you shall have one from yourgrandfather. Listen to me; I will give you a bit of advice: Adore eachother. I do not make a pack of gyrations, I go straight to the mark, behappy. In all creation, only the turtledoves are wise. Philosopherssay: ‘Moderate your joys.’ I say: ‘Give rein to your joys.’ Be as muchsmitten with each other as fiends. Be in a rage about it. Thephilosophers talk stuff and nonsense. I should like to stuff theirphilosophy down their gullets again. Can there be too many perfumes,too many open rose-buds, too many nightingales singing, too many greenleaves, too much aurora in life? can people love each other too much?can people please each other too much? Take care, Estelle, thou art toopretty! Have a care, Nemorin, thou art too handsome! Fine stupidity, insooth! Can people enchant each other too much, cajole each other toomuch, charm each other too much? Can one be too much alive, too happy?Moderate your joys. Ah, indeed! Down with the philosophers! Wisdomconsists in jubilation. Make merry, let us make merry. Are we happybecause we are good, or are we good because we are happy? Is the Sancydiamond called the Sancy because it belonged to Harley de Sancy, orbecause it weighs six hundred carats? I know nothing about it, life isfull of such problems; the important point is to possess the Sancy andhappiness. Let us be happy without quibbling and quirking. Let us obeythe sun blindly. What is the sun? It is love. He who says love, sayswoman. Ah! ah! behold omnipotence—women. Ask that demagogue of a Mariusif he is not the slave of that little tyrant of a Cosette. And of hisown free will, too, the coward! Woman! There is no Robespierre whokeeps his place but woman reigns. I am no longer Royalist excepttowards that royalty. What is Adam? The kingdom of Eve. No ’89 for Eve.There has been the royal sceptre surmounted by a fleur-de-lys, therehas been the imperial sceptre surmounted by a globe, there has been thesceptre of Charlemagne, which was of iron, there has been the sceptreof Louis the Great, which was of gold,—the revolution twisted thembetween its thumb and forefinger, ha’penny straws; it is done with, itis broken, it lies on the earth, there is no longer any sceptre, butmake me a revolution against that little embroidered handkerchief,which smells of patchouli! I should like to see you do it. Try. Why isit so solid? Because it is a gewgaw. Ah! you are the nineteenthcentury? Well, what then? And we have been as foolish as you. Do notimagine that you have effected much change in the universe, becauseyour trip-gallant is called the cholera-morbus, and because your_pourrée_ is called the cachuca. In fact, the women must always beloved. I defy you to escape from that. These friends are our angels.Yes, love, woman, the kiss forms a circle from which I defy you toescape; and, for my own part, I should be only too happy to re-enterit. Which of you has seen the planet Venus, the coquette of the abyss,the Célimène of the ocean, rise in the infinite, calming all herebelow? The ocean is a rough Alcestis. Well, grumble as he will, whenVenus appears he is forced to smile. That brute beast submits. We areall made so. Wrath, tempest, claps of thunder, foam to the veryceiling. A woman enters on the scene, a planet rises; flat on yourface! Marius was fighting six months ago; to-day he is married. That iswell. Yes, Marius, yes, Cosette, you are in the right. Exist boldly foreach other, make us burst with rage that we cannot do the same,idealize each other, catch in your beaks all the tiny blades offelicity that exist on earth, and arrange yourselves a nest for life.Pardi, to love, to be loved, what a fine miracle when one is young!Don’t imagine that you have invented that. I, too, have had my dream,I, too, have meditated, I, too, have sighed; I, too, have had amoonlight soul. Love is a child six thousand years old. Love has theright to a long white beard. Methusalem is a street arab beside Cupid.For sixty centuries men and women have got out of their scrape byloving. The devil, who is cunning, took to hating man; man, who isstill more cunning, took to loving woman. In this way he does more goodthan the devil does him harm. This craft was discovered in the days ofthe terrestrial paradise. The invention is old, my friends, but it isperfectly new. Profit by it. Be Daphnis and Chloe, while waiting tobecome Philemon and Baucis. Manage so that, when you are with eachother, nothing shall be lacking to you, and that Cosette may be the sunfor Marius, and that Marius may be the universe to Cosette. Cosette,let your fine weather be the smile of your husband; Marius, let yourrain be your wife’s tears. And let it never rain in your household. Youhave filched the winning number in the lottery; you have gained thegreat prize, guard it well, keep it under lock and key, do not squanderit, adore each other and snap your fingers at all the rest. Believewhat I say to you. It is good sense. And good sense cannot lie. Be areligion to each other. Each man has his own fashion of adoring God.Saperlotte! the best way to adore God is to love one’s wife. _I lovethee!_ that’s my catechism. He who loves is orthodox. The oath of HenriIV. places sanctity somewhere between feasting and drunkenness.Ventre-saint-gris! I don’t belong to the religion of that oath. Womanis forgotten in it. This astonishes me on the part of Henri IV. Myfriends, long live women! I am old, they say; it’s astonishing how muchI feel in the mood to be young. I should like to go and listen to thebagpipes in the woods. Children who contrive to be beautiful andcontented,—that intoxicates me. I would like greatly to get married, ifany one would have me. It is impossible to imagine that God could havemade us for anything but this: to idolize, to coo, to preen ourselves,to be dove-like, to be dainty, to bill and coo our loves from morn tonight, to gaze at one’s image in one’s little wife, to be proud, to betriumphant, to plume oneself; that is the aim of life. There, let notthat displease you which we used to think in our day, when we wereyoung folks. Ah! vertu-bamboche! what charming women there were inthose days, and what pretty little faces and what lovely lasses! Icommitted my ravages among them. Then love each other. If people didnot love each other, I really do not see what use there would be inhaving any springtime; and for my own part, I should pray the good Godto shut up all the beautiful things that he shows us, and to take awayfrom us and put back in his box, the flowers, the birds, and the prettymaidens. My children, receive an old man’s blessing.”

The evening was gay, lively and agreeable. The grandfather’s sovereigngood humor gave the key-note to the whole feast, and each personregulated his conduct on that almost centenarian cordiality. Theydanced a little, they laughed a great deal; it was an amiable wedding.Goodman Days of Yore might have been invited to it. However, he waspresent in the person of Father Gillenormand.
There was a tumult, then silence.
The married pair disappeared.
A little after midnight, the Gillenormand house became a temple.
Here we pause. On the threshold of wedding nights stands a smilingangel with his finger on his lips.
The soul enters into contemplation before that sanctuary where thecelebration of love takes place.
There should be flashes of light athwart such houses. The joy whichthey contain ought to make its escape through the stones of the wallsin brilliancy, and vaguely illuminate the gloom. It is impossible thatthis sacred and fatal festival should not give off a celestial radianceto the infinite. Love is the sublime crucible wherein the fusion of theman and the woman takes place; the being one, the being triple, thebeing final, the human trinity proceeds from it. This birth of twosouls into one, ought to be an emotion for the gloom. The lover is thepriest; the ravished virgin is terrified. Something of that joy ascendsto God. Where true marriage is, that is to say, where there is love,the ideal enters in. A nuptial bed makes a nook of dawn amid theshadows. If it were given to the eye of the flesh to scan theformidable and charming visions of the upper life, it is probable thatwe should behold the forms of night, the winged unknowns, the bluepassers of the invisible, bend down, a throng of sombre heads, aroundthe luminous house, satisfied, showering benedictions, pointing out toeach other the virgin wife gently alarmed, sweetly terrified, andbearing the reflection of human bliss upon their divine countenances.If at that supreme hour, the wedded pair, dazzled with voluptuousnessand believing themselves alone, were to listen, they would hear intheir chamber a confused rustling of wings. Perfect happiness implies amutual understanding with the angels. That dark little chamber has allheaven for its ceiling. When two mouths, rendered sacred by love,approach to create, it is impossible that there should not be, abovethat ineffable kiss, a quivering throughout the immense mystery ofstars.
These felicities are the true ones. There is no joy outside of thesejoys. Love is the only ecstasy. All the rest weeps.
To love, or to have loved,—this suffices. Demand nothing more. There isno other pearl to be found in the shadowy folds of life. To love is afulfilment.



CHAPTER III—THE INSEPARABLE

What had become of Jean Valjean?
Immediately after having laughed, at Cosette’s graceful command, whenno one was paying any heed to him, Jean Valjean had risen and hadgained the antechamber unperceived. This was the very room which, eightmonths before, he had entered black with mud, with blood and powder,bringing back the grandson to the grandfather. The old wainscoting wasgarlanded with foliage and flowers; the musicians were seated on thesofa on which they had laid Marius down. Basque, in a black coat,knee-breeches, white stockings and white gloves, was arranging rosesround all of the dishes that were to be served. Jean Valjean pointed tohis arm in its sling, charged Basque to explain his absence, and wentaway.
The long windows of the dining-room opened on the street. Jean Valjeanstood for several minutes, erect and motionless in the darkness,beneath those radiant windows. He listened. The confused sounds of thebanquet reached his ear. He heard the loud, commanding tones of thegrandfather, the violins, the clatter of the plates, the bursts oflaughter, and through all that merry uproar, he distinguished Cosette’ssweet and joyous voice.
He quitted the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, and returned to the Rue del’Homme Armé.
In order to return thither, he took the Rue Saint-Louis, the RueCulture-Sainte-Catherine, and the Blancs-Manteaux; it was a littlelonger, but it was the road through which, for the last three months,he had become accustomed to pass every day on his way from the Rue del’Homme Armé to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, in order to avoid theobstructions and the mud in the Rue Vieille-du-Temple.
This road, through which Cosette had passed, excluded for him allpossibility of any other itinerary.
Jean Valjean entered his lodgings. He lighted his candle and mountedthe stairs. The apartment was empty. Even Toussaint was no longerthere. Jean Valjean’s step made more noise than usual in the chambers.All the cupboards stood open. He penetrated to Cosette’s bedroom. Therewere no sheets on the bed. The pillow, covered with ticking, andwithout a case or lace, was laid on the blankets folded up on the footof the mattress, whose covering was visible, and on which no one wasever to sleep again. All the little feminine objects which Cosette wasattached to had been carried away; nothing remained except the heavyfurniture and the four walls. Toussaint’s bed was despoiled in likemanner. One bed only was made up, and seemed to be waiting some one,and this was Jean Valjean’s bed.
Jean Valjean looked at the walls, closed some of the cupboard doors,and went and came from one room to another.
Then he sought his own chamber once more, and set his candle on atable.
He had disengaged his arm from the sling, and he used his right hand asthough it did not hurt him.
He approached his bed, and his eyes rested, was it by chance? was itintentionally? on the _inseparable_ of which Cosette had been jealous,on the little portmanteau which never left him. On his arrival in theRue de l’Homme Armé, on the 4th of June, he had deposited it on a roundtable near the head of his bed. He went to this table with a sort ofvivacity, took a key from his pocket, and opened the valise.
From it he slowly drew forth the garments in which, ten years before,Cosette had quitted Montfermeil; first the little gown, then the blackfichu, then the stout, coarse child’s shoes which Cosette might almosthave worn still, so tiny were her feet, then the fustian bodice, whichwas very thick, then the knitted petticoat, next the apron withpockets, then the woollen stockings. These stockings, which stillpreserved the graceful form of a tiny leg, were no longer than JeanValjean’s hand. All this was black of hue. It was he who had broughtthose garments to Montfermeil for her. As he removed them from thevalise, he laid them on the bed. He fell to thinking. He called upmemories. It was in winter, in a very cold month of December, she wasshivering, half-naked, in rags, her poor little feet were all red intheir wooden shoes. He, Jean Valjean, had made her abandon those ragsto clothe herself in these mourning habiliments. The mother must havefelt pleased in her grave, to see her daughter wearing mourning forher, and, above all, to see that she was properly clothed, and that shewas warm. He thought of that forest of Montfermeil; they had traversedit together, Cosette and he; he thought of what the weather had been,of the leafless trees, of the wood destitute of birds, of the sunlesssky; it mattered not, it was charming. He arranged the tiny garments onthe bed, the fichu next to the petticoat, the stockings beside theshoes, and he looked at them, one after the other. She was no tallerthan that, she had her big doll in her arms, she had put her louis d’orin the pocket of that apron, she had laughed, they walked hand in hand,she had no one in the world but him.
Then his venerable, white head fell forward on the bed, that stoicalold heart broke, his face was engulfed, so to speak, in Cosette’sgarments, and if any one had passed up the stairs at that moment, hewould have heard frightful sobs.



CHAPTER IV—THE IMMORTAL LIVER 68

The old and formidable struggle, of which we have already witnessed somany phases, began once more.
Jacob struggled with the angel but one night. Alas! how many times havewe beheld Jean Valjean seized bodily by his conscience, in thedarkness, and struggling desperately against it!
Unheard-of conflict! At certain moments the foot slips; at othermoments the ground crumbles away underfoot. How many times had thatconscience, mad for the good, clasped and overthrown him! How manytimes had the truth set her knee inexorably upon his breast! How manytimes, hurled to earth by the light, had he begged for mercy! How manytimes had that implacable spark, lighted within him, and upon him bythe Bishop, dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind! Howmany times had he risen to his feet in the combat, held fast to therock, leaning against sophism, dragged in the dust, now getting theupper hand of his conscience, again overthrown by it! How many times,after an equivoque, after the specious and treacherous reasoning ofegotism, had he heard his irritated conscience cry in his ear: “A trip!you wretch!” How many times had his refractory thoughts rattledconvulsively in his throat, under the evidence of duty! Resistance toGod. Funereal sweats. What secret wounds which he alone felt bleed!What excoriations in his lamentable existence! How many times he hadrisen bleeding, bruised, broken, enlightened, despair in his heart,serenity in his soul! and, vanquished, he had felt himself theconqueror. And, after having dislocated, broken, and rent hisconscience with red-hot pincers, it had said to him, as it stood overhim, formidable, luminous, and tranquil: “Now, go in peace!”

But on emerging from so melancholy a conflict, what a lugubrious peace,alas!
Nevertheless, that night Jean Valjean felt that he was passing throughhis final combat.
A heart-rending question presented itself.
Predestinations are not all direct; they do not open out in a straightavenue before the predestined man; they have blind courts, impassablealleys, obscure turns, disturbing crossroads offering the choice ofmany ways. Jean Valjean had halted at that moment at the most perilousof these crossroads.
He had come to the supreme crossing of good and evil. He had thatgloomy intersection beneath his eyes. On this occasion once more, ashad happened to him already in other sad vicissitudes, two roads openedout before him, the one tempting, the other alarming.
Which was he to take?
He was counselled to the one which alarmed him by that mysterious indexfinger which we all perceive whenever we fix our eyes on the darkness.
Once more, Jean Valjean had the choice between the terrible port andthe smiling ambush.
Is it then true? the soul may recover; but not fate. Frightful thing!an incurable destiny!
This is the problem which presented itself to him:
In what manner was Jean Valjean to behave in relation to the happinessof Cosette and Marius? It was he who had willed that happiness, it washe who had brought it about; he had, himself, buried it in hisentrails, and at that moment, when he reflected on it, he was able toenjoy the sort of satisfaction which an armorer would experience onrecognizing his factory mark on a knife, on withdrawing it, allsmoking, from his own breast.
Cosette had Marius, Marius possessed Cosette. They had everything, evenriches. And this was his doing.
But what was he, Jean Valjean, to do with this happiness, now that itexisted, now that it was there? Should he force himself on thishappiness? Should he treat it as belonging to him? No doubt, Cosettedid belong to another; but should he, Jean Valjean, retain of Cosetteall that he could retain? Should he remain the sort of father, halfseen but respected, which he had hitherto been? Should he, withoutsaying a word, bring his past to that future? Should he present himselfthere, as though he had a right, and should he seat himself, veiled, atthat luminous fireside? Should he take those innocent hands into histragic hands, with a smile? Should he place upon the peaceful fender ofthe Gillenormand drawing-room those feet of his, which dragged behindthem the disgraceful shadow of the law? Should he enter intoparticipation in the fair fortunes of Cosette and Marius? Should herender the obscurity on his brow and the cloud upon theirs still moredense? Should he place his catastrophe as a third associate in theirfelicity? Should he continue to hold his peace? In a word, should he bethe sinister mute of destiny beside these two happy beings?
We must have become habituated to fatality and to encounters with it,in order to have the daring to raise our eyes when certain questionsappear to us in all their horrible nakedness. Good or evil standsbehind this severe interrogation point. What are you going to do?demands the sphinx.
This habit of trial Jean Valjean possessed. He gazed intently at thesphinx.
He examined the pitiless problem under all its aspects.
Cosette, that charming existence, was the raft of this shipwreck. Whatwas he to do? To cling fast to it, or to let go his hold?
If he clung to it, he should emerge from disaster, he should ascendagain into the sunlight, he should let the bitter water drip from hisgarments and his hair, he was saved, he should live.
And if he let go his hold?
Then the abyss.
Thus he took sad council with his thoughts. Or, to speak morecorrectly, he fought; he kicked furiously internally, now against hiswill, now against his conviction.
Happily for Jean Valjean that he had been able to weep. That relievedhim, possibly. But the beginning was savage. A tempest, more furiousthan the one which had formerly driven him to Arras, broke loose withinhim. The past surged up before him facing the present; he compared themand sobbed. The silence of tears once opened, the despairing manwrithed.
He felt that he had been stopped short.
Alas! in this fight to the death between our egotism and our duty, whenwe thus retreat step by step before our immutable ideal, bewildered,furious, exasperated at having to yield, disputing the ground, hopingfor a possible flight, seeking an escape, what an abrupt and sinisterresistance does the foot of the wall offer in our rear!
To feel the sacred shadow which forms an obstacle!
The invisible inexorable, what an obsession!
Then, one is never done with conscience. Make your choice, Brutus; makeyour choice, Cato. It is fathomless, since it is God. One flings intothat well the labor of one’s whole life, one flings in one’s fortune,one flings in one’s riches, one flings in one’s success, one flings inone’s liberty or fatherland, one flings in one’s well-being, one flingsin one’s repose, one flings in one’s joy! More! more! more! Empty thevase! tip the urn! One must finish by flinging in one’s heart.
Somewhere in the fog of the ancient hells, there is a tun like that.
Is not one pardonable, if one at last refuses! Can the inexhaustiblehave any right? Are not chains which are endless above human strength?Who would blame Sisyphus and Jean Valjean for saying: “It is enough!”

The obedience of matter is limited by friction; is there no limit tothe obedience of the soul? If perpetual motion is impossible, canperpetual self-sacrifice be exacted?
The first step is nothing, it is the last which is difficult. What wasthe Champmathieu affair in comparison with Cosette’s marriage and ofthat which it entailed? What is a re-entrance into the galleys,compared to entrance into the void?
Oh, first step that must be descended, how sombre art thou! Oh, secondstep, how black art thou!
How could he refrain from turning aside his head this time?
Martyrdom is sublimation, corrosive sublimation. It is a torture whichconsecrates. One can consent to it for the first hour; one seatsoneself on the throne of glowing iron, one places on one’s head thecrown of hot iron, one accepts the globe of red hot iron, one takes thesceptre of red hot iron, but the mantle of flame still remains to bedonned, and comes there not a moment when the miserable flesh revoltsand when one abdicates from suffering?
At length, Jean Valjean entered into the peace of exhaustion.
He weighed, he reflected, he considered the alternatives, themysterious balance of light and darkness.
Should he impose his galleys on those two dazzling children, or shouldhe consummate his irremediable engulfment by himself? On one side laythe sacrifice of Cosette, on the other that of himself.
At what solution should he arrive? What decision did he come to?
What resolution did he take? What was his own inward definitiveresponse to the unbribable interrogatory of fatality? What door did hedecide to open? Which side of his life did he resolve upon closing andcondemning? Among all the unfathomable precipices which surrounded him,which was his choice? What extremity did he accept? To which of thegulfs did he nod his head?
His dizzy reverie lasted all night long.
He remained there until daylight, in the same attitude, bent doubleover that bed, prostrate beneath the enormity of fate, crushed,perchance, alas! with clenched fists, with arms outspread at rightangles, like a man crucified who has been un-nailed, and flung facedown on the earth. There he remained for twelve hours, the twelve longhours of a long winter’s night, ice-cold, without once raising hishead, and without uttering a word. He was as motionless as a corpse,while his thoughts wallowed on the earth and soared, now like thehydra, now like the eagle. Any one to behold him thus motionless wouldhave pronounced him dead; all at once he shuddered convulsively, andhis mouth, glued to Cosette’s garments, kissed them; then it could beseen that he was alive.
Who could see? Since Jean Valjean was alone, and there was no onethere.
The One who is in the shadows.



BOOK SEVENTH—THE LAST DRAUGHT FROM THE CUP


  Enlarge
Last Drop from the Cup  5b7-1-last-drop



CHAPTER I—THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN

The days that follow weddings are solitary. People respect themeditations of the happy pair. And also, their tardy slumbers, to somedegree. The tumult of visits and congratulations only begins later on.On the morning of the 17th of February, it was a little past middaywhen Basque, with napkin and feather-duster under his arm, busy insetting his antechamber to rights, heard a light tap at the door. Therehad been no ring, which was discreet on such a day. Basque opened thedoor, and beheld M. Fauchelevent. He introduced him into thedrawing-room, still encumbered and topsy-turvy, and which bore the airof a field of battle after the joys of the preceding evening.
“_Dame_, sir,” remarked Basque, “we all woke up late.”

“Is your master up?” asked Jean Valjean.
“How is Monsieur’s arm?” replied Basque.
“Better. Is your master up?”

“Which one? the old one or the new one?”

“Monsieur Pontmercy.”

“Monsieur le Baron,” said Basque, drawing himself up.
A man is a Baron most of all to his servants. He counts for somethingwith them; they are what a philosopher would call, bespattered with thetitle, and that flatters them. Marius, be it said in passing, amilitant republican as he had proved, was now a Baron in spite ofhimself. A small revolution had taken place in the family in connectionwith this title. It was now M. Gillenormand who clung to it, and Mariuswho detached himself from it. But Colonel Pontmercy had written: “Myson will bear my title.” Marius obeyed. And then, Cosette, in whom thewoman was beginning to dawn, was delighted to be a Baroness.
“Monsieur le Baron?” repeated Basque. “I will go and see. I will tellhim that M. Fauchelevent is here.”

“No. Do not tell him that it is I. Tell him that some one wishes tospeak to him in private, and mention no name.”

“Ah!” ejaculated Basque.
“I wish to surprise him.”

“Ah!” ejaculated Basque once more, emitting his second “ah!” as anexplanation of the first.
And he left the room.
Jean Valjean remained alone.
The drawing-room, as we have just said, was in great disorder. Itseemed as though, by lending an ear, one might still hear the vaguenoise of the wedding. On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowerswhich had fallen from garlands and head-dresses. The wax candles,burned to stumps, added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of thechandeliers. Not a single piece of furniture was in its place. In thecorners, three or four armchairs, drawn close together in a circle, hadthe appearance of continuing a conversation. The whole effect wascheerful. A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast. It has beena happy thing. On the chairs in disarray, among those fading flowers,beneath those extinct lights, people have thought of joy. The sun hadsucceeded to the chandelier, and made its way gayly into thedrawing-room.
Several minutes elapsed. Jean Valjean stood motionless on the spotwhere Basque had left him. He was very pale. His eyes were hollow, andso sunken in his head by sleeplessness that they nearly disappeared intheir orbits. His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that hasbeen up all night. The elbows were whitened with the down which thefriction of cloth against linen leaves behind it.
Jean Valjean stared at the window outlined on the polished floor at hisfeet by the sun.
There came a sound at the door, and he raised his eyes.
Marius entered, his head well up, his mouth smiling, an indescribablelight on his countenance, his brow expanded, his eyes triumphant. Hehad not slept either.
“It is you, father!” he exclaimed, on catching sight of Jean Valjean;“that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air! But you have cometoo early. It is only half past twelve. Cosette is asleep.”

That word: “Father,” said to M. Fauchelevent by Marius, signified:supreme felicity. There had always existed, as the reader knows, alofty wall, a coldness and a constraint between them; ice which must bebroken or melted. Marius had reached that point of intoxication whenthe wall was lowered, when the ice dissolved, and when M. Faucheleventwas to him, as to Cosette, a father.
He continued: his words poured forth, as is the peculiarity of divineparoxysms of joy.
“How glad I am to see you! If you only knew how we missed youyesterday! Good morning, father. How is your hand? Better, is it not?”

And, satisfied with the favorable reply which he had made to himself,he pursued:
“We have both been talking about you. Cosette loves you so dearly! Youmust not forget that you have a chamber here, We want nothing more todo with the Rue de l’Homme Armé. We will have no more of it at all. Howcould you go to live in a street like that, which is sickly, which isdisagreeable, which is ugly, which has a barrier at one end, where oneis cold, and into which one cannot enter? You are to come and installyourself here. And this very day. Or you will have to deal withCosette. She means to lead us all by the nose, I warn you. You haveyour own chamber here, it is close to ours, it opens on the garden; thetrouble with the clock has been attended to, the bed is made, it is allready, you have only to take possession of it. Near your bed Cosettehas placed a huge, old, easy-chair covered with Utrecht velvet and shehas said to it: ‘Stretch out your arms to him.’ A nightingale comes tothe clump of acacias opposite your windows, every spring. In two monthsmore you will have it. You will have its nest on your left and ours onyour right. By night it will sing, and by day Cosette will prattle.Your chamber faces due South. Cosette will arrange your books for you,your Voyages of Captain Cook and the other,—Vancouver’s and all youraffairs. I believe that there is a little valise to which you areattached, I have fixed upon a corner of honor for that. You haveconquered my grandfather, you suit him. We will live together. Do youplay whist? you will overwhelm my grandfather with delight if you playwhist. It is you who shall take Cosette to walk on the days when I amat the courts, you shall give her your arm, you know, as you used to,in the Luxembourg. We are absolutely resolved to be happy. And youshall be included in it, in our happiness, do you hear, father? Come,will you breakfast with us to-day?”

“Sir,” said Jean Valjean, “I have something to say to you. I am anex-convict.”

The limit of shrill sounds perceptible can be overleaped, as well inthe case of the mind as in that of the ear. These words: “I am anex-convict,” proceeding from the mouth of M. Fauchelevent and enteringthe ear of Marius overshot the possible. It seemed to him thatsomething had just been said to him; but he did not know what. He stoodwith his mouth wide open.
Then he perceived that the man who was addressing him was frightful.Wholly absorbed in his own dazzled state, he had not, up to thatmoment, observed the other man’s terrible pallor.
Jean Valjean untied the black cravat which supported his right arm,unrolled the linen from around his hand, bared his thumb and showed itto Marius.
“There is nothing the matter with my hand,” said he.
Marius looked at the thumb.
“There has not been anything the matter with it,” went on Jean Valjean.
There was, in fact, no trace of any injury.
Jean Valjean continued:
“It was fitting that I should be absent from your marriage. I absentedmyself as much as was in my power. So I invented this injury in orderthat I might not commit a forgery, that I might not introduce a flawinto the marriage documents, in order that I might escape fromsigning.”

Marius stammered.
“What is the meaning of this?”

“The meaning of it is,” replied Jean Valjean, “that I have been in thegalleys.”

“You are driving me mad!” exclaimed Marius in terror.
“Monsieur Pontmercy,” said Jean Valjean, “I was nineteen years in thegalleys. For theft. Then, I was condemned for life for theft, for asecond offence. At the present moment, I have broken my ban.”

In vain did Marius recoil before the reality, refuse the fact, resistthe evidence, he was forced to give way. He began to understand, and,as always happens in such cases, he understood too much. An inwardshudder of hideous enlightenment flashed through him; an idea whichmade him quiver traversed his mind. He caught a glimpse of a wretcheddestiny for himself in the future.
“Say all, say all!” he cried. “You are Cosette’s father!”

And he retreated a couple of paces with a movement of indescribablehorror.
Jean Valjean elevated his head with so much majesty of attitude that heseemed to grow even to the ceiling.
“It is necessary that you should believe me here, sir; although ouroath to others may not be received in law . . .”

Here he paused, then, with a sort of sovereign and sepulchralauthority, he added, articulating slowly, and emphasizing thesyllables:
“. . . You will believe me. I the father of Cosette! before God, no.Monsieur le Baron Pontmercy, I am a peasant of Faverolles. I earned myliving by pruning trees. My name is not Fauchelevent, but Jean Valjean.I am not related to Cosette. Reassure yourself.”

Marius stammered:
“Who will prove that to me?”

“I. Since I tell you so.”

Marius looked at the man. He was melancholy yet tranquil. No lie couldproceed from such a calm. That which is icy is sincere. The truth couldbe felt in that chill of the tomb.
“I believe you,” said Marius.
Jean Valjean bent his head, as though taking note of this, andcontinued:
“What am I to Cosette? A passer-by. Ten years ago, I did not know thatshe was in existence. I love her, it is true. One loves a child whomone has seen when very young, being old oneself. When one is old, onefeels oneself a grandfather towards all little children. You may, itseems to me, suppose that I have something which resembles a heart. Shewas an orphan. Without either father or mother. She needed me. That iswhy I began to love her. Children are so weak that the first comer,even a man like me, can become their protector. I have fulfilled thisduty towards Cosette. I do not think that so slight a thing can becalled a good action; but if it be a good action, well, say that I havedone it. Register this attenuating circumstance. To-day, Cosette passesout of my life; our two roads part. Henceforth, I can do nothing forher. She is Madame Pontmercy. Her providence has changed. And Cosettegains by the change. All is well. As for the six hundred thousandfrancs, you do not mention them to me, but I forestall your thought,they are a deposit. How did that deposit come into my hands? What doesthat matter? I restore the deposit. Nothing more can be demanded of me.I complete the restitution by announcing my true name. That concernsme. I have a reason for desiring that you should know who I am.”

And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face.
All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent. Certaingusts of destiny produce these billows in our souls.
We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within usis dispersed; we say the first things that occur to us, which are notalways precisely those which should be said. There are suddenrevelations which one cannot bear, and which intoxicate like balefulwine. Marius was stupefied by the novel situation which presenteditself to him, to the point of addressing that man almost like a personwho was angry with him for this avowal.
“But why,” he exclaimed, “do you tell me all this? Who forces you to doso? You could have kept your secret to yourself. You are neitherdenounced, nor tracked nor pursued. You have a reason for wantonlymaking such a revelation. Conclude. There is something more. In whatconnection do you make this confession? What is your motive?”

“My motive?” replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that onewould have said that he was talking to himself rather than to Marius.“From what motive, in fact, has this convict just said ‘I am aconvict’? Well, yes! the motive is strange. It is out of honesty. Stay,the unfortunate point is that I have a thread in my heart, which keepsme fast. It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularlysolid. All life falls in ruin around one; one resists. Had I been ableto tear out that thread, to break it, to undo the knot or to cut it, togo far away, I should have been safe. I had only to go away; there arediligences in the Rue Bouloy; you are happy; I am going. I have triedto break that thread, I have jerked at it, it would not break, I toremy heart with it. Then I said: ‘I cannot live anywhere else than here.’I must stay. Well, yes, you are right, I am a fool, why not simplyremain here? You offer me a chamber in this house, Madame Pontmercy issincerely attached to me, she said to the armchair: ‘Stretch out yourarms to him,’ your grandfather demands nothing better than to have me,I suit him, we shall live together, and take our meals in common, Ishall give Cosette my arm . . . Madame Pontmercy, excuse me, it is ahabit, we shall have but one roof, one table, one fire, the samechimney-corner in winter, the same promenade in summer, that is joy,that is happiness, that is everything. We shall live as one family. Onefamily!”

At that word, Jean Valjean became wild. He folded his arms, glared atthe floor beneath his feet as though he would have excavated an abysstherein, and his voice suddenly rose in thundering tones:
“As one family! No. I belong to no family. I do not belong to yours. Ido not belong to any family of men. In houses where people are amongthemselves, I am superfluous. There are families, but there is nothingof the sort for me. I am an unlucky wretch; I am left outside. Did Ihave a father and mother? I almost doubt it. On the day when I gavethat child in marriage, all came to an end. I have seen her happy, andthat she is with a man whom she loves, and that there exists here akind old man, a household of two angels, and all joys in that house,and that it was well, I said to myself: ‘Enter thou not.’ I could havelied, it is true, have deceived you all, and remained MonsieurFauchelevent. So long as it was for her, I could lie; but now it wouldbe for myself, and I must not. It was sufficient for me to hold mypeace, it is true, and all would go on. You ask me what has forced meto speak? a very odd thing; my conscience. To hold my peace was veryeasy, however. I passed the night in trying to persuade myself to it;you questioned me, and what I have just said to you is so extraordinarythat you have the right to do it; well, yes, I have passed the night inalleging reasons to myself, and I gave myself very good reasons, I havedone what I could. But there are two things in which I have notsucceeded; in breaking the thread that holds me fixed, riveted andsealed here by the heart, or in silencing some one who speaks softly tome when I am alone. That is why I have come hither to tell youeverything this morning. Everything or nearly everything. It is uselessto tell you that which concerns only myself; I keep that to myself. Youknow the essential points. So I have taken my mystery and have broughtit to you. And I have disembowelled my secret before your eyes. It wasnot a resolution that was easy to take. I struggled all night long. Ah!you think that I did not tell myself that this was no Champmathieuaffair, that by concealing my name I was doing no one any injury, thatthe name of Fauchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself,out of gratitude for a service rendered to him, and that I mightassuredly keep it, and that I should be happy in that chamber which youoffer me, that I should not be in any one’s way, that I should be in myown little corner, and that, while you would have Cosette, I shouldhave the idea that I was in the same house with her. Each one of uswould have had his share of happiness. If I continued to be MonsieurFauchelevent, that would arrange everything. Yes, with the exception ofmy soul. There was joy everywhere upon my surface, but the bottom of mysoul remained black. It is not enough to be happy, one must be content.Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent, thus I should haveconcealed my true visage, thus, in the presence of your expansion, Ishould have had an enigma, thus, in the midst of your full noonday, Ishould have had shadows, thus, without crying ‘’ware,’ I should havesimply introduced the galleys to your fireside, I should have taken myseat at your table with the thought that if you knew who I was, youwould drive me from it, I should have allowed myself to be served bydomestics who, had they known, would have said: ‘How horrible!’ Ishould have touched you with my elbow, which you have a right todislike, I should have filched your clasps of the hand! There wouldhave existed in your house a division of respect between venerablewhite locks and tainted white locks; at your most intimate hours, whenall hearts thought themselves open to the very bottom to all the rest,when we four were together, your grandfather, you two and myself, astranger would have been present! I should have been side by side withyou in your existence, having for my only care not to disarrange thecover of my dreadful pit. Thus, I, a dead man, should have thrustmyself upon you who are living beings. I should have condemned her tomyself forever. You and Cosette and I would have had all three of ourheads in the green cap! Does it not make you shudder? I am only themost crushed of men; I should have been the most monstrous of men. AndI should have committed that crime every day! And I should have hadthat face of night upon my visage every day! every day! And I shouldhave communicated to you a share in my taint every day! every day! toyou, my dearly beloved, my children, to you, my innocent creatures! Isit nothing to hold one’s peace? is it a simple matter to keep silence?No, it is not simple. There is a silence which lies. And my lie, and myfraud and my indignity, and my cowardice and my treason and my crime, Ishould have drained drop by drop, I should have spit it out, thenswallowed it again, I should have finished at midnight and have begunagain at midday, and my ‘good morning’ would have lied, and my ‘goodnight’ would have lied, and I should have slept on it, I should haveeaten it, with my bread, and I should have looked Cosette in the face,and I should have responded to the smile of the angel by the smile ofthe damned soul, and I should have been an abominable villain! Whyshould I do it? in order to be happy. In order to be happy. Have I theright to be happy? I stand outside of life, sir.”

Jean Valjean paused. Marius listened. Such chains of ideas and ofanguishes cannot be interrupted. Jean Valjean lowered his voice oncemore, but it was no longer a dull voice—it was a sinister voice.
“You ask why I speak? I am neither denounced, nor pursued, nor tracked,you say. Yes! I am denounced! yes! I am tracked! By whom? By myself. Itis I who bar the passage to myself, and I drag myself, and I pushmyself, and I arrest myself, and I execute myself, and when one holdsoneself, one is firmly held.”

And, seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck andextending it towards Marius:
“Do you see that fist?” he continued. “Don’t you think that it holdsthat collar in such a wise as not to release it? Well! conscience isanother grasp! If one desires to be happy, sir, one must neverunderstand duty; for, as soon as one has comprehended it, it isimplacable. One would say that it punished you for comprehending it;but no, it rewards you; for it places you in a hell, where you feel Godbeside you. One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is atpeace with himself.”

And, with a poignant accent, he added:
“Monsieur Pontmercy, this is not common sense, I am an honest man. Itis by degrading myself in your eyes that I elevate myself in my own.This has happened to me once before, but it was less painful then; itwas a mere nothing. Yes, an honest man. I should not be so if, throughmy fault, you had continued to esteem me; now that you despise me, I amso. I have that fatality hanging over me that, not being able to everhave anything but stolen consideration, that consideration humiliatesme, and crushes me inwardly, and, in order that I may respect myself,it is necessary that I should be despised. Then I straighten up again.I am a galley-slave who obeys his conscience. I know well that that ismost improbable. But what would you have me do about it? it is thefact. I have entered into engagements with myself; I keep them. Thereare encounters which bind us, there are chances which involve us induties. You see, Monsieur Pontmercy, various things have happened to mein the course of my life.”

Again Jean Valjean paused, swallowing his saliva with an effort, asthough his words had a bitter after-taste, and then he went on:
“When one has such a horror hanging over one, one has not the right tomake others share it without their knowledge, one has not the right tomake them slip over one’s own precipice without their perceiving it,one has not the right to let one’s red blouse drag upon them, one hasno right to slyly encumber with one’s misery the happiness of others.It is hideous to approach those who are healthy, and to touch them inthe dark with one’s ulcer. In spite of the fact that Fauchelevent lentme his name, I have no right to use it; he could give it to me, but Icould not take it. A name is an _I_. You see, sir, that I have thoughtsomewhat, I have read a little, although I am a peasant; and you seethat I express myself properly. I understand things. I have procuredmyself an education. Well, yes, to abstract a name and to place oneselfunder it is dishonest. Letters of the alphabet can be filched, like apurse or a watch. To be a false signature in flesh and blood, to be aliving false key, to enter the house of honest people by picking theirlock, never more to look straightforward, to forever eye askance, to beinfamous within the _I_, no! no! no! no! no! It is better to suffer, tobleed, to weep, to tear one’s skin from the flesh with one’s nails, topass nights writhing in anguish, to devour oneself body and soul. Thatis why I have just told you all this. Wantonly, as you say.”

He drew a painful breath, and hurled this final word:
“In days gone by, I stole a loaf of bread in order to live; to-day, inorder to live, I will not steal a name.”

“To live!” interrupted Marius. “You do not need that name in order tolive?”

“Ah! I understand the matter,” said Jean Valjean, raising and loweringhis head several times in succession.
A silence ensued. Both held their peace, each plunged in a gulf ofthoughts. Marius was sitting near a table and resting the corner of hismouth on one of his fingers, which was folded back. Jean Valjean waspacing to and fro. He paused before a mirror, and remained motionless.Then, as though replying to some inward course of reasoning, he said,as he gazed at the mirror, which he did not see:
“While, at present, I am relieved.”

He took up his march again, and walked to the other end of thedrawing-room. At the moment when he turned round, he perceived thatMarius was watching his walk. Then he said, with an inexpressibleintonation:
“I drag my leg a little. Now you understand why!”

Then he turned fully round towards Marius:
“And now, sir, imagine this: I have said nothing, I have remainedMonsieur Fauchelevent, I have taken my place in your house, I am one ofyou, I am in my chamber, I come to breakfast in the morning inslippers, in the evening all three of us go to the play, I accompanyMadame Pontmercy to the Tuileries, and to the Place Royale, we aretogether, you think me your equal; one fine day you are there, and I amthere, we are conversing, we are laughing; all at once, you hear avoice shouting this name: ‘Jean Valjean!’ and behold, that terriblehand, the police, darts from the darkness, and abruptly tears off mymask!”

Again he paused; Marius had sprung to his feet with a shudder. JeanValjean resumed:
“What do you say to that?”

Marius’ silence answered for him.
Jean Valjean continued:
“You see that I am right in not holding my peace. Be happy, be inheaven, be the angel of an angel, exist in the sun, be contenttherewith, and do not trouble yourself about the means which a poordamned wretch takes to open his breast and force his duty to comeforth; you have before you, sir, a wretched man.”

Marius slowly crossed the room, and, when he was quite close to JeanValjean, he offered the latter his hand.
But Marius was obliged to step up and take that hand which was notoffered, Jean Valjean let him have his own way, and it seemed to Mariusthat he pressed a hand of marble.
“My grandfather has friends,” said Marius; “I will procure yourpardon.”

“It is useless,” replied Jean Valjean. “I am believed to be dead, andthat suffices. The dead are not subjected to surveillance. They aresupposed to rot in peace. Death is the same thing as pardon.”

And, disengaging the hand which Marius held, he added, with a sort ofinexorable dignity:
“Moreover, the friend to whom I have recourse is the doing of my duty;and I need but one pardon, that of my conscience.”

At that moment, a door at the other end of the drawing-room openedgently half way, and in the opening Cosette’s head appeared. They sawonly her sweet face, her hair was in charming disorder, her eyelidswere still swollen with sleep. She made the movement of a bird, whichthrusts its head out of its nest, glanced first at her husband, then atJean Valjean, and cried to them with a smile, so that they seemed tobehold a smile at the heart of a rose:
“I will wager that you are talking politics. How stupid that is,instead of being with me!”

Jean Valjean shuddered.
“Cosette! . . .” stammered Marius.
And he paused. One would have said that they were two criminals.
Cosette, who was radiant, continued to gaze at both of them. There wassomething in her eyes like gleams of paradise.
“I have caught you in the very act,” said Cosette. “Just now, I heardmy father Fauchelevent through the door saying: ‘Conscience . . . doingmy duty . . .’ That is politics, indeed it is. I will not have it.People should not talk politics the very next day. It is not right.”

“You are mistaken. Cosette,” said Marius, “we are talking business. Weare discussing the best investment of your six hundred thousand francs. . .”

“That is not it at all,” interrupted Cosette. “I am coming. Doesanybody want me here?”

And, passing resolutely through the door, she entered the drawing-room.She was dressed in a voluminous white dressing-gown, with a thousandfolds and large sleeves which, starting from the neck, fell to herfeet. In the golden heavens of some ancient gothic pictures, there arethese charming sacks fit to clothe the angels.
She contemplated herself from head to foot in a long mirror, thenexclaimed, in an outburst of ineffable ecstasy:
“There was once a King and a Queen. Oh! how happy I am!”

That said, she made a curtsey to Marius and to Jean Valjean.
“There,” said she, “I am going to install myself near you in aneasy-chair, we breakfast in half an hour, you shall say anything youlike, I know well that men must talk, and I will be very good.”

Marius took her by the arm and said lovingly to her:
“We are talking business.”

“By the way,” said Cosette, “I have opened my window, a flock ofpierrots has arrived in the garden,—Birds, not maskers. To-day isAsh-Wednesday; but not for the birds.”

“I tell you that we are talking business, go, my little Cosette, leaveus alone for a moment. We are talking figures. That will bore you.”

“You have a charming cravat on this morning, Marius. You are verydandified, monseigneur. No, it will not bore me.”

“I assure you that it will bore you.”

“No. Since it is you. I shall not understand you, but I shall listen toyou. When one hears the voices of those whom one loves, one does notneed to understand the words that they utter. That we should be heretogether—that is all that I desire. I shall remain with you, bah!”

“You are my beloved Cosette! Impossible.”

“Impossible!”

“Yes.”

“Very good,” said Cosette. “I was going to tell you some news. I couldhave told you that your grandfather is still asleep, that your aunt isat mass, that the chimney in my father Fauchelevent’s room smokes, thatNicolette has sent for the chimney-sweep, that Toussaint and Nicolettehave already quarrelled, that Nicolette makes sport of Toussaint’sstammer. Well, you shall know nothing. Ah! it is impossible? you shallsee, gentlemen, that I, in my turn, can say: It is impossible. Then whowill be caught? I beseech you, my little Marius, let me stay here withyou two.”

“I swear to you, that it is indispensable that we should be alone.”

“Well, am I anybody?”

Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word. Cosette turned to him:
“In the first place, father, I want you to come and embrace me. What doyou mean by not saying anything instead of taking my part? who gave mesuch a father as that? You must perceive that my family life is veryunhappy. My husband beats me. Come, embrace me instantly.”

Jean Valjean approached.
Cosette turned toward Marius.
“As for you, I shall make a face at you.”

Then she presented her brow to Jean Valjean.
Jean Valjean advanced a step toward her.
Cosette recoiled.
“Father, you are pale. Does your arm hurt you?”

“It is well,” said Jean Valjean.
“Did you sleep badly?”

“No.”

“Are you sad?”

“No.”

“Embrace me if you are well, if you sleep well, if you are content, Iwill not scold you.”

And again she offered him her brow.
Jean Valjean dropped a kiss upon that brow whereon rested a celestialgleam.
“Smile.”

Jean Valjean obeyed. It was the smile of a spectre.
“Now, defend me against my husband.”

“Cosette! . . .” ejaculated Marius.
“Get angry, father. Say that I must stay. You can certainly talk beforeme. So you think me very silly. What you say is astonishing! business,placing money in a bank a great matter truly. Men make mysteries out ofnothing. I am very pretty this morning. Look at me, Marius.”

And with an adorable shrug of the shoulders, and an indescribablyexquisite pout, she glanced at Marius.
“I love you!” said Marius.
“I adore you!” said Cosette.
And they fell irresistibly into each other’s arms.
“Now,” said Cosette, adjusting a fold of her dressing-gown, with atriumphant little grimace, “I shall stay.”

“No, not that,” said Marius, in a supplicating tone. “We have to finishsomething.”

“Still no?”

Marius assumed a grave tone:
“I assure you, Cosette, that it is impossible.”

“Ah! you put on your man’s voice, sir. That is well, I go. You, father,have not upheld me. Monsieur my father, monsieur my husband, you aretyrants. I shall go and tell grandpapa. If you think that I am going toreturn and talk platitudes to you, you are mistaken. I am proud. Ishall wait for you now. You shall see, that it is you who are going tobe bored without me. I am going, it is well.”

And she left the room.
Two seconds later, the door opened once more, her fresh and rosy headwas again thrust between the two leaves, and she cried to them:
“I am very angry indeed.”

The door closed again, and the shadows descended once more.
It was as though a ray of sunlight should have suddenly traversed thenight, without itself being conscious of it.
Marius made sure that the door was securely closed.
“Poor Cosette!” he murmured, “when she finds out . . .”

At that word Jean Valjean trembled in every limb. He fixed on Marius abewildered eye.
“Cosette! oh yes, it is true, you are going to tell Cosette about this.That is right. Stay, I had not thought of that. One has the strengthfor one thing, but not for another. Sir, I conjure you, I entreat now,sir, give me your most sacred word of honor, that you will not tellher. Is it not enough that you should know it? I have been able to sayit myself without being forced to it, I could have told it to theuniverse, to the whole world,—it was all one to me. But she, she doesnot know what it is, it would terrify her. What, a convict! we shouldbe obliged to explain matters to her, to say to her: ‘He is a man whohas been in the galleys.’ She saw the chain-gang pass by one day. Oh!My God!” . . . He dropped into an armchair and hid his face in hishands.
His grief was not audible, but from the quivering of his shoulders itwas evident that he was weeping. Silent tears, terrible tears.
There is something of suffocation in the sob. He was seized with a sortof convulsion, he threw himself against the back of the chair as thoughto gain breath, letting his arms fall, and allowing Marius to see hisface inundated with tears, and Marius heard him murmur, so low that hisvoice seemed to issue from fathomless depths:
“Oh! would that I could die!”

“Be at your ease,” said Marius, “I will keep your secret for myselfalone.”

And, less touched, perhaps, than he ought to have been, but forced, forthe last hour, to familiarize himself with something as unexpected asit was dreadful, gradually beholding the convict superposed before hisvery eyes, upon M. Fauchelevent, overcome, little by little, by thatlugubrious reality, and led, by the natural inclination of thesituation, to recognize the space which had just been placed betweenthat man and himself, Marius added:
“It is impossible that I should not speak a word to you with regard tothe deposit which you have so faithfully and honestly remitted. That isan act of probity. It is just that some recompense should be bestowedon you. Fix the sum yourself, it shall be counted out to you. Do notfear to set it very high.”

“I thank you, sir,” replied Jean Valjean, gently.
He remained in thought for a moment, mechanically passing the tip ofhis fore-finger across his thumb-nail, then he lifted up his voice:
“All is nearly over. But one last thing remains for me . . .”

“What is it?”

Jean Valjean struggled with what seemed a last hesitation, and, withoutvoice, without breath, he stammered rather than said:
“Now that you know, do you think, sir, you, who are the master, that Iought not to see Cosette any more?”

“I think that would be better,” replied Marius coldly.
“I shall never see her more,” murmured Jean Valjean. And he directedhis steps towards the door.
He laid his hand on the knob, the latch yielded, the door opened. JeanValjean pushed it open far enough to pass through, stood motionless fora second, then closed the door again and turned to Marius.
He was no longer pale, he was livid. There were no longer any tears inhis eyes, but only a sort of tragic flame. His voice had regained astrange composure.
“Stay, sir,” he said. “If you will allow it, I will come to see her. Iassure you that I desire it greatly. If I had not cared to see Cosette,I should not have made to you the confession that I have made, I shouldhave gone away; but, as I desired to remain in the place where Cosetteis, and to continue to see her, I had to tell you about it honestly.You follow my reasoning, do you not? it is a matter easily understood.You see, I have had her with me for more than nine years. We livedfirst in that hut on the boulevard, then in the convent, then near theLuxembourg. That was where you saw her for the first time. You rememberher blue plush hat. Then we went to the Quartier des Invalides, wherethere was a railing on a garden, the Rue Plumet. I lived in a littleback court-yard, whence I could hear her piano. That was my life. Wenever left each other. That lasted for nine years and some months. Iwas like her own father, and she was my child. I do not know whetheryou understand, Monsieur Pontmercy, but to go away now, never to seeher again, never to speak to her again, to no longer have anything,would be hard. If you do not disapprove of it, I will come to seeCosette from time to time. I will not come often. I will not remainlong. You shall give orders that I am to be received in the littlewaiting-room. On the ground floor. I could enter perfectly well by theback door, but that might create surprise perhaps, and it would bebetter, I think, for me to enter by the usual door. Truly, sir, Ishould like to see a little more of Cosette. As rarely as you please.Put yourself in my place, I have nothing left but that. And then, wemust be cautious. If I no longer come at all, it would produce a badeffect, it would be considered singular. What I can do, by the way, isto come in the afternoon, when night is beginning to fall.”

“You shall come every evening,” said Marius, “and Cosette will bewaiting for you.”

“You are kind, sir,” said Jean Valjean.
Marius saluted Jean Valjean, happiness escorted despair to the door,and these two men parted.



CHAPTER II—THE OBSCURITIES WHICH A REVELATION CAN CONTAIN

Marius was quite upset.
The sort of estrangement which he had always felt towards the manbeside whom he had seen Cosette, was now explained to him. There wassomething enigmatic about that person, of which his instinct had warnedhim.
This enigma was the most hideous of disgraces, the galleys. This M.Fauchelevent was the convict Jean Valjean.
To abruptly find such a secret in the midst of one’s happinessresembles the discovery of a scorpion in a nest of turtledoves.
Was the happiness of Marius and Cosette thenceforth condemned to such aneighborhood? Was this an accomplished fact? Did the acceptance of thatman form a part of the marriage now consummated? Was there nothing tobe done?
Had Marius wedded the convict as well?
In vain may one be crowned with light and joy, in vain may one tastethe grand purple hour of life, happy love, such shocks would force eventhe archangel in his ecstasy, even the demigod in his glory, toshudder.
As is always the case in changes of view of this nature, Marius askedhimself whether he had nothing with which to reproach himself. Had hebeen wanting in divination? Had he been wanting in prudence? Had heinvoluntarily dulled his wits? A little, perhaps. Had he entered uponthis love affair, which had ended in his marriage to Cosette, withouttaking sufficient precautions to throw light upon the surroundings? Headmitted,—it is thus, by a series of successive admissions of ourselvesin regard to ourselves, that life amends us, little by little,—headmitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature, a sort ofinternal cloud peculiar to many organizations, and which, in paroxysmsof passion and sorrow, dilates as the temperature of the soul changes,and invades the entire man, to such a degree as to render him nothingmore than a conscience bathed in a mist. We have more than onceindicated this characteristic element of Marius’ individuality.
He recalled that, in the intoxication of his love, in the Rue Plumet,during those six or seven ecstatic weeks, he had not even spoken toCosette of that drama in the Gorbeau hovel, where the victim had takenup such a singular line of silence during the struggle and the ensuingflight. How had it happened that he had not mentioned this to Cosette?Yet it was so near and so terrible! How had it come to pass that he hadnot even named the Thénardiers, and, particularly, on the day when hehad encountered Éponine? He now found it almost difficult to explainhis silence of that time. Nevertheless, he could account for it. Herecalled his benumbed state, his intoxication with Cosette, loveabsorbing everything, that catching away of each other into the ideal,and perhaps also, like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingledwith this violent and charming state of the soul, a vague, dullinstinct impelling him to conceal and abolish in his memory thatredoubtable adventure, contact with which he dreaded, in which he didnot wish to play any part, his agency in which he had kept secret, andin which he could be neither narrator nor witness without being anaccuser.
Moreover, these few weeks had been a flash of lightning; there had beenno time for anything except love.
In short, having weighed everything, turned everything over in hismind, examined everything, whatever might have been the consequences ifhe had told Cosette about the Gorbeau ambush, even if he had discoveredthat Jean Valjean was a convict, would that have changed him, Marius?Would that have changed her, Cosette? Would he have drawn back? Wouldhe have adored her any the less? Would he have refrained from marryingher? No. Then there was nothing to regret, nothing with which he needreproach himself. All was well. There is a deity for those drunken menwho are called lovers. Marius blind, had followed the path which hewould have chosen had he been in full possession of his sight. Love hadbandaged his eyes, in order to lead him whither? To paradise.
But this paradise was henceforth complicated with an infernalaccompaniment.
Marius’ ancient estrangement towards this man, towards thisFauchelevent who had turned into Jean Valjean, was at present mingledwith horror.
In this horror, let us state, there was some pity, and even a certainsurprise.
This thief, this thief guilty of a second offence, had restored thatdeposit. And what a deposit! Six hundred thousand francs.
He alone was in the secret of that deposit. He might have kept it all,he had restored it all.
Moreover, he had himself revealed his situation. Nothing forced him tothis. If any one learned who he was, it was through himself. In thisavowal there was something more than acceptance of humiliation, therewas acceptance of peril. For a condemned man, a mask is not a mask, itis a shelter. A false name is security, and he had rejected that falsename. He, the galley-slave, might have hidden himself forever in anhonest family; he had withstood this temptation. And with what motive?Through a conscientious scruple. He himself explained this with theirresistible accents of truth. In short, whatever this Jean Valjeanmight be, he was, undoubtedly, a conscience which was awakening. Thereexisted some mysterious re-habilitation which had begun; and, to allappearances, scruples had for a long time already controlled this man.Such fits of justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgarnatures. An awakening of conscience is grandeur of soul.
Jean Valjean was sincere. This sincerity, visible, palpable,irrefragable, evident from the very grief that it caused him, renderedinquiries useless, and conferred authority on all that that man hadsaid.
Here, for Marius, there was a strange reversal of situations. Whatbreathed from M. Fauchelevent? distrust. What did Jean Valjean inspire?confidence.
In the mysterious balance of this Jean Valjean which the pensive Mariusstruck, he admitted the active principle, he admitted the passiveprinciple, and he tried to reach a balance.
But all this went on as in a storm. Marius, while endeavoring to form aclear idea of this man, and while pursuing Jean Valjean, so to speak,in the depths of his thought, lost him and found him again in a fatalmist.
The deposit honestly restored, the probity of the confession—these weregood. This produced a lightening of the cloud, then the cloud becameblack once more.
Troubled as were Marius’ memories, a shadow of them returned to him.
After all, what was that adventure in the Jondrette attic? Why had thatman taken to flight on the arrival of the police, instead of entering acomplaint?
Here Marius found the answer. Because that man was a fugitive fromjustice, who had broken his ban.
Another question: Why had that man come to the barricade?
For Marius now once more distinctly beheld that recollection which hadreappeared in his emotions like sympathetic ink at the application ofheat. This man had been in the barricade. He had not fought there. Whathad he come there for? In the presence of this question a spectresprang up and replied: “Javert.”

Marius recalled perfectly now that funereal sight of Jean Valjeandragging the pinioned Javert out of the barricade, and he still heardbehind the corner of the little Rue Mondétour that frightful pistolshot. Obviously, there was hatred between that police spy and thegalley-slave. The one was in the other’s way. Jean Valjean had gone tothe barricade for the purpose of revenging himself. He had arrivedlate. He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there. The Corsicanvendetta has penetrated to certain lower strata and has become the lawthere; it is so simple that it does not astonish souls which are buthalf turned towards good; and those hearts are so constituted that acriminal, who is in the path of repentance, may be scrupulous in thematter of theft and unscrupulous in the matter of vengeance. JeanValjean had killed Javert. At least, that seemed to be evident.
This was the final question, to be sure; but to this there was noreply. This question Marius felt like pincers. How had it come to passthat Jean Valjean’s existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long aperiod?
What melancholy sport of Providence was that which had placed thatchild in contact with that man? Are there then chains for two which areforged on high? and does God take pleasure in coupling the angel withthe demon? So a crime and an innocence can be room-mates in themysterious galleys of wretchedness? In that defiling of condemnedpersons which is called human destiny, can two brows pass side by side,the one ingenuous, the other formidable, the one all bathed in thedivine whiteness of dawn, the other forever blemished by the flash ofan eternal lightning? Who could have arranged that inexplicable pairingoff? In what manner, in consequence of what prodigy, had any communityof life been established between this celestial little creature andthat old criminal?
Who could have bound the lamb to the wolf, and, what was still moreincomprehensible, have attached the wolf to the lamb? For the wolfloved the lamb, for the fierce creature adored the feeble one, for,during the space of nine years, the angel had had the monster as herpoint of support. Cosette’s childhood and girlhood, her advent in thedaylight, her virginal growth towards life and light, had beensheltered by that hideous devotion. Here questions exfoliated, so tospeak, into innumerable enigmas, abysses yawned at the bottoms ofabysses, and Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean withoutbecoming dizzy. What was this man-precipice?
The old symbols of Genesis are eternal; in human society, such as itnow exists, and until a broader day shall effect a change in it, therewill always be two men, the one superior, the other subterranean; theone which is according to good is Abel; the other which is according toevil is Cain. What was this tender Cain? What was this ruffianreligiously absorbed in the adoration of a virgin, watching over her,rearing her, guarding her, dignifying her, and enveloping her, impureas he was himself, with purity?
What was that cesspool which had venerated that innocence to such apoint as not to leave upon it a single spot? What was this Jean Valjeaneducating Cosette? What was this figure of the shadows which had forits only object the preservation of the rising of a star from everyshadow and from every cloud?
That was Jean Valjean’s secret; that was also God’s secret.
In the presence of this double secret, Marius recoiled. The one, insome sort, reassured him as to the other. God was as visible in thisaffair as was Jean Valjean. God has his instruments. He makes use ofthe tool which he wills. He is not responsible to men. Do we know howGod sets about the work? Jean Valjean had labored over Cosette. He had,to some extent, made that soul. That was incontestable. Well, whatthen? The workman was horrible; but the work was admirable. Godproduces his miracles as seems good to him. He had constructed thatcharming Cosette, and he had employed Jean Valjean. It had pleased himto choose this strange collaborator for himself. What account have weto demand of him? Is this the first time that the dung-heap has aidedthe spring to create the rose?
Marius made himself these replies, and declared to himself that theywere good. He had not dared to press Jean Valjean on all the pointswhich we have just indicated, but he did not confess to himself that hedid not dare to do it. He adored Cosette, he possessed Cosette, Cosettewas splendidly pure. That was sufficient for him. What enlightenmentdid he need? Cosette was a light. Does light require enlightenment? Hehad everything; what more could he desire? All,—is not that enough?Jean Valjean’s personal affairs did not concern him.
And bending over the fatal shadow of that man, he clung fast,convulsively, to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch: “I amnothing to Cosette. Ten years ago I did not know that she was inexistence.”

Jean Valjean was a passer-by. He had said so himself. Well, he hadpassed. Whatever he was, his part was finished.
Henceforth, there remained Marius to fulfil the part of Providence toCosette. Cosette had sought the azure in a person like herself, in herlover, her husband, her celestial male. Cosette, as she took herflight, winged and transfigured, left behind her on the earth herhideous and empty chrysalis, Jean Valjean.
In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved, he always returned to acertain horror for Jean Valjean. A sacred horror, perhaps, for, as wehave just pointed out, he felt a _quid divinum_ in that man. But dowhat he would, and seek what extenuation he would, he was certainlyforced to fall back upon this: the man was a convict; that is to say, abeing who has not even a place in the social ladder, since he is lowerthan the very lowest rung. After the very last of men comes theconvict. The convict is no longer, so to speak, in the semblance of theliving. The law has deprived him of the entire quantity of humanity ofwhich it can deprive a man.
Marius, on penal questions, still held to the inexorable system, thoughhe was a democrat and he entertained all the ideas of the law on thesubject of those whom the law strikes. He had not yet accomplished allprogress, we admit. He had not yet come to distinguish between thatwhich is written by man and that which is written by God, between lawand right. He had not examined and weighed the right which man takes todispose of the irrevocable and the irreparable. He was not shocked bythe word _vindicte_. He found it quite simple that certain breaches ofthe written law should be followed by eternal suffering, and heaccepted, as the process of civilization, social damnation. He stillstood at this point, though safe to advance infallibly later on, sincehis nature was good, and, at bottom, wholly formed of latent progress.
In this stage of his ideas, Jean Valjean appeared to him hideous andrepulsive. He was a man reproved, he was the convict. That word was forhim like the sound of the trump on the Day of Judgment; and, afterhaving reflected upon Jean Valjean for a long time, his final gesturehad been to turn away his head. _Vade retro_.
Marius, if we must recognize and even insist upon the fact, whileinterrogating Jean Valjean to such a point that Jean Valjean had said:“You are confessing me,” had not, nevertheless, put to him two or threedecisive questions.
It was not that they had not presented themselves to his mind, but thathe had been afraid of them. The Jondrette attic? The barricade? Javert?Who knows where these revelations would have stopped? Jean Valjean didnot seem like a man who would draw back, and who knows whether Marius,after having urged him on, would not have himself desired to hold himback?
Has it not happened to all of us, in certain supreme conjunctures, tostop our ears in order that we may not hear the reply, after we haveasked a question? It is especially when one loves that one gives way tothese exhibitions of cowardice. It is not wise to question sinistersituations to the last point, particularly when the indissoluble sideof our life is fatally intermingled with them. What a terrible lightmight have proceeded from the despairing explanations of Jean Valjean,and who knows whether that hideous glare would not have darted forth asfar as Cosette? Who knows whether a sort of infernal glow would nothave lingered behind it on the brow of that angel? The spattering of alightning-flash is of the thunder also. Fatality has points of juncturewhere innocence itself is stamped with crime by the gloomy law of thereflections which give color. The purest figures may forever preservethe reflection of a horrible association. Rightly or wrongly, Mariushad been afraid. He already knew too much. He sought to dull his sensesrather than to gain further light.
In dismay he bore off Cosette in his arms and shut his eyes to JeanValjean.
That man was the night, the living and horrible night. How should hedare to seek the bottom of it? It is a terrible thing to interrogatethe shadow. Who knows what its reply will be? The dawn may be blackenedforever by it.
In this state of mind the thought that that man would, henceforth, comeinto any contact whatever with Cosette was a heartrending perplexity toMarius.
He now almost reproached himself for not having put those formidablequestions, before which he had recoiled, and from which an implacableand definitive decision might have sprung. He felt that he was toogood, too gentle, too weak, if we must say the word. This weakness hadled him to an imprudent concession. He had allowed himself to betouched. He had been in the wrong. He ought to have simply and purelyrejected Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean played the part of fire, and thatis what he should have done, and have freed his house from that man.
He was vexed with himself, he was angry with that whirlwind of emotionswhich had deafened, blinded, and carried him away. He was displeasedwith himself.
What was he to do now? Jean Valjean’s visits were profoundly repugnantto him. What was the use in having that man in his house? What did theman want? Here, he became dismayed, he did not wish to dig down, he didnot wish to penetrate deeply; he did not wish to sound himself. He hadpromised, he had allowed himself to be drawn into a promise; JeanValjean held his promise; one must keep one’s word even to a convict,above all to a convict. Still, his first duty was to Cosette. In short,he was carried away by the repugnance which dominated him.
Marius turned over all this confusion of ideas in his mind, passingfrom one to the other, and moved by all of them. Hence arose a profoundtrouble.
It was not easy for him to hide this trouble from Cosette, but love isa talent, and Marius succeeded in doing it.
However, without any apparent object, he questioned Cosette, who was ascandid as a dove is white and who suspected nothing; he talked of herchildhood and her youth, and he became more and more convinced thatthat convict had been everything good, paternal and respectable that aman can be towards Cosette. All that Marius had caught a glimpse of andhad surmised was real. That sinister nettle had loved and protectedthat lily.



BOOK EIGHTH—FADING AWAY OF THE TWILIGHT


  Enlarge
The Twilight Decline  5b8-1-decline



CHAPTER I—THE LOWER CHAMBER

On the following day, at nightfall, Jean Valjean knocked at thecarriage gate of the Gillenormand house. It was Basque who receivedhim. Basque was in the courtyard at the appointed hour, as though hehad received his orders. It sometimes happens that one says to aservant: “You will watch for Mr. So and So, when he arrives.”

Basque addressed Jean Valjean without waiting for the latter toapproach him:
“Monsieur le Baron has charged me to inquire whether monsieur desiresto go upstairs or to remain below?”

“I will remain below,” replied Jean Valjean.
Basque, who was perfectly respectful, opened the door of thewaiting-room and said:
“I will go and inform Madame.”

The room which Jean Valjean entered was a damp, vaulted room on theground floor, which served as a cellar on occasion, which opened on thestreet, was paved with red squares and was badly lighted by a gratedwindow.
This chamber was not one of those which are harassed by thefeather-duster, the pope’s head brush, and the broom. The dust restedtranquilly there. Persecution of the spiders was not organized there. Afine web, which spread far and wide, and was very black and ornamentedwith dead flies, formed a wheel on one of the window-panes. The room,which was small and low-ceiled, was furnished with a heap of emptybottles piled up in one corner.
The wall, which was daubed with an ochre yellow wash, was scaling offin large flakes. At one end there was a chimney-piece painted in blackwith a narrow shelf. A fire was burning there; which indicated thatJean Valjean’s reply: “I will remain below,” had been foreseen.
Two armchairs were placed at the two corners of the fireplace. Betweenthe chairs an old bedside rug, which displayed more foundation threadthan wool, had been spread by way of a carpet.
The chamber was lighted by the fire on the hearth and the twilightfalling through the window.
Jean Valjean was fatigued. For days he had neither eaten nor slept. Hethrew himself into one of the armchairs.
Basque returned, set a lighted candle on the chimney-piece and retired.Jean Valjean, his head drooping and his chin resting on his breast,perceived neither Basque nor the candle.
All at once, he drew himself up with a start. Cosette was standingbeside him.
He had not seen her enter, but he had felt that she was there.
He turned round. He gazed at her. She was adorably lovely. But what hewas contemplating with that profound gaze was not her beauty but hersoul.
“Well,” exclaimed Cosette, “father, I knew that you were peculiar, butI never should have expected this. What an idea! Marius told me thatyou wish me to receive you here.”

“Yes, it is my wish.”

“I expected that reply. Good. I warn you that I am going to make ascene for you. Let us begin at the beginning. Embrace me, father.”

And she offered him her cheek.
Jean Valjean remained motionless.
“You do not stir. I take note of it. Attitude of guilt. But never mind,I pardon you. Jesus Christ said: Offer the other cheek. Here it is.”

And she presented her other cheek.
Jean Valjean did not move. It seemed as though his feet were nailed tothe pavement.
“This is becoming serious,” said Cosette. “What have I done to you? Ideclare that I am perplexed. You owe me reparation. You will dine withus.”

“I have dined.”

“That is not true. I will get M. Gillenormand to scold you.Grandfathers are made to reprimand fathers. Come. Go upstairs with meto the drawing-room. Immediately.”

“Impossible.”

Here Cosette lost ground a little. She ceased to command and passed toquestioning.
“But why? and you choose the ugliest chamber in the house in which tosee me. It’s horrible here.”

“Thou knowest . . .”

Jean Valjean caught himself up.
“You know, madame, that I am peculiar, I have my freaks.”

Cosette struck her tiny hands together.
“Madame! . . . You know! . . . more novelties! What is the meaning ofthis?”

Jean Valjean directed upon her that heartrending smile to which heoccasionally had recourse:
“You wished to be Madame. You are so.”

“Not for you, father.”

“Do not call me father.”

“What?”

“Call me ‘Monsieur Jean.’ ‘Jean,’ if you like.”

“You are no longer my father? I am no longer Cosette? ‘Monsieur Jean’?What does this mean? why, these are revolutions, aren’t they? what hastaken place? come, look me in the face. And you won’t live with us! Andyou won’t have my chamber! What have I done to you? Has anythinghappened?”

“Nothing.”

“Well then?”

“Everything is as usual.”

“Why do you change your name?”

“You have changed yours, surely.”

He smiled again with the same smile as before and added:
“Since you are Madame Pontmercy, I certainly can be Monsieur Jean.”

“I don’t understand anything about it. All this is idiotic. I shall askpermission of my husband for you to be ‘Monsieur Jean.’ I hope that hewill not consent to it. You cause me a great deal of pain. One doeshave freaks, but one does not cause one’s little Cosette grief. That iswrong. You have no right to be wicked, you who are so good.”

He made no reply.
She seized his hands with vivacity, and raising them to her face withan irresistible movement, she pressed them against her neck beneath herchin, which is a gesture of profound tenderness.
“Oh!” she said to him, “be good!”

And she went on:
“This is what I call being good: being nice and coming and livinghere,—there are birds here as there are in the Rue Plumet,—living withus, quitting that hole of a Rue de l’Homme Armé, not giving us riddlesto guess, being like all the rest of the world, dining with us,breakfasting with us, being my father.”

He loosed her hands.
“You no longer need a father, you have a husband.”

Cosette became angry.
“I no longer need a father! One really does not know what to say tothings like that, which are not common sense!”

“If Toussaint were here,” resumed Jean Valjean, like a person who isdriven to seek authorities, and who clutches at every branch, “shewould be the first to agree that it is true that I have always had waysof my own. There is nothing new in this. I always have loved my blackcorner.”

“But it is cold here. One cannot see distinctly. It is abominable, thatit is, to wish to be Monsieur Jean! I will not have you say ‘you’ tome.
“Just now, as I was coming hither,” replied Jean Valjean, “I saw apiece of furniture in the Rue Saint Louis. It was at a cabinet-maker’s.If I were a pretty woman, I would treat myself to that bit offurniture. A very neat toilet table in the reigning style. What youcall rosewood, I think. It is inlaid. The mirror is quite large. Thereare drawers. It is pretty.”

“Hou! the villainous bear!” replied Cosette.
And with supreme grace, setting her teeth and drawing back her lips,she blew at Jean Valjean. She was a Grace copying a cat.
“I am furious,” she resumed. “Ever since yesterday, you have made merage, all of you. I am greatly vexed. I don’t understand. You do notdefend me against Marius. Marius will not uphold me against you. I amall alone. I arrange a chamber prettily. If I could have put the goodGod there I would have done it. My chamber is left on my hands. Mylodger sends me into bankruptcy. I order a nice little dinner ofNicolette. We will have nothing to do with your dinner, Madame. And myfather Fauchelevent wants me to call him ‘Monsieur Jean,’ and toreceive him in a frightful, old, ugly cellar, where the walls havebeards, and where the crystal consists of empty bottles, and thecurtains are of spiders’ webs! You are singular, I admit, that is yourstyle, but people who get married are granted a truce. You ought not tohave begun being singular again instantly. So you are going to beperfectly contented in your abominable Rue de l’Homme Armé. I was verydesperate indeed there, that I was. What have you against me? You causeme a great deal of grief. Fi!”

And, becoming suddenly serious, she gazed intently at Jean Valjean andadded:
“Are you angry with me because I am happy?”

Ingenuousness sometimes unconsciously penetrates deep. This question,which was simple for Cosette, was profound for Jean Valjean. Cosettehad meant to scratch, and she lacerated.
Jean Valjean turned pale.
He remained for a moment without replying, then, with an inexpressibleintonation, and speaking to himself, he murmured:
“Her happiness was the object of my life. Now God may sign mydismissal. Cosette, thou art happy; my day is over.”

“Ah, you have said _thou_ to me!” exclaimed Cosette.
And she sprang to his neck.
Jean Valjean, in bewilderment, strained her wildly to his breast. Italmost seemed to him as though he were taking her back.
“Thanks, father!” said Cosette.
This enthusiastic impulse was on the point of becoming poignant forJean Valjean. He gently removed Cosette’s arms, and took his hat.
“Well?” said Cosette.
“I leave you, Madame, they are waiting for you.”

And, from the threshold, he added:
“I have said _thou_ to you. Tell your husband that this shall nothappen again. Pardon me.”

Jean Valjean quitted the room, leaving Cosette stupefied at thisenigmatical farewell.



CHAPTER II—ANOTHER STEP BACKWARDS

On the following day, at the same hour, Jean Valjean came.
Cosette asked him no questions, was no longer astonished, no longerexclaimed that she was cold, no longer spoke of the drawing-room, sheavoided saying either “father” or “Monsieur Jean.” She allowed herselfto be addressed as _you_. She allowed herself to be called Madame.Only, her joy had undergone a certain diminution. She would have beensad, if sadness had been possible to her.
It is probable that she had had with Marius one of those conversationsin which the beloved man says what he pleases, explains nothing, andsatisfies the beloved woman. The curiosity of lovers does not extendvery far beyond their own love.
The lower room had made a little toilet. Basque had suppressed thebottles, and Nicolette the spiders.
All the days which followed brought Jean Valjean at the same hour. Hecame every day, because he had not the strength to take Marius’ wordsotherwise than literally. Marius arranged matters so as to be absent atthe hours when Jean Valjean came. The house grew accustomed to thenovel ways of M. Fauchelevent. Toussaint helped in this direction:“Monsieur has always been like that,” she repeated. The grandfatherissued this decree:—“He’s an original.” And all was said. Moreover, atthe age of ninety-six, no bond is any longer possible, all is merelyjuxtaposition; a newcomer is in the way. There is no longer any room;all habits are acquired. M. Fauchelevent, M. Tranchelevent, FatherGillenormand asked nothing better than to be relieved from “thatgentleman.” He added:—“Nothing is more common than those originals.They do all sorts of queer things. They have no reason. The Marquis deCanaples was still worse. He bought a palace that he might lodge in thegarret. These are fantastic appearances that people affect.”

No one caught a glimpse of the sinister foundation. And moreover, whocould have guessed such a thing? There are marshes of this descriptionin India. The water seems extraordinary, inexplicable, rippling thoughthere is no wind, and agitated where it should be calm. One gazes atthe surface of these causeless ebullitions; one does not perceive thehydra which crawls on the bottom.
Many men have a secret monster in this same manner, a dragon whichgnaws them, a despair which inhabits their night. Such a man resemblesother men, he goes and comes. No one knows that he bears within him afrightful parasitic pain with a thousand teeth, which lives within theunhappy man, and of which he is dying. No one knows that this man is agulf. He is stagnant but deep. From time to time, a trouble of whichthe onlooker understands nothing appears on his surface. A mysteriouswrinkle is formed, then vanishes, then reappears; an air-bubble risesand bursts. It is the breathing of the unknown beast.
Certain strange habits: arriving at the hour when other people aretaking their leave, keeping in the background when other people aredisplaying themselves, preserving on all occasions what may bedesignated as the wall-colored mantle, seeking the solitary walk,preferring the deserted street, avoiding any share in conversation,avoiding crowds and festivals, seeming at one’s ease and living poorly,having one’s key in one’s pocket, and one’s candle at the porter’slodge, however rich one may be, entering by the side door, ascendingthe private staircase,—all these insignificant singularities, fugitivefolds on the surface, often proceed from a formidable foundation.
Many weeks passed in this manner. A new life gradually took possessionof Cosette: the relations which marriage creates, visits, the care ofthe house, pleasures, great matters. Cosette’s pleasures were notcostly, they consisted in one thing: being with Marius. The greatoccupation of her life was to go out with him, to remain with him. Itwas for them a joy that was always fresh, to go out arm in arm, in theface of the sun, in the open street, without hiding themselves, beforethe whole world, both of them completely alone.
Cosette had one vexation. Toussaint could not get on with Nicolette,the soldering of two elderly maids being impossible, and she went away.The grandfather was well; Marius argued a case here and there; AuntGillenormand peacefully led that life aside which sufficed for her,beside the new household. Jean Valjean came every day.
The address as _thou_ disappeared, the _you_, the “Madame,” the“Monsieur Jean,” rendered him another person to Cosette. The care whichhe had himself taken to detach her from him was succeeding. She becamemore and more gay and less and less tender. Yet she still loved himsincerely, and he felt it.
One day she said to him suddenly: “You used to be my father, you are nolonger my father, you were my uncle, you are no longer my uncle, youwere Monsieur Fauchelevent, you are Jean. Who are you then? I don’tlike all this. If I did not know how good you are, I should be afraidof you.”

He still lived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, because he could not make uphis mind to remove to a distance from the quarter where Cosette dwelt.
At first, he only remained a few minutes with Cosette, and then wentaway.
Little by little he acquired the habit of making his visits less brief.One would have said that he was taking advantage of the authorizationof the days which were lengthening, he arrived earlier and departedlater.
One day Cosette chanced to say “father” to him. A flash of joyilluminated Jean Valjean’s melancholy old countenance. He caught herup: “Say Jean.”—“Ah! truly,” she replied with a burst of laughter,“Monsieur Jean.”—“That is right,” said he. And he turned aside so thatshe might not see him wipe his eyes.



CHAPTER III—THEY RECALL THE GARDEN OF THE RUE PLUMET

This was the last time. After that last flash of light, completeextinction ensued. No more familiarity, no more good-morning with akiss, never more that word so profoundly sweet: “My father!” He was athis own request and through his own complicity driven out of all hishappinesses one after the other; and he had this sorrow, that afterhaving lost Cosette wholly in one day, he was afterwards obliged tolose her again in detail.
The eye eventually becomes accustomed to the light of a cellar. Inshort, it sufficed for him to have an apparition of Cosette every day.His whole life was concentrated in that one hour.
He seated himself close to her, he gazed at her in silence, or hetalked to her of years gone by, of her childhood, of the convent, ofher little friends of those bygone days.
One afternoon,—it was on one of those early days in April, already warmand fresh, the moment of the sun’s great gayety, the gardens whichsurrounded the windows of Marius and Cosette felt the emotion ofwaking, the hawthorn was on the point of budding, a jewelled garnitureof gillyflowers spread over the ancient walls, snapdragons yawnedthrough the crevices of the stones, amid the grass there was a charmingbeginning of daisies, and buttercups, the white butterflies of the yearwere making their first appearance, the wind, that minstrel of theeternal wedding, was trying in the trees the first notes of that grand,auroral symphony which the old poets called the springtide,—Marius saidto Cosette:—“We said that we would go back to take a look at our gardenin the Rue Plumet. Let us go thither. We must not be ungrateful.”—Andaway they flitted, like two swallows towards the spring. This garden ofthe Rue Plumet produced on them the effect of the dawn. They alreadyhad behind them in life something which was like the springtime oftheir love. The house in the Rue Plumet being held on a lease, stillbelonged to Cosette. They went to that garden and that house. Therethey found themselves again, there they forgot themselves. Thatevening, at the usual hour, Jean Valjean came to the Rue desFilles-du-Calvaire.—“Madame went out with Monsieur and has not yetreturned,” Basque said to him. He seated himself in silence, and waitedan hour. Cosette did not return. He departed with drooping head.
Cosette was so intoxicated with her walk to “their garden,” and sojoyous at having “lived a whole day in her past,” that she talked ofnothing else on the morrow. She did not notice that she had not seenJean Valjean.
“In what way did you go thither?” Jean Valjean asked her.”

“On foot.”

“And how did you return?”

“In a hackney carriage.”

For some time, Jean Valjean had noticed the economical life led by theyoung people. He was troubled by it. Marius’ economy was severe, andthat word had its absolute meaning for Jean Valjean. He hazarded aquery:
“Why do you not have a carriage of your own? A pretty coupé would onlycost you five hundred francs a month. You are rich.”

“I don’t know,” replied Cosette.
“It is like Toussaint,” resumed Jean Valjean. “She is gone. You havenot replaced her. Why?”

“Nicolette suffices.”

“But you ought to have a maid.”

“Have I not Marius?”

“You ought to have a house of your own, your own servants, a carriage,a box at the theatre. There is nothing too fine for you. Why not profitby your riches? Wealth adds to happiness.”

Cosette made no reply.
Jean Valjean’s visits were not abridged. Far from it. When it is theheart which is slipping, one does not halt on the downward slope.
When Jean Valjean wished to prolong his visit and to induceforgetfulness of the hour, he sang the praises of Marius; he pronouncedhim handsome, noble, courageous, witty, eloquent, good. Cosette outdidhim. Jean Valjean began again. They were never weary. Marius—that wordwas inexhaustible; those six letters contained volumes. In this manner,Jean Valjean contrived to remain a long time.
It was so sweet to see Cosette, to forget by her side! It alleviatedhis wounds. It frequently happened that Basque came twice to announce:“M. Gillenormand sends me to remind Madame la Baronne that dinner isserved.”

On those days, Jean Valjean was very thoughtful on his return home.
Was there, then, any truth in that comparison of the chrysalis whichhad presented itself to the mind of Marius? Was Jean Valjean really achrysalis who would persist, and who would come to visit his butterfly?
One day he remained still longer than usual. On the following day heobserved that there was no fire on the hearth.—“Hello!” he thought. “Nofire.”—And he furnished the explanation for himself.—“It is perfectlysimple. It is April. The cold weather has ceased.”

“Heavens! how cold it is here!” exclaimed Cosette when she entered.
“Why, no,” said Jean Valjean.
“Was it you who told Basque not to make a fire then?”

“Yes, since we are now in the month of May.”

“But we have a fire until June. One is needed all the year in thiscellar.”

“I thought that a fire was unnecessary.”

“That is exactly like one of your ideas!” retorted Cosette.
On the following day there was a fire. But the two armchairs werearranged at the other end of the room near the door. “—What is themeaning of this?” thought Jean Valjean.
He went for the armchairs and restored them to their ordinary placenear the hearth.
This fire lighted once more encouraged him, however. He prolonged theconversation even beyond its customary limits. As he rose to take hisleave, Cosette said to him:
“My husband said a queer thing to me yesterday.”

“What was it?”

“He said to me: ‘Cosette, we have an income of thirty thousand livres.Twenty-seven that you own, and three that my grandfather gives me.’ Ireplied: ‘That makes thirty.’ He went on: ‘Would you have the courageto live on the three thousand?’ I answered: ‘Yes, on nothing. Providedthat it was with you.’ And then I asked: ‘Why do you say that to me?’He replied: ‘I wanted to know.’”

Jean Valjean found not a word to answer. Cosette probably expected someexplanation from him; he listened in gloomy silence. He went back tothe Rue de l’Homme Armé; he was so deeply absorbed that he mistook thedoor and instead of entering his own house, he entered the adjoiningdwelling. It was only after having ascended nearly two stories that heperceived his error and went down again.
His mind was swarming with conjectures. It was evident that Marius hadhis doubts as to the origin of the six hundred thousand francs, that hefeared some source that was not pure, who knows? that he had even,perhaps, discovered that the money came from him, Jean Valjean, that hehesitated before this suspicious fortune, and was disinclined to takeit as his own,—preferring that both he and Cosette should remain poor,rather than that they should be rich with wealth that was not clean.
Moreover, Jean Valjean began vaguely to surmise that he was being shownthe door.
On the following day, he underwent something like a shock on enteringthe ground-floor room. The armchairs had disappeared. There was not asingle chair of any sort.
“Ah, what’s this!” exclaimed Cosette as she entered, “no chairs! Whereare the armchairs?”

“They are no longer here,” replied Jean Valjean.
“This is too much!”

Jean Valjean stammered:
“It was I who told Basque to remove them.”

“And your reason?”

“I have only a few minutes to stay to-day.”

“A brief stay is no reason for remaining standing.”

“I think that Basque needed the chairs for the drawing-room.”

“Why?”

“You have company this evening, no doubt.”

“We expect no one.”

Jean Valjean had not another word to say.
Cosette shrugged her shoulders.
“To have the chairs carried off! The other day you had the fire putout. How odd you are!”

“Adieu!” murmured Jean Valjean.
He did not say: “Adieu, Cosette.” But he had not the strength to say:“Adieu, Madame.”

He went away utterly overwhelmed.
This time he had understood.
On the following day he did not come. Cosette only observed the fact inthe evening.
“Why,” said she, “Monsieur Jean has not been here today.”

And she felt a slight twinge at her heart, but she hardly perceived it,being immediately diverted by a kiss from Marius.
On the following day he did not come.
Cosette paid no heed to this, passed her evening and slept well thatnight, as usual, and thought of it only when she woke. She was sohappy! She speedily despatched Nicolette to M. Jean’s house to inquirewhether he were ill, and why he had not come on the previous evening.Nicolette brought back the reply of M. Jean that he was not ill. He wasbusy. He would come soon. As soon as he was able. Moreover, he was onthe point of taking a little journey. Madame must remember that it washis custom to take trips from time to time. They were not to worryabout him. They were not to think of him.
Nicolette on entering M. Jean’s had repeated to him her mistress’ verywords. That Madame had sent her to inquire why M. Jean had not come onthe preceding evening. ”—It is two days since I have been there,” saidJean Valjean gently.
But the remark passed unnoticed by Nicolette, who did not report it toCosette.



CHAPTER IV—ATTRACTION AND EXTINCTION

During the last months of spring and the first months of summer in1833, the rare passers-by in the Marais, the petty shopkeepers, theloungers on thresholds, noticed an old man neatly clad in black, whoemerged every day at the same hour, towards nightfall, from the Rue del’Homme Armé, on the side of the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie,passed in front of the Blancs Manteaux, gained the RueCulture-Sainte-Catherine, and, on arriving at the Rue de l‘Écharpe,turned to the left, and entered the Rue Saint-Louis.
There he walked at a slow pace, with his head strained forward, seeingnothing, hearing nothing, his eye immovably fixed on a point whichseemed to be a star to him, which never varied, and which was no otherthan the corner of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire. The nearer heapproached the corner of the street the more his eye lighted up; a sortof joy illuminated his pupils like an inward aurora, he had afascinated and much affected air, his lips indulged in obscuremovements, as though he were talking to some one whom he did not see,he smiled vaguely and advanced as slowly as possible. One would havesaid that, while desirous of reaching his destination, he feared themoment when he should be close at hand. When only a few houses remainedbetween him and that street which appeared to attract him his paceslackened, to such a degree that, at times, one might have thought thathe was no longer advancing at all. The vacillation of his head and thefixity of his eyeballs suggested the thought of the magnetic needleseeking the pole. Whatever time he spent on arriving, he was obliged toarrive at last; he reached the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire; then hehalted, he trembled, he thrust his head with a sort of melancholytimidity round the corner of the last house, and gazed into thatstreet, and there was in that tragic look something which resembled thedazzling light of the impossible, and the reflection from a paradisethat was closed to him. Then a tear, which had slowly gathered in thecorner of his lids, and had become large enough to fall, trickled downhis cheek, and sometimes stopped at his mouth. The old man tasted itsbitter flavor. Thus he remained for several minutes as though made ofstone, then he returned by the same road and with the same step, and,in proportion as he retreated, his glance died out.
Little by little, this old man ceased to go as far as the corner of theRue des Filles-du-Calvaire; he halted half way in the Rue Saint-Louis;sometimes a little further off, sometimes a little nearer.
One day he stopped at the corner of the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherineand looked at the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire from a distance. Then heshook his head slowly from right to left, as though refusing himselfsomething, and retraced his steps.
Soon he no longer came as far as the Rue Saint-Louis. He got as far asthe Rue Pavée, shook his head and turned back; then he went no furtherthan the Rue des Trois-Pavillons; then he did not overstep theBlancs-Manteaux. One would have said that he was a pendulum which wasno longer wound up, and whose oscillations were growing shorter beforeceasing altogether.
Every day he emerged from his house at the same hour, he undertook thesame trip, but he no longer completed it, and, perhaps without himselfbeing aware of the fact, he constantly shortened it. His wholecountenance expressed this single idea: What is the use?—His eye wasdim; no more radiance. His tears were also exhausted; they no longercollected in the corner of his eye-lid; that thoughtful eye was dry.The old man’s head was still craned forward; his chin moved at times;the folds in his gaunt neck were painful to behold. Sometimes, when theweather was bad, he had an umbrella under his arm, but he never openedit.
The good women of the quarter said: “He is an innocent.” The childrenfollowed him and laughed.



BOOK NINTH—SUPREME SHADOW, SUPREME DAWN



CHAPTER I—PITY FOR THE UNHAPPY, BUT INDULGENCE FOR THE HAPPY

It is a terrible thing to be happy! How content one is! Howall-sufficient one finds it! How, being in possession of the falseobject of life, happiness, one forgets the true object, duty!
Let us say, however, that the reader would do wrong were he to blameMarius.
Marius, as we have explained, before his marriage, had put no questionsto M. Fauchelevent, and, since that time, he had feared to put any toJean Valjean. He had regretted the promise into which he had allowedhimself to be drawn. He had often said to himself that he had donewrong in making that concession to despair. He had confined himself togradually estranging Jean Valjean from his house and to effacing him,as much as possible, from Cosette’s mind. He had, in a manner, alwaysplaced himself between Cosette and Jean Valjean, sure that, in thisway, she would not perceive nor think of the latter. It was more thaneffacement, it was an eclipse.
Marius did what he considered necessary and just. He thought that hehad serious reasons which the reader has already seen, and others whichwill be seen later on, for getting rid of Jean Valjean withoutharshness, but without weakness.
Chance having ordained that he should encounter, in a case which he hadargued, a former employee of the Laffitte establishment, he hadacquired mysterious information, without seeking it, which he had notbeen able, it is true, to probe, out of respect for the secret which hehad promised to guard, and out of consideration for Jean Valjean’sperilous position. He believed at that moment that he had a grave dutyto perform: the restitution of the six hundred thousand francs to someone whom he sought with all possible discretion. In the meanwhile, heabstained from touching that money.
As for Cosette, she had not been initiated into any of these secrets;but it would be harsh to condemn her also.
There existed between Marius and her an all-powerful magnetism, whichcaused her to do, instinctively and almost mechanically, what Mariuswished. She was conscious of Marius’ will in the direction of “MonsieurJean,” she conformed to it. Her husband had not been obliged to sayanything to her; she yielded to the vague but clear pressure of histacit intentions, and obeyed blindly. Her obedience in this instanceconsisted in not remembering what Marius forgot. She was not obliged tomake any effort to accomplish this. Without her knowing why herself,and without his having any cause to accuse her of it, her soul hadbecome so wholly her husband’s that that which was shrouded in gloom inMarius’ mind became overcast in hers.
Let us not go too far, however; in what concerns Jean Valjean, thisforgetfulness and obliteration were merely superficial. She was ratherheedless than forgetful. At bottom, she was sincerely attached to theman whom she had so long called her father; but she loved her husbandstill more dearly. This was what had somewhat disturbed the balance ofher heart, which leaned to one side only.
It sometimes happened that Cosette spoke of Jean Valjean and expressedher surprise. Then Marius calmed her: “He is absent, I think. Did nothe say that he was setting out on a journey?”—“That is true,” thoughtCosette. “He had a habit of disappearing in this fashion. But not forso long.” Two or three times she despatched Nicolette to inquire in theRue de l’Homme Armé whether M. Jean had returned from his journey. JeanValjean caused the answer “no” to be given.
Cosette asked nothing more, since she had but one need on earth,Marius.
Let us also say that, on their side, Cosette and Marius had also beenabsent. They had been to Vernon. Marius had taken Cosette to hisfather’s grave.
Marius gradually won Cosette away from Jean Valjean. Cosette allowedit.
Moreover that which is called, far too harshly in certain cases, theingratitude of children, is not always a thing so deserving of reproachas it is supposed. It is the ingratitude of nature. Nature, as we haveelsewhere said, “looks before her.” Nature divides living beings intothose who are arriving and those who are departing. Those who aredeparting are turned towards the shadows, those who are arrivingtowards the light. Hence a gulf which is fatal on the part of the old,and involuntary on the part of the young. This breach, at firstinsensible, increases slowly, like all separations of branches. Theboughs, without becoming detached from the trunk, grow away from it. Itis no fault of theirs. Youth goes where there is joy, festivals, vividlights, love. Old age goes towards the end. They do not lose sight ofeach other, but there is no longer a close connection. Young peoplefeel the cooling off of life; old people, that of the tomb. Let us notblame these poor children.



CHAPTER II—LAST FLICKERINGS OF A LAMP WITHOUT OIL

One day, Jean Valjean descended his staircase, took three steps in thestreet, seated himself on a post, on that same stone post whereGavroche had found him meditating on the night between the 5th and the6th of June; he remained there a few moments, then went upstairs again.This was the last oscillation of the pendulum. On the following day hedid not leave his apartment. On the day after that, he did not leavehis bed.
His portress, who prepared his scanty repasts, a few cabbages orpotatoes with bacon, glanced at the brown earthenware plate andexclaimed:
“But you ate nothing yesterday, poor, dear man!”

“Certainly I did,” replied Jean Valjean.
“The plate is quite full.”

“Look at the water jug. It is empty.”

“That proves that you have drunk; it does not prove that you haveeaten.”

“Well,” said Jean Valjean, “what if I felt hungry only for water?”

“That is called thirst, and, when one does not eat at the same time, itis called fever.”

“I will eat to-morrow.”

“Or at Trinity day. Why not to-day? Is it the thing to say: ‘I will eatto-morrow’? The idea of leaving my platter without even touching it! Mylady-finger potatoes were so good!”

Jean Valjean took the old woman’s hand:
“I promise you that I will eat them,” he said, in his benevolent voice.
“I am not pleased with you,” replied the portress.
Jean Valjean saw no other human creature than this good woman. Thereare streets in Paris through which no one ever passes, and houses towhich no one ever comes. He was in one of those streets and one ofthose houses.
While he still went out, he had purchased of a coppersmith, for a fewsous, a little copper crucifix which he had hung up on a nail oppositehis bed. That gibbet is always good to look at.
A week passed, and Jean Valjean had not taken a step in his room. Hestill remained in bed. The portress said to her husband:—“The good manupstairs yonder does not get up, he no longer eats, he will not lastlong. That man has his sorrows, that he has. You won’t get it out of myhead that his daughter has made a bad marriage.”

The porter replied, with the tone of marital sovereignty:
“If he’s rich, let him have a doctor. If he is not rich, let him gowithout. If he has no doctor he will die.”

“And if he has one?”

“He will die,” said the porter.
The portress set to scraping away the grass from what she called herpavement, with an old knife, and, as she tore out the blades, shegrumbled:
“It’s a shame. Such a neat old man! He’s as white as a chicken.”

She caught sight of the doctor of the quarter as he passed the end ofthe street; she took it upon herself to request him to come upstairs.
“It’s on the second floor,” said she. “You have only to enter. As thegood man no longer stirs from his bed, the door is always unlocked.”

The doctor saw Jean Valjean and spoke with him.
When he came down again the portress interrogated him:
“Well, doctor?”

“Your sick man is very ill indeed.”

“What is the matter with him?”

“Everything and nothing. He is a man who, to all appearances, has lostsome person who is dear to him. People die of that.”

“What did he say to you?”

“He told me that he was in good health.”

“Shall you come again, doctor?”

“Yes,” replied the doctor. “But some one else besides must come.”




CHAPTER III—A PEN IS HEAVY TO THE MAN WHO LIFTED THE FAUCHELEVENT’SCART

One evening Jean Valjean found difficulty in raising himself on hiselbow; he felt of his wrist and could not find his pulse; his breathwas short and halted at times; he recognized the fact that he wasweaker than he had ever been before. Then, no doubt under the pressureof some supreme preoccupation, he made an effort, drew himself up intoa sitting posture and dressed himself. He put on his old workingman’sclothes. As he no longer went out, he had returned to them andpreferred them. He was obliged to pause many times while dressinghimself; merely putting his arms through his waistcoat made theperspiration trickle from his forehead.
Since he had been alone, he had placed his bed in the antechamber, inorder to inhabit that deserted apartment as little as possible.
He opened the valise and drew from it Cosette’s outfit.
He spread it out on his bed.
The Bishop’s candlesticks were in their place on the chimney-piece. Hetook from a drawer two wax candles and put them in the candlesticks.Then, although it was still broad daylight,—it was summer,—he lightedthem. In the same way candles are to be seen lighted in broad daylightin chambers where there is a corpse.
Every step that he took in going from one piece of furniture to anotherexhausted him, and he was obliged to sit down. It was not ordinaryfatigue which expends the strength only to renew it; it was the remnantof all movement possible to him, it was life drained which flows awaydrop by drop in overwhelming efforts and which will never be renewed.
The chair into which he allowed himself to fall was placed in front ofthat mirror, so fatal for him, so providential for Marius, in which hehad read Cosette’s reversed writing on the blotting book. He caughtsight of himself in this mirror, and did not recognize himself. He waseighty years old; before Marius’ marriage, he would have hardly beentaken for fifty; that year had counted for thirty. What he bore on hisbrow was no longer the wrinkles of age, it was the mysterious mark ofdeath. The hollowing of that pitiless nail could be felt there. Hischeeks were pendulous; the skin of his face had the color which wouldlead one to think that it already had earth upon it; the corners of hismouth drooped as in the mask which the ancients sculptured on tombs. Hegazed into space with an air of reproach; one would have said that hewas one of those grand tragic beings who have cause to complain of someone.
He was in that condition, the last phase of dejection, in which sorrowno longer flows; it is coagulated, so to speak; there is something onthe soul like a clot of despair.
Night had come. He laboriously dragged a table and the old armchair tothe fireside, and placed upon the table a pen, some ink and some paper.
That done, he had a fainting fit. When he recovered consciousness, hewas thirsty. As he could not lift the jug, he tipped it over painfullytowards his mouth, and swallowed a draught.
As neither the pen nor the ink had been used for a long time, the pointof the pen had curled up, the ink had dried away, he was forced to riseand put a few drops of water in the ink, which he did not accomplishwithout pausing and sitting down two or three times, and he wascompelled to write with the back of the pen. He wiped his brow fromtime to time.
Then he turned towards the bed, and, still seated, for he could notstand, he gazed at the little black gown and all those beloved objects.
These contemplations lasted for hours which seemed minutes.
All at once he shivered, he felt that a child was taking possession ofhim; he rested his elbows on the table, which was illuminated by theBishop’s candles and took up the pen. His hand trembled. He wroteslowly the few following lines:
“Cosette, I bless thee. I am going to explain to thee. Thy husband wasright in giving me to understand that I ought to go away; but there isa little error in what he believed, though he was in the right. He isexcellent. Love him well even after I am dead. Monsieur Pontmercy, lovemy darling child well. Cosette, this paper will be found; this is whatI wish to say to thee, thou wilt see the figures, if I have thestrength to recall them, listen well, this money is really thine. Hereis the whole matter: White jet comes from Norway, black jet comes fromEngland, black glass jewellery comes from Germany. Jet is the lightest,the most precious, the most costly. Imitations can be made in France aswell as in Germany. What is needed is a little anvil two inches square,and a lamp burning spirits of wine to soften the wax. The wax wasformerly made with resin and lampblack, and cost four livres the pound.I invented a way of making it with gum shellac and turpentine. It doesnot cost more than thirty sous, and is much better. Buckles are madewith a violet glass which is stuck fast, by means of this wax, to alittle framework of black iron. The glass must be violet for ironjewellery, and black for gold jewellery. Spain buys a great deal of it.It is the country of jet . . .”

Here he paused, the pen fell from his fingers, he was seized by one ofthose sobs which at times welled up from the very depths of his being;the poor man clasped his head in both hands, and meditated.
“Oh!” he exclaimed within himself [lamentable cries, heard by Godalone], “all is over. I shall never see her more. She is a smile whichpassed over me. I am about to plunge into the night without even seeingher again. Oh! one minute, one instant, to hear her voice, to touch herdress, to gaze upon her, upon her, the angel! and then to die! It isnothing to die, what is frightful is to die without seeing her. Shewould smile on me, she would say a word to me, would that do any harmto any one? No, all is over, and forever. Here I am all alone. My God!My God! I shall never see her again!” At that moment there came a knockat the door.



CHAPTER IV—A BOTTLE OF INK WHICH ONLY SUCCEEDED IN WHITENING

That same day, or to speak more accurately, that same evening, asMarius left the table, and was on the point of withdrawing to hisstudy, having a case to look over, Basque handed him a letter saying:“The person who wrote the letter is in the antechamber.”

Cosette had taken the grandfather’s arm and was strolling in thegarden.
A letter, like a man, may have an unprepossessing exterior. Coarsepaper, coarsely folded—the very sight of certain missives isdispleasing.
The letter which Basque had brought was of this sort.
Marius took it. It smelled of tobacco. Nothing evokes a memory like anodor. Marius recognized that tobacco. He looked at the superscription:“To Monsieur, Monsieur le Baron Pommerci. At his hotel.” Therecognition of the tobacco caused him to recognize the writing as well.It may be said that amazement has its lightning flashes.
Marius was, as it were, illuminated by one of these flashes.
The sense of smell, that mysterious aid to memory, had just revived awhole world within him. This was certainly the paper, the fashion offolding, the dull tint of ink; it was certainly the well-knownhandwriting, especially was it the same tobacco.
The Jondrette garret rose before his mind.
Thus, strange freak of chance! one of the two scents which he had sodiligently sought, the one in connection with which he had lately againexerted so many efforts and which he supposed to be forever lost, hadcome and presented itself to him of its own accord.
He eagerly broke the seal, and read:
“Monsieur le Baron:—If the Supreme Being had given me the talents, Imight have been baron Thénard, member of the Institute [acadenmy ofciences], but I am not.  I only bear the same as him, happy if thismemory recommends me to the eccellence of your kindnesses. The benefitwith which you will honor me will be reciprocle. I am in possession ofa secret concerning an individual. This individual concerns you.  Ihold the secret at your disposal desiring to have the honor to behuseful to you.  I will furnish you with the simple means of drivingfrom your honorabel family that individual who has no right there,madame la baronne being of lofty birth.  The sanctuary of virtue cannotcohabit longer with crime without abdicating.
“I awate in the entichamber the orders of monsieur le baron.
“With respect.”

The letter was signed “Thénard.”

This signature was not false. It was merely a trifle abridged.
Moreover, the rigmarole and the orthography completed the revelation.The certificate of origin was complete.
Marius’ emotion was profound. After a start of surprise, he underwent afeeling of happiness. If he could now but find that other man of whomhe was in search, the man who had saved him, Marius, there would benothing left for him to desire.
He opened the drawer of his secretary, took out several bank-notes, putthem in his pocket, closed the secretary again, and rang the bell.Basque half opened the door.
“Show the man in,” said Marius.
Basque announced:
“Monsieur Thénard.”

A man entered.
A fresh surprise for Marius. The man who entered was an utter strangerto him.
This man, who was old, moreover, had a thick nose, his chin swathed ina cravat, green spectacles with a double screen of green taffeta overhis eyes, and his hair was plastered and flattened down on his brow ona level with his eyebrows like the wigs of English coachmen in “highlife.” His hair was gray. He was dressed in black from head to foot, ingarments that were very threadbare but clean; a bunch of sealsdepending from his fob suggested the idea of a watch. He held in hishand an old hat! He walked in a bent attitude, and the curve in hisspine augmented the profundity of his bow.
The first thing that struck the observer was, that this personage’scoat, which was too ample although carefully buttoned, had not beenmade for him.
Here a short digression becomes necessary.
There was in Paris at that epoch, in a low-lived old lodging in the RueBeautreillis, near the Arsenal, an ingenious Jew whose profession wasto change villains into honest men. Not for too long, which might haveproved embarrassing for the villain. The change was on sight, for a dayor two, at the rate of thirty sous a day, by means of a costume whichresembled the honesty of the world in general as nearly as possible.This costumer was called “the Changer”; the pickpockets of Paris hadgiven him this name and knew him by no other. He had a tolerablycomplete wardrobe. The rags with which he tricked out people werealmost probable. He had specialties and categories; on each nail of hisshop hung a social status, threadbare and worn; here the suit of amagistrate, there the outfit of a Curé, beyond the outfit of a banker,in one corner the costume of a retired military man, elsewhere thehabiliments of a man of letters, and further on the dress of astatesman.
This creature was the costumer of the immense drama which knavery playsin Paris. His lair was the green-room whence theft emerged, and intowhich roguery retreated. A tattered knave arrived at thisdressing-room, deposited his thirty sous and selected, according to thepart which he wished to play, the costume which suited him, and ondescending the stairs once more, the knave was a somebody. On thefollowing day, the clothes were faithfully returned, and the Changer,who trusted the thieves with everything, was never robbed. There wasone inconvenience about these clothes, they “did not fit”; not havingbeen made for those who wore them, they were too tight for one, tooloose for another and did not adjust themselves to any one. Everypickpocket who exceeded or fell short of the human average was ill athis ease in the Changer’s costumes. It was necessary that one shouldnot be either too fat or too lean. The Changer had foreseen onlyordinary men. He had taken the measure of the species from the firstrascal who came to hand, who is neither stout nor thin, neither tallnor short. Hence adaptations which were sometimes difficult and fromwhich the Changer’s clients extricated themselves as best they might.So much the worse for the exceptions! The suit of the statesman, forinstance, black from head to foot, and consequently proper, would havebeen too large for Pitt and too small for Castelcicala. The costume ofa statesman was designated as follows in the Changer’s catalogue; wecopy:
“A coat of black cloth, trowsers of black wool, a silk waistcoat, bootsand linen.” On the margin there stood: _ex-ambassador_, and a notewhich we also copy: “In a separate box, a neatly frizzed peruke, greenglasses, seals, and two small quills an inch long, wrapped in cotton.”All this belonged to the statesman, the ex-ambassador. This wholecostume was, if we may so express ourselves, debilitated; the seamswere white, a vague button-hole yawned at one of the elbows; moreover,one of the coat buttons was missing on the breast; but this was onlydetail; as the hand of the statesman should always be thrust into hiscoat and laid upon his heart, its function was to conceal the absentbutton.
If Marius had been familiar with the occult institutions of Paris, hewould instantly have recognized upon the back of the visitor whomBasque had just shown in, the statesman’s suit borrowed from thepick-me-down-that shop of the Changer.
Marius’ disappointment on beholding another man than the one whom heexpected to see turned to the newcomer’s disadvantage.
He surveyed him from head to foot, while that personage madeexaggerated bows, and demanded in a curt tone:
“What do you want?”

The man replied with an amiable grin of which the caressing smile of acrocodile will furnish some idea:
“It seems to me impossible that I should not have already had the honorof seeing Monsieur le Baron in society. I think I actually did meetmonsieur personally, several years ago, at the house of Madame laPrincesse Bagration and in the drawing-rooms of his Lordship theVicomte Dambray, peer of France.”

It is always a good bit of tactics in knavery to pretend to recognizesome one whom one does not know.
Marius paid attention to the manner of this man’s speech. He spied onhis accent and gesture, but his disappointment increased; thepronunciation was nasal and absolutely unlike the dry, shrill tonewhich he had expected.
He was utterly routed.
“I know neither Madame Bagration nor M. Dambray,” said he. “I havenever set foot in the house of either of them in my life.”

The reply was ungracious. The personage, determined to be gracious atany cost, insisted.
“Then it must have been at Chateaubriand’s that I have seen Monsieur! Iknow Chateaubriand very well. He is very affable. He sometimes says tome: ‘Thénard, my friend . . . won’t you drink a glass of wine withme?’”

Marius’ brow grew more and more severe:
“I have never had the honor of being received by M. de Chateaubriand.Let us cut it short. What do you want?”

The man bowed lower at that harsh voice.
“Monsieur le Baron, deign to listen to me. There is in America, in adistrict near Panama, a village called la Joya. That village iscomposed of a single house, a large, square house of three stories,built of bricks dried in the sun, each side of the square five hundredfeet in length, each story retreating twelve feet back of the storybelow, in such a manner as to leave in front a terrace which makes thecircuit of the edifice, in the centre an inner court where theprovisions and munitions are kept; no windows, loopholes, no doors,ladders, ladders to mount from the ground to the first terrace, andfrom the first to the second, and from the second to the third, laddersto descend into the inner court, no doors to the chambers, trap-doors,no staircases to the chambers, ladders; in the evening the traps areclosed, the ladders are withdrawn, carbines and blunderbusses trainedfrom the loopholes; no means of entering, a house by day, a citadel bynight, eight hundred inhabitants,—that is the village. Why so manyprecautions? because the country is dangerous; it is full of cannibals.Then why do people go there? because the country is marvellous; gold isfound there.”

“What are you driving at?” interrupted Marius, who had passed fromdisappointment to impatience.
“At this, Monsieur le Baron. I am an old and weary diplomat. Ancientcivilization has thrown me on my own devices. I want to try savages.”

“Well?”

“Monsieur le Baron, egotism is the law of the world. The proletarianpeasant woman, who toils by the day, turns round when the diligencepasses by, the peasant proprietress, who toils in her field, does notturn round. The dog of the poor man barks at the rich man, the dog ofthe rich man barks at the poor man. Each one for himself.Self-interest—that’s the object of men. Gold, that’s the loadstone.”

“What then? Finish.”

“I should like to go and establish myself at la Joya. There are threeof us. I have my spouse and my young lady; a very beautiful girl. Thejourney is long and costly. I need a little money.”

“What concern is that of mine?” demanded Marius.
The stranger stretched his neck out of his cravat, a gesturecharacteristic of the vulture, and replied with an augmented smile.
“Has not Monsieur le Baron perused my letter?”

There was some truth in this. The fact is, that the contents of theepistle had slipped Marius’ mind. He had seen the writing rather thanread the letter. He could hardly recall it. But a moment ago a freshstart had been given him. He had noted that detail: “my spouse and myyoung lady.”

He fixed a penetrating glance on the stranger. An examining judge couldnot have done the look better. He almost lay in wait for him.
He confined himself to replying:
“State the case precisely.”

The stranger inserted his two hands in both his fobs, drew himself upwithout straightening his dorsal column, but scrutinizing Marius in histurn, with the green gaze of his spectacles.
“So be it, Monsieur le Baron. I will be precise. I have a secret tosell to you.”

“A secret?”

“A secret.”

“Which concerns me?”

“Somewhat.”

“What is the secret?”

Marius scrutinized the man more and more as he listened to him.
“I commence gratis,” said the stranger. “You will see that I aminteresting.”

“Speak.”

“Monsieur le Baron, you have in your house a thief and an assassin.”

Marius shuddered.
“In my house? no,” said he.
The imperturbable stranger brushed his hat with his elbow and went on:
“An assassin and a thief. Remark, Monsieur le Baron, that I do not herespeak of ancient deeds, deeds of the past which have lapsed, which canbe effaced by limitation before the law and by repentance before God. Ispeak of recent deeds, of actual facts as still unknown to justice atthis hour. I continue. This man has insinuated himself into yourconfidence, and almost into your family under a false name. I am aboutto tell you his real name. And to tell it to you for nothing.”

“I am listening.”

“His name is Jean Valjean.”

“I know it.”

“I am going to tell you, equally for nothing, who he is.”

“Say on.”

“He is an ex-convict.”

“I know it.”

“You know it since I have had the honor of telling you.”

“No. I knew it before.”

Marius’ cold tone, that double reply of “I know it,” his laconicism,which was not favorable to dialogue, stirred up some smouldering wrathin the stranger. He launched a furious glance on the sly at Marius,which was instantly extinguished. Rapid as it was, this glance was ofthe kind which a man recognizes when he has once beheld it; it did notescape Marius. Certain flashes can only proceed from certain souls; theeye, that vent-hole of the thought, glows with it; spectacles hidenothing; try putting a pane of glass over hell!
The stranger resumed with a smile:
“I will not permit myself to contradict Monsieur le Baron. In any case,you ought to perceive that I am well informed. Now what I have to tellyou is known to myself alone. This concerns the fortune of Madame laBaronne. It is an extraordinary secret. It is for sale—I make you thefirst offer of it. Cheap. Twenty thousand francs.”

“I know that secret as well as the others,” said Marius.
The personage felt the necessity of lowering his price a trifle.
“Monsieur le Baron, say ten thousand francs and I will speak.”

“I repeat to you that there is nothing which you can tell me. I knowwhat you wish to say to me.”

A fresh flash gleamed in the man’s eye. He exclaimed:
“But I must dine to-day, nevertheless. It is an extraordinary secret, Itell you. Monsieur le Baron, I will speak. I speak. Give me twentyfrancs.”

Marius gazed intently at him:
“I know your extraordinary secret, just as I knew Jean Valjean’s name,just as I know your name.”

“My name?”

“Yes.”

“That is not difficult, Monsieur le Baron. I had the honor to write toyou and to tell it to you. Thénard.”

“—Dier.”

“Hey?”

“Thénardier.”

“Who’s that?”

In danger the porcupine bristles up, the beetle feigns death, the oldguard forms in a square; this man burst into laughter.
Then he flicked a grain of dust from the sleeve of his coat with afillip.
Marius continued:
“You are also Jondrette the workman, Fabantou the comedian, Genflot thepoet, Don Alvarès the Spaniard, and Mistress Balizard.”

“Mistress what?”

“And you kept a pot-house at Montfermeil.”

“A pot-house! Never.”

“And I tell you that your name is Thénardier.”

“I deny it.”

“And that you are a rascal. Here.”

And Marius drew a bank-note from his pocket and flung it in his face.
“Thanks! Pardon me! five hundred francs! Monsieur le Baron!”

And the man, overcome, bowed, seized the note and examined it.
“Five hundred francs!” he began again, taken aback. And he stammered ina low voice: “An honest rustler."69
Then brusquely:
“Well, so be it!” he exclaimed. “Let us put ourselves at our ease.”

And with the agility of a monkey, flinging back his hair, tearing offhis spectacles, and withdrawing from his nose by sleight of hand thetwo quills of which mention was recently made, and which the reader hasalso met with on another page of this book, he took off his face as theman takes off his hat.
His eye lighted up; his uneven brow, with hollows in some places andbumps in others, hideously wrinkled at the top, was laid bare, his nosehad become as sharp as a beak; the fierce and sagacious profile of theman of prey reappeared.
“Monsieur le Baron is infallible,” he said in a clear voice whence allnasal twang had disappeared, “I am Thénardier.”

And he straightened up his crooked back.
Thénardier, for it was really he, was strangely surprised; he wouldhave been troubled, had he been capable of such a thing. He had come tobring astonishment, and it was he who had received it. This humiliationhad been worth five hundred francs to him, and, taking it all in all,he accepted it; but he was nonetheless bewildered.
He beheld this Baron Pontmercy for the first time, and, in spite of hisdisguise, this Baron Pontmercy recognized him, and recognized himthoroughly. And not only was this Baron perfectly informed as toThénardier, but he seemed well posted as to Jean Valjean. Who was thisalmost beardless young man, who was so glacial and so generous, whoknew people’s names, who knew all their names, and who opened his purseto them, who bullied rascals like a judge, and who paid them like adupe?
Thénardier, the reader will remember, although he had been Marius’neighbor, had never seen him, which is not unusual in Paris; he hadformerly, in a vague way, heard his daughters talk of a very poor youngman named Marius who lived in the house. He had written to him, withoutknowing him, the letter with which the reader is acquainted.
No connection between that Marius and M. le Baron Pontmercy waspossible in his mind.
As for the name Pontmercy, it will be recalled that, on the battlefieldof Waterloo, he had only heard the last two syllables, for which healways entertained the legitimate scorn which one owes to what ismerely an expression of thanks.
However, through his daughter Azelma, who had started on the scent ofthe married pair on the 16th of February, and through his own personalresearches, he had succeeded in learning many things, and, from thedepths of his own gloom, he had contrived to grasp more than onemysterious clew. He had discovered, by dint of industry, or, at least,by dint of induction, he had guessed who the man was whom he hadencountered on a certain day in the Grand Sewer. From the man he hadeasily reached the name. He knew that Madame la Baronne Pontmercy wasCosette. But he meant to be discreet in that quarter.
Who was Cosette? He did not know exactly himself. He did, indeed, catchan inkling of illegitimacy, the history of Fantine had always seemed tohim equivocal; but what was the use of talking about that? in order tocause himself to be paid for his silence? He had, or thought he had,better wares than that for sale. And, according to all appearances, ifhe were to come and make to the Baron Pontmercy this revelation—andwithout proof: “Your wife is a bastard,” the only result would be toattract the boot of the husband towards the loins of the revealer.
From Thénardier’s point of view, the conversation with Marius had notyet begun. He ought to have drawn back, to have modified his strategy,to have abandoned his position, to have changed his front; but nothingessential had been compromised as yet, and he had five hundred francsin his pocket. Moreover, he had something decisive to say, and, evenagainst this very well-informed and well-armed Baron Pontmercy, he felthimself strong. For men of Thénardier’s nature, every dialogue is acombat. In the one in which he was about to engage, what was hissituation? He did not know to whom he was speaking, but he did know ofwhat he was speaking, he made this rapid review of his inner forces,and after having said: “I am Thénardier,” he waited.
Marius had become thoughtful. So he had hold of Thénardier at last.That man whom he had so greatly desired to find was before him. Hecould honor Colonel Pontmercy’s recommendation.
He felt humiliated that that hero should have owned anything to thisvillain, and that the letter of change drawn from the depths of thetomb by his father upon him, Marius, had been protested up to that day.It also seemed to him, in the complex state of his mind towardsThénardier, that there was occasion to avenge the Colonel for themisfortune of having been saved by such a rascal. In any case, he wascontent. He was about to deliver the Colonel’s shade from this unworthycreditor at last, and it seemed to him that he was on the point ofrescuing his father’s memory from the debtors’ prison. By the side ofthis duty there was another—to elucidate, if possible, the source ofCosette’s fortune. The opportunity appeared to present itself. PerhapsThénardier knew something. It might prove useful to see the bottom ofthis man.
He commenced with this.
Thénardier had caused the “honest rustler” to disappear in his fob, andwas gazing at Marius with a gentleness that was almost tender.
Marius broke the silence.
“Thénardier, I have told you your name. Now, would you like to have metell you your secret—the one that you came here to reveal to me? I haveinformation of my own, also. You shall see that I know more about itthan you do. Jean Valjean, as you have said, is an assassin and athief. A thief, because he robbed a wealthy manufacturer, whose ruin hebrought about. An assassin, because he assassinated police-agentJavert.”

“I don’t understand, sir,” ejaculated Thénardier.
“I will make myself intelligible. In a certain arrondissement of thePas de Calais, there was, in 1822, a man who had fallen out withjustice, and who, under the name of M. Madeleine, had regained hisstatus and rehabilitated himself. This man had become a just man in thefull force of the term. In a trade, the manufacture of black glassgoods, he made the fortune of an entire city. As far as his personalfortune was concerned he made that also, but as a secondary matter, andin some sort, by accident. He was the foster-father of the poor. Hefounded hospitals, opened schools, visited the sick, dowered younggirls, supported widows, and adopted orphans; he was like the guardianangel of the country. He refused the cross, he was appointed Mayor. Aliberated convict knew the secret of a penalty incurred by this man informer days; he denounced him, and had him arrested, and profited bythe arrest to come to Paris and cause the banker Laffitte,—I have thefact from the cashier himself,—by means of a false signature, to handover to him the sum of over half a million which belonged to M.Madeleine. This convict who robbed M. Madeleine was Jean Valjean. Asfor the other fact, you have nothing to tell me about it either. JeanValjean killed the agent Javert; he shot him with a pistol. I, theperson who is speaking to you, was present.”

Thénardier cast upon Marius the sovereign glance of a conquered man wholays his hand once more upon the victory, and who has just regained, inone instant, all the ground which he has lost. But the smile returnedinstantly. The inferior’s triumph in the presence of his superior mustbe wheedling.
Thénardier contented himself with saying to Marius:
“Monsieur le Baron, we are on the wrong track.”

And he emphasized this phrase by making his bunch of seals execute anexpressive whirl.
“What!” broke forth Marius, “do you dispute that? These are facts.”

“They are chimæras. The confidence with which Monsieur le Baron honorsme renders it my duty to tell him so. Truth and justice before allthings. I do not like to see folks accused unjustly. Monsieur le Baron,Jean Valjean did not rob M. Madeleine and Jean Valjean did not killJavert.”

“This is too much! How is this?”

“For two reasons.”

“What are they? Speak.”

“This is the first: he did not rob M. Madeleine, because it is JeanValjean himself who was M. Madeleine.”

“What tale are you telling me?”

“And this is the second: he did not assassinate Javert, because theperson who killed Javert was Javert.”

“What do you mean to say?”

“That Javert committed suicide.”

“Prove it! prove it!” cried Marius beside himself.
Thénardier resumed, scanning his phrase after the manner of the ancientAlexandrine measure:
“Police-agent-Ja-vert-was-found-drowned-un-der-a-boat-of-the-Pont-au-Change.”

“But prove it!”

Thénardier drew from his pocket a large envelope of gray paper, whichseemed to contain sheets folded in different sizes.
“I have my papers,” he said calmly.
And he added:
“Monsieur le Baron, in your interests I desired to know Jean Valjeanthoroughly. I say that Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine are one and thesame man, and I say that Javert had no other assassin than Javert. If Ispeak, it is because I have proofs. Not manuscript proofs—writing issuspicious, handwriting is complaisant,—but printed proofs.”

As he spoke, Thénardier extracted from the envelope two copies ofnewspapers, yellow, faded, and strongly saturated with tobacco. One ofthese two newspapers, broken at every fold and falling into rags,seemed much older than the other.
“Two facts, two proofs,” remarked Thénardier. And he offered the twonewspapers, unfolded, to Marius.
The reader is acquainted with these two papers. One, the most ancient,a number of the _Drapeau Blanc_ of the 25th of July, 1823, the text ofwhich can be seen in the first volume, established the identity of M.Madeleine and Jean Valjean.
The other, a _Moniteur_ of the 15th of June, 1832, announced thesuicide of Javert, adding that it appeared from a verbal report ofJavert to the prefect that, having been taken prisoner in the barricadeof the Rue de la Chanvrerie, he had owed his life to the magnanimity ofan insurgent who, holding him under his pistol, had fired into the air,instead of blowing out his brains.
Marius read. He had evidence, a certain date, irrefragable proof, thesetwo newspapers had not been printed expressly for the purpose ofbacking up Thénardier’s statements; the note printed in the _Moniteur_had been an administrative communication from the Prefecture of Police.Marius could not doubt.
The information of the cashier-clerk had been false, and he himself hadbeen deceived.
Jean Valjean, who had suddenly grown grand, emerged from his cloud.Marius could not repress a cry of joy.
“Well, then this unhappy wretch is an admirable man! the whole of thatfortune really belonged to him! he is Madeleine, the providence of awhole countryside! he is Jean Valjean, Javert’s savior! he is a hero!he is a saint!”

“He’s not a saint, and he’s not a hero!” said Thénardier. “He’s anassassin and a robber.”

And he added, in the tone of a man who begins to feel that he possessessome authority:
“Let us be calm.”

Robber, assassin—those words which Marius thought had disappeared andwhich returned, fell upon him like an ice-cold shower-bath.
“Again!” said he.
“Always,” ejaculated Thénardier. “Jean Valjean did not rob Madeleine,but he is a thief. He did not kill Javert, but he is a murderer.”

“Will you speak,” retorted Marius, “of that miserable theft, committedforty years ago, and expiated, as your own newspapers prove, by a wholelife of repentance, of self-abnegation and of virtue?”

“I say assassination and theft, Monsieur le Baron, and I repeat that Iam speaking of actual facts. What I have to reveal to you is absolutelyunknown. It belongs to unpublished matter. And perhaps you will find init the source of the fortune so skilfully presented to Madame laBaronne by Jean Valjean. I say skilfully, because, by a gift of thatnature it would not be so very unskilful to slip into an honorablehouse whose comforts one would then share, and, at the same stroke, toconceal one’s crime, and to enjoy one’s theft, to bury one’s name andto create for oneself a family.”

“I might interrupt you at this point,” said Marius, “but go on.”

“Monsieur le Baron, I will tell you all, leaving the recompense to yourgenerosity. This secret is worth massive gold. You will say to me: ‘Whydo not you apply to Jean Valjean?’ For a very simple reason; I knowthat he has stripped himself, and stripped himself in your favor, and Iconsider the combination ingenious; but he has no longer a son, hewould show me his empty hands, and, since I am in need of some moneyfor my trip to la Joya, I prefer you, you who have it all, to him whohas nothing. I am a little fatigued, permit me to take a chair.”

Marius seated himself and motioned to him to do the same.
Thénardier installed himself on a tufted chair, picked up his twonewspapers, thrust them back into their envelope, and murmured as hepecked at the _Drapeau Blanc_ with his nail: “It cost me a good deal oftrouble to get this one.”

That done he crossed his legs and stretched himself out on the back ofthe chair, an attitude characteristic of people who are sure of whatthey are saying, then he entered upon his subject gravely, emphasizinghis words:
“Monsieur le Baron, on the 6th of June, 1832, about a year ago, on theday of the insurrection, a man was in the Grand Sewer of Paris, at thepoint where the sewer enters the Seine, between the Pont des Invalidesand the Pont de Jéna.”

Marius abruptly drew his chair closer to that of Thénardier. Thénardiernoticed this movement and continued with the deliberation of an oratorwho holds his interlocutor and who feels his adversary palpitatingunder his words:
“This man, forced to conceal himself, and for reasons, moreover, whichare foreign to politics, had adopted the sewer as his domicile and hada key to it. It was, I repeat, on the 6th of June; it might have beeneight o’clock in the evening. The man hears a noise in the sewer.Greatly surprised, he hides himself and lies in wait. It was the soundof footsteps, some one was walking in the dark, and coming in hisdirection. Strange to say, there was another man in the sewer besideshimself. The grating of the outlet from the sewer was not far off. Alittle light which fell through it permitted him to recognize thenewcomer, and to see that the man was carrying something on his back.He was walking in a bent attitude. The man who was walking in a bentattitude was an ex-convict, and what he was dragging on his shoulderswas a corpse. Assassination caught in the very act, if ever there wassuch a thing. As for the theft, that is understood; one does not kill aman gratis. This convict was on his way to fling the body into theriver. One fact is to be noticed, that before reaching the exitgrating, this convict, who had come a long distance in the sewer, must,necessarily, have encountered a frightful quagmire where it seems asthough he might have left the body, but the sewermen would have foundthe assassinated man the very next day, while at work on the quagmire,and that did not suit the assassin’s plans. He had preferred totraverse that quagmire with his burden, and his exertions must havebeen terrible, for it is impossible to risk one’s life more completely;I don’t understand how he could have come out of that alive.”

Marius’ chair approached still nearer. Thénardier took advantage ofthis to draw a long breath. He went on:
“Monsieur le Baron, a sewer is not the Champ de Mars. One lackseverything there, even room. When two men are there, they must meet.That is what happened. The man domiciled there and the passer-by wereforced to bid each other good-day, greatly to the regret of both. Thepasser-by said to the inhabitant:—“You see what I have on my back, Imust get out, you have the key, give it to me.” That convict was a manof terrible strength. There was no way of refusing. Nevertheless, theman who had the key parleyed, simply to gain time. He examined the deadman, but he could see nothing, except that the latter was young, welldressed, with the air of being rich, and all disfigured with blood.While talking, the man contrived to tear and pull off behind, withoutthe assassin perceiving it, a bit of the assassinated man’s coat. Adocument for conviction, you understand; a means of recovering thetrace of things and of bringing home the crime to the criminal. He putthis document for conviction in his pocket. After which he opened thegrating, made the man go out with his embarrassment on his back, closedthe grating again, and ran off, not caring to be mixed up with theremainder of the adventure and above all, not wishing to be presentwhen the assassin threw the assassinated man into the river. Now youcomprehend. The man who was carrying the corpse was Jean Valjean; theone who had the key is speaking to you at this moment; and the piece ofthe coat . . .”

Thénardier completed his phrase by drawing from his pocket, andholding, on a level with his eyes, nipped between his two thumbs andhis two forefingers, a strip of torn black cloth, all covered with darkspots.
Marius had sprung to his feet, pale, hardly able to draw his breath,with his eyes riveted on the fragment of black cloth, and, withoututtering a word, without taking his eyes from that fragment, heretreated to the wall and fumbled with his right hand along the wallfor a key which was in the lock of a cupboard near the chimney.
He found the key, opened the cupboard, plunged his arm into it withoutlooking, and without his frightened gaze quitting the rag whichThénardier still held outspread.
But Thénardier continued:
“Monsieur le Baron, I have the strongest of reasons for believing thatthe assassinated young man was an opulent stranger lured into a trap byJean Valjean, and the bearer of an enormous sum of money.”

“The young man was myself, and here is the coat!” cried Marius, and heflung upon the floor an old black coat all covered with blood.
Then, snatching the fragment from the hands of Thénardier, he croucheddown over the coat, and laid the torn morsel against the tatteredskirt. The rent fitted exactly, and the strip completed the coat.
Thénardier was petrified.
This is what he thought: “I’m struck all of a heap.”

Marius rose to his feet trembling, despairing, radiant.
He fumbled in his pocket and stalked furiously to Thénardier,presenting to him and almost thrusting in his face his fist filled withbank-notes for five hundred and a thousand francs.
“You are an infamous wretch! you are a liar, a calumniator, a villain.You came to accuse that man, you have only justified him; you wanted toruin him, you have only succeeded in glorifying him. And it is you whoare the thief! And it is you who are the assassin! I saw you,Thénardier Jondrette, in that lair on the Rue de l’Hôpital. I knowenough about you to send you to the galleys and even further if Ichoose. Here are a thousand francs, bully that you are!”

And he flung a thousand franc note at Thénardier.
“Ah! Jondrette Thénardier, vile rascal! Let this serve you as a lesson,you dealer in second-hand secrets, merchant of mysteries, rummager ofthe shadows, wretch! Take these five hundred francs and get out ofhere! Waterloo protects you.”

“Waterloo!” growled Thénardier, pocketing the five hundred francs alongwith the thousand.
“Yes, assassin! You there saved the life of a Colonel. . .”

“Of a General,” said Thénardier, elevating his head.
“Of a Colonel!” repeated Marius in a rage. “I wouldn’t give a ha’pennyfor a general. And you come here to commit infamies! I tell you thatyou have committed all crimes. Go! disappear! Only be happy, that isall that I desire. Ah! monster! here are three thousand francs more.Take them. You will depart to-morrow, for America, with your daughter;for your wife is dead, you abominable liar. I shall watch over yourdeparture, you ruffian, and at that moment I will count out to youtwenty thousand francs. Go get yourself hung elsewhere!”

“Monsieur le Baron!” replied Thénardier, bowing to the very earth,“eternal gratitude.” And Thénardier left the room, understandingnothing, stupefied and delighted with this sweet crushing beneath sacksof gold, and with that thunder which had burst forth over his head inbank-bills.
Struck by lightning he was, but he was also content; and he would havebeen greatly angered had he had a lightning rod to ward off suchlightning as that.
Let us finish with this man at once.
Two days after the events which we are at this moment narrating, he setout, thanks to Marius’ care, for America under a false name, with hisdaughter Azelma, furnished with a draft on New York for twenty thousandfrancs.
The moral wretchedness of Thénardier, the bourgeois who had missed hisvocation, was irremediable. He was in America what he had been inEurope. Contact with an evil man sometimes suffices to corrupt a goodaction and to cause evil things to spring from it. With Marius’ money,Thénardier set up as a slave-dealer.
As soon as Thénardier had left the house, Marius rushed to the garden,where Cosette was still walking.
“Cosette! Cosette!” he cried. “Come! come quick! Let us go. Basque, acarriage! Cosette, come. Ah! My God! It was he who saved my life! Letus not lose a minute! Put on your shawl.”

Cosette thought him mad and obeyed.
He could not breathe, he laid his hand on his heart to restrain itsthrobbing. He paced back and forth with huge strides, he embracedCosette:
“Ah! Cosette! I am an unhappy wretch!” said he.
Marius was bewildered. He began to catch a glimpse in Jean Valjean ofsome indescribably lofty and melancholy figure. An unheard-of virtue,supreme and sweet, humble in its immensity, appeared to him. Theconvict was transfigured into Christ.
Marius was dazzled by this prodigy. He did not know precisely what hebeheld, but it was grand.
In an instant, a hackney-carriage stood in front of the door.
Marius helped Cosette in and darted in himself.
“Driver,” said he, “Rue de l’Homme Armé, Number 7.”

The carriage drove off.
“Ah! what happiness!” ejaculated Cosette. “Rue de l’Homme Armé, I didnot dare to speak to you of that. We are going to see M. Jean.”

“Thy father! Cosette, thy father more than ever. Cosette, I guess it.You told me that you had never received the letter that I sent you byGavroche. It must have fallen into his hands. Cosette, he went to thebarricade to save me. As it is a necessity with him to be an angel, hesaved others also; he saved Javert. He rescued me from that gulf togive me to you. He carried me on his back through that frightful sewer.Ah! I am a monster of ingratitude. Cosette, after having been yourprovidence, he became mine. Just imagine, there was a terrible quagmireenough to drown one a hundred times over, to drown one in mire.Cosette! he made me traverse it. I was unconscious; I saw nothing, Iheard nothing, I could know nothing of my own adventure. We are goingto bring him back, to take him with us, whether he is willing or not,he shall never leave us again. If only he is at home! Provided onlythat we can find him, I will pass the rest of my life in veneratinghim. Yes, that is how it should be, do you see, Cosette? Gavroche musthave delivered my letter to him. All is explained. You understand.”

Cosette did not understand a word.
“You are right,” she said to him.
Meanwhile the carriage rolled on.



CHAPTER V—A NIGHT BEHIND WHICH THERE IS DAY

Jean Valjean turned round at the knock which he heard on his door.
“Come in,” he said feebly.
The door opened.
Cosette and Marius made their appearance.
Cosette rushed into the room.
Marius remained on the threshold, leaning against the jamb of the door.
“Cosette!” said Jean Valjean.
And he sat erect in his chair, his arms outstretched and trembling,haggard, livid, gloomy, an immense joy in his eyes.
Cosette, stifling with emotion, fell upon Jean Valjean’s breast.
“Father!” said she.
Jean Valjean, overcome, stammered:
“Cosette! she! you! Madame! it is thou! Ah! my God!”

And, pressed close in Cosette’s arms, he exclaimed:
“It is thou! thou art here! Thou dost pardon me then!”

Marius, lowering his eyelids, in order to keep his tears from flowing,took a step forward and murmured between lips convulsively contractedto repress his sobs:
“My father!”

“And you also, you pardon me!” Jean Valjean said to him.
Marius could find no words, and Jean Valjean added:
“Thanks.”

Cosette tore off her shawl and tossed her hat on the bed.
“It embarrasses me,” said she.
And, seating herself on the old man’s knees, she put aside his whitelocks with an adorable movement, and kissed his brow.
Jean Valjean, bewildered, let her have her own way.
Cosette, who only understood in a very confused manner, redoubled hercaresses, as though she desired to pay Marius’ debt.
Jean Valjean stammered:
“How stupid people are! I thought that I should never see her again.Imagine, Monsieur Pontmercy, at the very moment when you entered, I wassaying to myself: ‘All is over. Here is her little gown, I am amiserable man, I shall never see Cosette again,’ and I was saying thatat the very moment when you were mounting the stairs. Was not I anidiot? Just see how idiotic one can be! One reckons without the goodGod. The good God says:
“‘You fancy that you are about to be abandoned, stupid! No. No, thingswill not go so. Come, there is a good man yonder who is in need of anangel.’ And the angel comes, and one sees one’s Cosette again! and onesees one’s little Cosette once more! Ah! I was very unhappy.”

For a moment he could not speak, then he went on:
“I really needed to see Cosette a little bit now and then. A heartneeds a bone to gnaw. But I was perfectly conscious that I was in theway. I gave myself reasons: ‘They do not want you, keep in your owncourse, one has not the right to cling eternally.’ Ah! God be praised,I see her once more! Dost thou know, Cosette, thy husband is veryhandsome? Ah! what a pretty embroidered collar thou hast on, luckily. Iam fond of that pattern. It was thy husband who chose it, was it not?And then, thou shouldst have some cashmere shawls. Let me call herthou, Monsieur Pontmercy. It will not be for long.”

And Cosette began again:
“How wicked of you to have left us like that! Where did you go? Whyhave you stayed away so long? Formerly your journeys only lasted threeor four days. I sent Nicolette, the answer always was: ‘He is absent.’How long have you been back? Why did you not let us know? Do you knowthat you are very much changed? Ah! what a naughty father! he has beenill, and we have not known it! Stay, Marius, feel how cold his handis!”

“So you are here! Monsieur Pontmercy, you pardon me!” repeated JeanValjean.
At that word which Jean Valjean had just uttered once more, all thatwas swelling Marius’ heart found vent.
He burst forth:
“Cosette, do you hear? he has come to that! he asks my forgiveness! Anddo you know what he has done for me, Cosette? He has saved my life. Hehas done more—he has given you to me. And after having saved me, andafter having given you to me, Cosette, what has he done with himself?He has sacrificed himself. Behold the man. And he says to me theingrate, to me the forgetful, to me the pitiless, to me the guilty one:Thanks! Cosette, my whole life passed at the feet of this man would betoo little. That barricade, that sewer, that furnace, thatcesspool,—all that he traversed for me, for thee, Cosette! He carriedme away through all the deaths which he put aside before me, andaccepted for himself. Every courage, every virtue, every heroism, everysanctity he possesses! Cosette, that man is an angel!”

“Hush! hush!” said Jean Valjean in a low voice. “Why tell all that?”

“But you!” cried Marius with a wrath in which there was veneration,“why did you not tell it to me? It is your own fault, too. You savepeople’s lives, and you conceal it from them! You do more, under thepretext of unmasking yourself, you calumniate yourself. It isfrightful.”

“I told the truth,” replied Jean Valjean.
“No,” retorted Marius, “the truth is the whole truth; and that you didnot tell. You were Monsieur Madeleine, why not have said so? You savedJavert, why not have said so? I owed my life to you, why not have saidso?”

“Because I thought as you do. I thought that you were in the right. Itwas necessary that I should go away. If you had known about thataffair, of the sewer, you would have made me remain near you. I wastherefore forced to hold my peace. If I had spoken, it would havecaused embarrassment in every way.”

“It would have embarrassed what? embarrassed whom?” retorted Marius.“Do you think that you are going to stay here? We shall carry you off.Ah! good heavens! when I reflect that it was by an accident that I havelearned all this. You form a part of ourselves. You are her father, andmine. You shall not pass another day in this dreadful house. Do notimagine that you will be here to-morrow.”

“To-morrow,” said Jean Valjean, “I shall not be here, but I shall notbe with you.”

“What do you mean?” replied Marius. “Ah! come now, we are not going topermit any more journeys. You shall never leave us again. You belong tous. We shall not loose our hold of you.”

“This time it is for good,” added Cosette. “We have a carriage at thedoor. I shall run away with you. If necessary, I shall employ force.”

And she laughingly made a movement to lift the old man in her arms.
“Your chamber still stands ready in our house,” she went on. “If youonly knew how pretty the garden is now! The azaleas are doing very wellthere. The walks are sanded with river sand; there are tiny violetshells. You shall eat my strawberries. I water them myself. And no more‘madame,’ no more ‘Monsieur Jean,’ we are living under a Republic,everybody says _thou_, don’t they, Marius? The programme is changed. Ifyou only knew, father, I have had a sorrow, there was a robin redbreastwhich had made her nest in a hole in the wall, and a horrible cat ateher. My poor, pretty, little robin red-breast which used to put herhead out of her window and look at me! I cried over it. I should haveliked to kill the cat. But now nobody cries any more. Everybody laughs,everybody is happy. You are going to come with us. How delightedgrandfather will be! You shall have your plot in the garden, you shallcultivate it, and we shall see whether your strawberries are as fine asmine. And, then, I shall do everything that you wish, and then, youwill obey me prettily.”

Jean Valjean listened to her without hearing her. He heard the music ofher voice rather than the sense of her words; one of those large tearswhich are the sombre pearls of the soul welled up slowly in his eyes.
He murmured:
“The proof that God is good is that she is here.”

“Father!” said Cosette.
Jean Valjean continued:
“It is quite true that it would be charming for us to live together.Their trees are full of birds. I would walk with Cosette. It is sweetto be among living people who bid each other ‘good-day,’ who call toeach other in the garden. People see each other from early morning. Weshould each cultivate our own little corner. She would make me eat herstrawberries. I would make her gather my roses. That would be charming.Only . . .”

He paused and said gently:
“It is a pity.”

The tear did not fall, it retreated, and Jean Valjean replaced it witha smile.
Cosette took both the old man’s hands in hers.
“My God!” said she, “your hands are still colder than before. Are youill? Do you suffer?”

“I? No,” replied Jean Valjean. “I am very well. Only . . .”

He paused.
“Only what?”

“I am going to die presently.”

Cosette and Marius shuddered.
“To die!” exclaimed Marius.
“Yes, but that is nothing,” said Jean Valjean.
He took breath, smiled and resumed:
“Cosette, thou wert talking to me, go on, so thy little robinred-breast is dead? Speak, so that I may hear thy voice.”

Marius gazed at the old man in amazement.
Cosette uttered a heartrending cry.
“Father! my father! you will live. You are going to live. I insist uponyour living, do you hear?”

Jean Valjean raised his head towards her with adoration.
“Oh! yes, forbid me to die. Who knows? Perhaps I shall obey. I was onthe verge of dying when you came. That stopped me, it seemed to me thatI was born again.”

“You are full of strength and life,” cried Marius. “Do you imagine thata person can die like this? You have had sorrow, you shall have nomore. It is I who ask your forgiveness, and on my knees! You are goingto live, and to live with us, and to live a long time. We takepossession of you once more. There are two of us here who willhenceforth have no other thought than your happiness.”

“You see,” resumed Cosette, all bathed in tears, “that Marius says thatyou shall not die.”

Jean Valjean continued to smile.
“Even if you were to take possession of me, Monsieur Pontmercy, wouldthat make me other than I am? No, God has thought like you and myself,and he does not change his mind; it is useful for me to go. Death is agood arrangement. God knows better than we what we need. May you behappy, may Monsieur Pontmercy have Cosette, may youth wed the morning,may there be around you, my children, lilacs and nightingales; may yourlife be a beautiful, sunny lawn, may all the enchantments of heavenfill your souls, and now let me, who am good for nothing, die; it iscertain that all this is right. Come, be reasonable, nothing ispossible now, I am fully conscious that all is over. And then, lastnight, I drank that whole jug of water. How good thy husband is,Cosette! Thou art much better off with him than with me.”

A noise became audible at the door.
It was the doctor entering.
“Good-day, and farewell, doctor,” said Jean Valjean. “Here are my poorchildren.”

Marius stepped up to the doctor. He addressed to him only this singleword: “Monsieur? . . .” But his manner of pronouncing it contained acomplete question.
The doctor replied to the question by an expressive glance.
“Because things are not agreeable,” said Jean Valjean, “that is noreason for being unjust towards God.”

A silence ensued.
All breasts were oppressed.
Jean Valjean turned to Cosette. He began to gaze at her as though hewished to retain her features for eternity.
In the depths of the shadow into which he had already descended,ecstasy was still possible to him when gazing at Cosette. Thereflection of that sweet face lighted up his pale visage.
The doctor felt of his pulse.
“Ah! it was you that he wanted!” he murmured, looking at Cosette andMarius.
And bending down to Marius’ ear, he added in a very low voice:
“Too late.”

Jean Valjean surveyed the doctor and Marius serenely, almost withoutceasing to gaze at Cosette.
These barely articulate words were heard to issue from his mouth:
“It is nothing to die; it is dreadful not to live.”

All at once he rose to his feet. These accesses of strength aresometimes the sign of the death agony. He walked with a firm step tothe wall, thrusting aside Marius and the doctor who tried to help him,detached from the wall a little copper crucifix which was suspendedthere, and returned to his seat with all the freedom of movement ofperfect health, and said in a loud voice, as he laid the crucifix onthe table:
“Behold the great martyr.”

Then his chest sank in, his head wavered, as though the intoxication ofthe tomb were seizing hold upon him.
His hands, which rested on his knees, began to press their nails intothe stuff of his trousers.
Cosette supported his shoulders, and sobbed, and tried to speak to him,but could not.
Among the words mingled with that mournful saliva which accompaniestears, they distinguished words like the following:
“Father, do not leave us. Is it possible that we have found you only tolose you again?”

It might be said that agony writhes. It goes, comes, advances towardsthe sepulchre, and returns towards life. There is groping in the actionof dying.
Jean Valjean rallied after this semi-swoon, shook his brow as though tomake the shadows fall away from it and became almost perfectly lucidonce more.
He took a fold of Cosette’s sleeve and kissed it.
“He is coming back! doctor, he is coming back,” cried Marius.
“You are good, both of you,” said Jean Valjean. “I am going to tell youwhat has caused me pain. What has pained me, Monsieur Pontmercy, isthat you have not been willing to touch that money. That money reallybelongs to your wife. I will explain to you, my children, and for thatreason, also, I am glad to see you. Black jet comes from England, whitejet comes from Norway. All this is in this paper, which you will read.For bracelets, I invented a way of substituting for slides of solderedsheet iron, slides of iron laid together. It is prettier, better andless costly. You will understand how much money can be made in thatway. So Cosette’s fortune is really hers. I give you these details, inorder that your mind may be set at rest.”

The portress had come upstairs and was gazing in at the half-open door.The doctor dismissed her.
But he could not prevent this zealous woman from exclaiming to thedying man before she disappeared: “Would you like a priest?”

“I have had one,” replied Jean Valjean.
And with his finger he seemed to indicate a point above his head whereone would have said that he saw some one.
It is probable, in fact, that the Bishop was present at this deathagony.
Cosette gently slipped a pillow under his loins.
Jean Valjean resumed:
“Have no fear, Monsieur Pontmercy, I adjure you. The six hundredthousand francs really belong to Cosette. My life will have been wastedif you do not enjoy them! We managed to do very well with those glassgoods. We rivalled what is called Berlin jewellery. However, we couldnot equal the black glass of England. A gross, which contains twelvehundred very well cut grains, only costs three francs.”

When a being who is dear to us is on the point of death, we gaze uponhim with a look which clings convulsively to him and which would fainhold him back.
Cosette gave her hand to Marius, and both, mute with anguish, notknowing what to say to the dying man, stood trembling and despairingbefore him.
Jean Valjean sank moment by moment. He was failing; he was drawing nearto the gloomy horizon.
His breath had become intermittent; a little rattling interrupted it.He found some difficulty in moving his forearm, his feet had lost allmovement, and in proportion as the wretchedness of limb and feeblenessof body increased, all the majesty of his soul was displayed and spreadover his brow. The light of the unknown world was already visible inhis eyes.
His face paled and smiled. Life was no longer there, it was somethingelse.
His breath sank, his glance grew grander. He was a corpse on which thewings could be felt.
He made a sign to Cosette to draw near, then to Marius; the last minuteof the last hour had, evidently, arrived.
He began to speak to them in a voice so feeble that it seemed to comefrom a distance, and one would have said that a wall now rose betweenthem and him.
“Draw near, draw near, both of you. I love you dearly. Oh! how good itis to die like this! And thou lovest me also, my Cosette. I knew wellthat thou still felt friendly towards thy poor old man. How kind it wasof thee to place that pillow under my loins! Thou wilt weep for me alittle, wilt thou not? Not too much. I do not wish thee to have anyreal griefs. You must enjoy yourselves a great deal, my children. Iforgot to tell you that the profit was greater still on the buckleswithout tongues than on all the rest. A gross of a dozen dozens costten francs and sold for sixty. It really was a good business. So thereis no occasion for surprise at the six hundred thousand francs,Monsieur Pontmercy. It is honest money. You may be rich with a tranquilmind. Thou must have a carriage, a box at the theatres now and then,and handsome ball dresses, my Cosette, and then, thou must give gooddinners to thy friends, and be very happy. I was writing to Cosette awhile ago. She will find my letter. I bequeath to her the twocandlesticks which stand on the chimney-piece. They are of silver, butto me they are gold, they are diamonds; they change candles which areplaced in them into wax-tapers. I do not know whether the person whogave them to me is pleased with me yonder on high. I have done what Icould. My children, you will not forget that I am a poor man, you willhave me buried in the first plot of earth that you find, under a stoneto mark the spot. This is my wish. No name on the stone. If Cosettecares to come for a little while now and then, it will give mepleasure. And you too, Monsieur Pontmercy. I must admit that I have notalways loved you. I ask your pardon for that. Now she and you form butone for me. I feel very grateful to you. I am sure that you makeCosette happy. If you only knew, Monsieur Pontmercy, her pretty rosycheeks were my delight; when I saw her in the least pale, I was sad. Inthe chest of drawers, there is a bank-bill for five hundred francs. Ihave not touched it. It is for the poor. Cosette, dost thou see thylittle gown yonder on the bed? dost thou recognize it? That was tenyears ago, however. How time flies! We have been very happy. All isover. Do not weep, my children, I am not going very far, I shall seeyou from there, you will only have to look at night, and you will seeme smile. Cosette, dost thou remember Montfermeil? Thou wert in theforest, thou wert greatly terrified; dost thou remember how I took holdof the handle of the water-bucket? That was the first time that Itouched thy poor, little hand. It was so cold! Ah! your hands were redthen, mademoiselle, they are very white now. And the big doll! dostthou remember? Thou didst call her Catherine. Thou regrettedest nothaving taken her to the convent! How thou didst make me laughsometimes, my sweet angel! When it had been raining, thou didst floatbits of straw on the gutters, and watch them pass away. One day I gavethee a willow battledore and a shuttlecock with yellow, blue and greenfeathers. Thou hast forgotten it. Thou wert roguish so young! Thoudidst play. Thou didst put cherries in thy ears. Those are things ofthe past. The forests through which one has passed with one’s child,the trees under which one has strolled, the convents where one hasconcealed oneself, the games, the hearty laughs of childhood, areshadows. I imagined that all that belonged to me. In that lay mystupidity. Those Thénardiers were wicked. Thou must forgive them.Cosette, the moment has come to tell thee the name of thy mother. Shewas called Fantine. Remember that name—Fantine. Kneel whenever thouutterest it. She suffered much. She loved thee dearly. She had as muchunhappiness as thou hast had happiness. That is the way God apportionsthings. He is there on high, he sees us all, and he knows what he doesin the midst of his great stars. I am on the verge of departure, mychildren. Love each other well and always. There is nothing else butthat in the world: love for each other. You will think sometimes of thepoor old man who died here. Oh my Cosette, it is not my fault, indeed,that I have not seen thee all this time, it cut me to the heart; I wentas far as the corner of the street, I must have produced a queer effecton the people who saw me pass, I was like a madman, I once went outwithout my hat. I no longer see clearly, my children, I had still otherthings to say, but never mind. Think a little of me. Come still nearer.I die happy. Give me your dear and well-beloved heads, so that I maylay my hands upon them.”

Cosette and Marius fell on their knees, in despair, suffocating withtears, each beneath one of Jean Valjean’s hands. Those august hands nolonger moved.
He had fallen backwards, the light of the candles illuminated him.
His white face looked up to heaven, he allowed Cosette and Marius tocover his hands with kisses.
He was dead.
The night was starless and extremely dark. No doubt, in the gloom, someimmense angel stood erect with wings outspread, awaiting that soul.

  Enlarge
Darkness  5b9-1-darkness



CHAPTER VI—THE GRASS COVERS AND THE RAIN EFFACES

In the cemetery of Père-Lachaise, in the vicinity of the common grave,far from the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres, far from allthe tombs of fancy which display in the presence of eternity all thehideous fashions of death, in a deserted corner, beside an old wall,beneath a great yew tree over which climbs the wild convolvulus, amiddandelions and mosses, there lies a stone. That stone is no more exemptthan others from the leprosy of time, of dampness, of the lichens andfrom the defilement of the birds. The water turns it green, the airblackens it. It is not near any path, and people are not fond ofwalking in that direction, because the grass is high and their feet areimmediately wet. When there is a little sunshine, the lizards comethither. All around there is a quivering of weeds. In the spring,linnets warble in the trees.
This stone is perfectly plain. In cutting it the only thought was therequirements of the tomb, and no other care was taken than to make thestone long enough and narrow enough to cover a man.
No name is to be read there.
Only, many years ago, a hand wrote upon it in pencil these four lines,which have become gradually illegible beneath the rain and the dust,and which are, to-day, probably effaced:
Il dort. Quoique le sort fût pour lui bien étrange,Il vivait. Il mourut quand il n’eut plus son ange.La chose simplement d’elle-même arriva,Comme la nuit se fait lorsque le jour s’en va.70


LETTER TO M. DAELLI

Publisher of the Italian translation of Les Misérables in Milan.
HAUTEVILLE-HOUSE, October 18, 1862.
You are right, sir, when you tell me that _Les Misérables_ is writtenfor all nations. I do not know whether it will be read by all, but Iwrote it for all. It is addressed to England as well as to Spain, toItaly as well as to France, to Germany as well as to Ireland, toRepublics which have slaves as well as to Empires which have serfs.Social problems overstep frontiers. The sores of the human race, thosegreat sores which cover the globe, do not halt at the red or blue linestraced upon the map. In every place where man is ignorant anddespairing, in every place where woman is sold for bread, wherever thechild suffers for lack of the book which should instruct him and of thehearth which should warm him, the book of _Les Misérables_ knocks atthe door and says: “Open to me, I come for you.”

At the hour of civilization through which we are now passing, and whichis still so sombre, the _miserable’s_ name is Man; he is agonizing inall climes, and he is groaning in all languages.
Your Italy is no more exempt from the evil than is our France. Youradmirable Italy has all miseries on the face of it. Does not banditism,that raging form of pauperism, inhabit your mountains? Few nations aremore deeply eaten by that ulcer of convents which I have endeavored tofathom. In spite of your possessing Rome, Milan, Naples, Palermo,Turin, Florence, Sienna, Pisa, Mantua, Bologna, Ferrara, Genoa, Venice,a heroic history, sublime ruins, magnificent ruins, and superb cities,you are, like ourselves, poor. You are covered with marvels and vermin.Assuredly, the sun of Italy is splendid, but, alas, azure in the skydoes not prevent rags on man.
Like us, you have prejudices, superstitions, tyrannies, fanaticisms,blind laws lending assistance to ignorant customs. You taste nothing ofthe present nor of the future without a flavor of the past beingmingled with it. You have a barbarian, the monk, and a savage, thelazzarone. The social question is the same for you as for us. There area few less deaths from hunger with you, and a few more from fever; yoursocial hygiene is not much better than ours; shadows, which areProtestant in England, are Catholic in Italy; but, under differentnames, the _vescovo_ is identical with the _bishop_, and it alwaysmeans night, and of pretty nearly the same quality. To explain theBible badly amounts to the same thing as to understand the Gospelbadly.
Is it necessary to emphasize this? Must this melancholy parallelism beyet more completely verified? Have you not indigent persons? Glancebelow. Have you not parasites? Glance up. Does not that hideousbalance, whose two scales, pauperism and parasitism, so mournfullypreserve their mutual equilibrium, oscillate before you as it doesbefore us? Where is your army of schoolmasters, the only army whichcivilization acknowledges?
Where are your free and compulsory schools? Does every one know how toread in the land of Dante and of Michael Angelo? Have you made publicschools of your barracks? Have you not, like ourselves, an opulentwar-budget and a paltry budget of education? Have not you also thatpassive obedience which is so easily converted into soldierlyobedience? military establishment which pushes the regulations to theextreme of firing upon Garibaldi; that is to say, upon the living honorof Italy? Let us subject your social order to examination, let us takeit where it stands and as it stands, let us view its flagrant offences,show me the woman and the child. It is by the amount of protection withwhich these two feeble creatures are surrounded that the degree ofcivilization is to be measured. Is prostitution less heartrending inNaples than in Paris? What is the amount of truth that springs fromyour laws, and what amount of justice springs from your tribunals? Doyou chance to be so fortunate as to be ignorant of the meaning of thosegloomy words: public prosecution, legal infamy, prison, the scaffold,the executioner, the death penalty? Italians, with you as with us,Beccaria is dead and Farinace is alive. And then, let us scrutinizeyour state reasons. Have you a government which comprehends theidentity of morality and politics? You have reached the point where yougrant amnesty to heroes! Something very similar has been done inFrance. Stay, let us pass miseries in review, let each one contributehis pile, you are as rich as we. Have you not, like ourselves, twocondemnations, religious condemnation pronounced by the priest, andsocial condemnation decreed by the judge? Oh, great nation of Italy,thou resemblest the great nation of France! Alas! our brothers, youare, like ourselves, _Miserables_.
From the depths of the gloom wherein you dwell, you do not see muchmore distinctly than we the radiant and distant portals of Eden. Only,the priests are mistaken. These holy portals are before and not behindus.
I resume. This book, _Les Misérables_, is no less your mirror thanours. Certain men, certain castes, rise in revolt against this book,—Iunderstand that. Mirrors, those revealers of the truth, are hated; thatdoes not prevent them from being of use.
As for myself, I have written for all, with a profound love for my owncountry, but without being engrossed by France more than by any othernation. In proportion as I advance in life, I grow more simple, and Ibecome more and more patriotic for humanity.
This is, moreover, the tendency of our age, and the law of radiance ofthe French Revolution; books must cease to be exclusively French,Italian, German, Spanish, or English, and become European, I say more,human, if they are to correspond to the enlargement of civilization.
Hence a new logic of art, and of certain requirements of compositionwhich modify everything, even the conditions, formerly narrow, of tasteand language, which must grow broader like all the rest.
In France, certain critics have reproached me, to my great delight,with having transgressed the bounds of what they call “French taste”; Ishould be glad if this eulogium were merited.
In short, I am doing what I can, I suffer with the same universalsuffering, and I try to assuage it, I possess only the puny forces of aman, and I cry to all: “Help me!”

This, sir, is what your letter prompts me to say; I say it for you andfor your country. If I have insisted so strongly, it is because of onephrase in your letter. You write:—
“There are Italians, and they are numerous, who say: ‘This book, _LesMisérables_, is a French book. It does not concern us. Let the Frenchread it as a history, we read it as a romance.’”—Alas! I repeat,whether we be Italians or Frenchmen, misery concerns us all. Ever sincehistory has been written, ever since philosophy has meditated, miseryhas been the garment of the human race; the moment has at lengtharrived for tearing off that rag, and for replacing, upon the nakedlimbs of the Man-People, the sinister fragment of the past with thegrand purple robe of the dawn.
If this letter seems to you of service in enlightening some minds andin dissipating some prejudices, you are at liberty to publish it, sir.Accept, I pray you, a renewed assurance of my very distinguishedsentiments.
VICTOR HUGO.
